A MARKOV MODEL OF A LIMIT ORDER BOOK: THRESHOLDS, RECURRENCE, AND TRADING STRA TEGIES FRANK KELLY AND ELENA YUDOVINA Abstract. We analyze a tractable model of a limit order book on short time scales, where the dynamics are driven by stochastic ﬂuctuations between supply and demand. We establish the existence of a limiting distribution for the highest bid, and for the lowest ask, where the limiting distributions are conﬁned between two thresholds. We make extensive use of ﬂuid limits in order to establish recurrence properties of the model. We use the model to analyze various high-frequency trading strategies, and comment on the Nash equilibria that emerge between high-frequency traders when a market in continuous time is replaced by frequent batch auctions. 1. Introduction. A limit order book (LOB) is a trading mechanism for a single-commodity market. The mechanism is of signiﬁcant interest to economists as a model of price formation. It is also used in many ﬁnancial markets, and has generated extensive research, both empirical and theoretical: for a recent survey, see [11]. The detailed historic data from LOBs in ﬁnancial markets has encouraged models able to replicate the observed statistical properties of these markets. Unfortunately, the added complexity usually makes the models less analytically tractable and, with relatively few exceptions, such models are explored by simulation or numerical methods. Our aim in this paper is to analyze a simple and tractable model of a LOB, ﬁrst introduced by [22] and independently by [16] and by [19]. The basic form of the model explicitly excludes a number of signiﬁcant features of real-world markets. Nevertheless we shall see that, from the model, several non-trivial and insightful results can be obtained on the structure of high-frequency trading strategies. Further, the model has a natural interpretation for a competitive and highly traded market on short time- scales, where the excluded features may be less signiﬁcant. We believe the model may be helpful in discussions of market design, and as an illustration we use the model to comment on the Nash equilibria that emerge between high-frequency traders when a market in continuous time is replaced by frequent batch auctions. To motivate the model consider a market with only two classes of participant. Firstly, long-term investors who place orders for reasons exogenous to the model, 1 who view the market as eﬀectively eﬃcient for their purposes, and who do not shade their orders strategically. Temporary imbalances between supply and demand from such long-term investors will cause prices to ﬂuctuate even in the absence of any new information becoming available concerning the fundamentals of the underlying asset. Our second class of participant, high-frequency traders, attempt to beneﬁt from these price ﬂuctuations by providing liquidity between the long-term investors. In practice we should expect a spectrum of behavior between these two extremes. The extreme case, with just long-term investors and high-frequency traders, is clearly a caricature, but we shall see that it does allow us to analyze various high-frequency trading strategies (for example market-making, sniping and mixtures of these) and the Nash equilibria between them. We next describe the model of a LOB for an example involving long-term investors only, and outline our results for this example. A bid is an order to buy one unit, and an ask is an order to sell one unit. Each order has associated with it a price, a real number. Suppose that bids and asks arrive as independent Poisson processes of unit rate and that the prices associated with bids, respectively asks, are independent identically distributed random variables with density fb(x), respectively fa(x). An arriving bid is either added to the LOB, if it is lower than all asks present in the LOB, or it is matched to the lowest ask and both depart. Similarly an arriving ask is either added to the LOB, if it is higher than all bids present in the LOB, or it is The second author’s research was partially supported by NSF Graduate Research Fellowship and NSF grant DMS-1204311. 1For example, to manage their portfolios. Investors may diﬀer in their preferences and in their valuations, even given the same information, which creates potential gains from trade. 1 arXiv:1504.00579v4 [q-fin.TR] 23 Mar 2017 matched to the highest bid and both depart. The LOB at time t is thus the set of bids and asks (with their prices), and our assumptions imply the LOB is a Markov process. For this model we show that there exists a threshold κb with the following properties: for any x < κb there is a ﬁnite time after which no arriving bids less than x are ever matched; and for any x > κb the event that there are no bids greater than x in the LOB is recurrent. Similarly, with directions of inequality reversed, there exists a corresponding threshold κa for asks. Further there is a density πa(x), respectively πb(x), supported on ( κb,κa) giving the limiting distribution of the lowest ask, respectively highest bid, in the LOB. The densities πa,πb solve the equations (1a) fb(x) ∫ κa x πa(y)dy =πb(x) ∫ x −∞ fa(y)dy (1b) fa(x) ∫ x κb πb(y)dy =πa(x) ∫ ∞ x fb(y)dy. As a speciﬁc example, if fa(x) =fb(x) = 1,x∈ (0, 1), then κa =κ,κb = 1−κ, πa(x) =πb(1−x), and (2) πb(x) = (1−κ) ( 1 x + log (1−x x )) , x ∈ (κ, 1−κ) where the value of κ is given as follows. Let w be the unique solution of wew = e−1: then w≈ 0.278 and κ = w/(w + 1)≈ 0.218. Observe that any example with fa = fb can be reduced to this example by a monotone transformation of the price axis. The existence of thresholds with the claimed properties is a relatively straightforward result, using Kol- mogorov’s 0–1 law. In order to make the claimed distributional result precise the major challenge is to establish positive recurrence of certain binned models: such models arise naturally where, for example, prices are recorded to only a ﬁnite number of decimal places. Given a suﬃciently strong notion of recurrence the intuition behind equations (1) is straightforward: in equilibrium the right-hand side of equation (1a) is the probability ﬂux that the highest bid in the LOB is at x and that it is matched by an arriving ask with a price less than x, and the left-hand side is the probability ﬂux that the lowest ask in the LOB is more than x and that an arriving bid enters the LOB at price x; these must balance, and a similar argument for the lowest ask leads to equation (1b). To establish positive recurrence of the binned models we make extensive use of ﬂuid limits (see [2]), an important technique in the study of queueing networks. The orders we have described so far are called limit orders to distinguish them from market orders which request to be fulﬁlled immediately at the best available price. Market orders are straightforward to include in the model: in the speciﬁc example just described we simply associate a price 1 or 0 with a market bid or market ask respectively. As the proportion of market bids increases towards a critical threshold,w≈ 0.278 in the above example, the support of the limiting distributions πa,πb increases to approach the entire interval (0, 1): above the threshold the model predicts recurring periods of time when there will exist either no highest bid or no lowest ask in the LOB. This conclusion necessarily holds, with the same critical threshold w, for any example with fa =fb. A LOB is a form of two-sided queue, the study of which dates at least to the early paper of [12], who modeled a taxi-stand with arrivals of both taxis and travellers as a symmetric random walk. Recent the- oretical advances involve servers and customers with varying types and constraints on feasible matchings between servers and customers, with applications ranging from large-scale call centres to national waiting lists for organ transplants (cf. [1, 23, 27]). Our interest in models of LOBs is in part due to the simplicity of the matchings in this particular application: types, as real variables, are totally ordered and so when an arriving order can be matched the match is uniquely deﬁned. Next we comment on several important features of real-world markets that are missing from the above basic model of a LOB. We assume that orders (from investors) are never cancelled and that the arrival streams of orders, with their prices, are not dependent on the state of the LOB. These assumptions might be natural for orders from our long-term investors who view the market as eﬀectively eﬃcient for their purposes. These assumptions, and the related assumption of stationarity of the arrival streams, may also be natural for a high-volume market where there may be a substantial amount of trading activity even over time periods where no new information becomes available concerning the fundamentals of the underlying 2 asset. Mathematically the model may then be viewed as assuming a separation between the time-scale of trading, represented in the model, and a longer time-scale on which fundamentals change. The assumption that all orders are for a single unit is important mathematically for the derivation of equations (1); economically, it corresponds to an assumption of a competitive market where an investor does not need to think about the impact of her order size on the market. We note that a long-term investor placing a large order may attempt to be passive in her execution, so as not to move the price against her, by spreading the order in line with volume in the market; see [8]. The natural question then becomes over how long the order is spread, and the model can give insight here. We note, however, that our assumption of a separation between the time-scale of trading and the timescale on which fundamentals change, modeled by our assumption of stationarity of arrival streams, may no longer be tenable when the time taken by a large investor to complete an order increases. In markets with a relatively small set of participants with large orders other approaches may be necessary; see [7] for a discussion of trading protocols that complement limit order books for large strategic investors. Markets may contain traders other than long-term investors, and there is currently considerable interest in the eﬀect of high-frequency trading on LOBs. Importantly, many high-frequency trading strategies are straightforward to represent within the model, since traders who can react immediately to an order entering the LOB may leave the Markov structure intact. Consider ﬁrst the following sniping strategy for a single high-frequency trader: she immediately buys every bid that joins the LOB at price above q and every ask that joins the LOB at price below p, where p andq are chosen to balance the rates of these purchases. This model ﬁts straightforwardly within our framework, and we show how to calculate the optimal values, for the high-frequency trader, of the constants p and q. A single trader might instead behave as a market maker and place an inﬁnite number of bid, respectively ask, orders at p, respectively q, where κb <p<q <κ a. We are again able to analyze this case. The optimal proﬁt rate under the sniping strategy may beat that under the market making strategy: it does so for the speciﬁc example above where fa(x) = fb(x) = 1,x∈ (0, 1), describes the order ﬂow from long-term investors. But a third strategy, which combines market making and sniping, will generally beat both the individual strategies. The model also allows us to readily explore the equilibria that emerge when there are multiple high- frequency traders competing using market making or sniping strategies. There has been considerable discus- sion recently of the eﬀects of competition between multiple high-frequency traders, and of proposals aimed to slow down markets. A key issue is that high-frequency traders may wastefully compete on the speed with which they can snipe an order, and as a regulatory response Budish et al. [3, 4] propose replacing a market continuous in time with frequent batch auctions, held perhaps several times a second. We consider Nash equilibria in continuous and batch markets when there are multiple high-frequency traders competing using mixtures of market making and sniping. Competition between market making traders reduces the bid-ask spread and the traders’ proﬁt rate, and does so whether the market is continuous or batch. Competition between sniping traders in a batch market results in a Nash equilibrium with traders sniping bids above, respectively asks below, a central price; the traders’ proﬁt rate is slightly less in a batch market than a continuous market. Competition between sniping strategies produces a large number of cancelled orders since if a strategy’s attempt to snipe an arriving order is not successful then the strategy immediately cancels its own order. A notable feature of data from real LOBs, that a substantial proportion of orders are immediately cancelled [11], thus emerges as a deduction from, rather than an assumption of, the model. A discrete version of the model was ﬁrst proposed by [22] in his pioneering work on regulation of secu- rities markets, and the model was independently introduced by [16] and by [19]. Taking stationarity as an assumption, [16] provided an extensive analysis of the model; our equations (1) can be deduced from [16, Proposition 1], assuming steady-state behavior, by setting time derivatives to zero. Our contribution is to establish the existence of the thresholds κa,κb and to prove a suﬃciently strong notion of recurrence to justify the intuition behind equations (1). Previous research similar in mathematical framework to that reported here is by Cont and coauthors [6, 5], by Simatos and coauthors [21, 14] building on Lakner et al. [15], and by Toke [25]: as we do, these authors describe LOBs as Markovian systems of interacting queues and are able to obtain analytical expressions for various quantities of interest. In the models of [6, 5, 15, 21, 14] the arrival rates of orders at any given price depends on how far the price is above or below the current best ask or bid price; the models 3 of [15, 21, 14, 25] are one-sided in that all bids are limit orders and all asks are market orders. Gao et al. [10] study the temporal evolution of the the shape of a LOB in the model of [6], under a scaling limit. Maglaras et al. [17] study a fragmented one-sided market in which traders may route their orders to one of several exchanges. The work of Lachappelle et al. [13], building on Ro¸ su [20], uses a diﬀerent mathematical framework, that of a mean ﬁeld game, but shares with our approach some important features. In particular, these authors distinguish between institutional investors whose decisions are independent of the immediate state of the LOB and high-frequency traders who trade as a consequence of the immediate state of the LOB. The models of both [5] and [13] keep detailed information on queue sizes only at the best bid and best ask prices; [6] shares with our approach a Markov description of the entire LOB. In much of the market microstructure literature features of LOBs, such as large bid-ask spreads, are explained as a consequence of participants protecting themselves from others with superior information. While this is clearly an important aspect of real-world markets we note that such features may also arise from simpler models. The driving force for the dynamics of the LOB in our approach, as in [13, 20], is not asymmetric information but stochastic ﬂuctuations between supply and demand. The organisation of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we describe precisely the model and our main results. Section 3 develops the scaﬀolding necessary for the proofs, which are given in Section 4. In Section 5 we describe some applications of our results: this section contains our discussion of market orders, and of high-frequency trading strategies and Nash equilibria. 2. Model and results. The state of the LOB at time t is a pair ( Bt,At) of (possibly inﬁnite) counting measures on R; Bt represents the prices of queued (not yet executed) bid orders, and At represents the prices of queued asks. New orders arrive as a labeled point process; the label records the type of order (bid or ask) and the price. Without loss of generality, we assume that the price axis has been continuously reparametrized so that all prices fall in the interval (0, 1) (or, occasionally, [0, 1]). Orders depart from the queue when an arriving order “matches” one of the orders already in the book. We shall need several notions of what it means for two prices to match, and to capture this we introduce a price equivalence function , that is a nondecreasing, not necessarily continuous, function P : [0, 1]→ [0, 1]. A bid-ask pair is compatible ifP(bid)≥P (ask).We shall primarily consider two types of price equivalence function:P(x) =x, and the function that partitions all prices into n pricing bins. We will refer to the latter case, where the image ofP is a ﬁnite set, as the binned model. Note that the same price equivalence function is applied to the prices of all the orders, and compatibility of bid-ask pairs is unchanged under any strictly increasing transformation of the equivalence function. We are now ready to formally deﬁne the evolution limit order book Lt. Initial state: Initially, there should be no compatible bid–ask pairs in the book. Equivalently, the initial state (B0,A 0) satisﬁes B0[x, 1)·A0(0,y ] = 0 if P(y)≤P (x). Most of the time we assume that the total number of orders in the book is ﬁnite; we relax this assumption in Section 5, where we allow an inﬁnite number of orders to be placed at a single price, and otherwise the book is ﬁnite. Order arrival process: New orders arrive as a Poisson process with iid labels designating the type and price of the order. Unless speciﬁed otherwise, we assume that P(bid) = P(ask) = 1/2.2 We assume the labels of orders are independent and identically distributed, and in particular independent of the state of the book, but the distributions of prices may depend on type. We let Fa be the CDF of prices of arriving asks, and Fb be the CDF of prices of arriving bids. We will often assume that the distributions of the prices of arriving orders have densities fa and fb respectively; this entails no loss of generality, because the LOB evolution is deﬁned by the combination of the arriving price distributions and a price equivalence function, and thus we can always assume that the arriving orders have densities and only become discontinuous after being put through the price equivalence function. 2The Poisson structure is not important to the book, because all that matters is the sequence of order arrivals. Unequal rates of arrival for bids and asks are considered in Section 5.1.1. 4 Change at order arrival: We do not allow cancellations in the model (until Section 5), so all changes to the state occur at the time of an order arrival. Suppose at time t a bid at price p arrives. If there is a matching ask in the book, i.e. if At−(0,y ] > 0 for some y such thatP(y)≤P (x), then nothing happens to the bids in the book (Bt =Bt−), and the lowest ask departs: At =At−−δq, where q = min{x :At−{x}> 0}3 . If there are no matching asks in the book, the bid joins the book: Bt =Bt− +δp andAt =At−. The situation is symmetric if the arriving order is an ask at price q: if there is a matching bid, the two orders depart (so At =At− and Bt =Bt−−δp where p = max{x :Bt−{x}> 0}), and if there are no matching bids, then the ask joins the book (Bt =Bt− and At =At− +δq). We will be keeping track of the highest (price of a) bid βt and lowest (price of an) ask αt in the book at timet. If an order departs the book at time t, it must be at price βt− (if a bid) or αt− (if an ask). We allow B0{x} =∞ orA0{y} =∞; if this is the case, then no bids left of x, and no asks right of y, will ever depart the limit order book, since they will never be the highest bid (respectively lowest ask). Below, we will refer to continuous and discretized models of LOBs. A continuous LOB is one where the order price densities fa andfb (exist and) are bounded above and below, and the price equivalence function isP(x) = x. Discretized models will use some binned price equivalence function, and will sometimes (but not always) assume that all bins receive a positive proportion of the orders of each type. For a discretized, binned LOB, we will use notation JxK to denote the index of the bin containing x; JxK is a positive integer ranging from 1 to N for some N >0. We now present the main results concerning the model. The ﬁrst result, Theorem 2.1, establishes a transition at threshold values κb andκa. Eventually bids arriving below κb, and asks arriving above κa, will never be executed; whereas all bids arriving above κb, and all asks arriving below κa, will be executed. The second result, Theorem 2.2, presents the distribution of the rightmost bid and leftmost ask. Theorem 2.1 (Thresholds). There exist prices κb and κa with the following properties: (1) For any ϵ > 0 there exists, almost surely, a (random) time T0 <∞ such that βt > κb−ϵ and αt <κ a +ϵ for all t≥T0. (2) For any ϵ> 0, inﬁnitely often there will be no orders with prices in (κb +ϵ,κa−ϵ). (3) Letx>κ b +ϵ and y <κa−ϵ for some ϵ> 0. Consider the LOB started with inﬁnitely many bids at x, inﬁnitely many asks at y, and ﬁnitely many orders in between. The evolution of the orders at prices in the interval (x,y ) is a positive (Harris) recurrent Markov process, with ﬁnite expected time until there are no orders in the interval. The fact that there will inﬁnitely often be no bids above x, and no asks below y, is a consequence of Kolmogorov’s 0–1 law; the challenge is to show that there will simultaneously be neither bids nor asks in the interval (x,y ). In fact, we shall need to prove this part of Theorem 2.1 and Theorem 2.2 below in tandem. Theorem 2.2 (Distribution of the highest bid) . Consider a continuous LOB; that is, P(x) = x, and the densities fb and fa are bounded above and below. Then (1) The limiting distributions of the highest bid and lowest ask have densities, denoted πb and πa; let ϖb =πb/fb and ϖa =πa/fa. (2) The thresholds satisfy 0<κ b <κ a < 1, and also Fb(κb) = 1−Fa(κa). (3) The distribution of the highest bid is such that ϖb is the unique solution to the ordinary diﬀerential equation ( − fa(x) 1−Fb(x)(Fa(x)ϖb(x))′ )′ =ϖb(x)fb(x) with initial conditions (Fa(x)ϖb(x))|x=κb = 1, (Fa(x)ϖb(x))′|x=κb = 0 and the additional constraint ϖb(x)→ 0 as x↑κa. The distribution of the lowest ask is determined by a similar ODE. 3The minimum exists when the initial state of the book is ﬁnite, since only ﬁnitely many orders are present in the book. 5 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0 1 2 3 4 5 Asymptotic bid densities price density Figure 1. Limiting density of the highest bid for the binned LOB with 50 bins, and limiting density for a continuous LOB (dotted line). Note the “shoulder” bin in the binned model: the threshold in the continuous LOB lies in the interior of this bin. Corollary 2.3 (Uniform arrivals). Suppose thatP(x) = x and the arrival price distribution is uniform on (0, 1) for both bids and asks. Then κb =κ≈ 0.218 is given by κ =w/(w +1) wherewew =e−1. The limiting density of the highest bid is supported on (κ, 1−κ), and is given by ϖb(x) = 1(κ,1−κ)(1−κ) ( 1 x + log (1−x x )) and the limiting density of the lowest ask is ϖa(x) =ϖb(1−x). Remark 1 (Absolute continuity). We can replace conditions on the densities fa and fb by the requirement that dFa/dFb be bounded above and below; however, it is more natural to state the result of Theorem 2.2 in terms of densities. The boundedness requirement avoids the trivial counterexamples fb = 2 1[0,1/2), fa = 21(1/2,1] (nonoverlapping supports, no orders leave) or fa = 21[0,1/2), fb = 21(1/2,1] (nonoverlapping supports, no threshold). Through a reparametrization of the price axis, Corollary 2.3 covers all cases where arriving bid and ask prices have identical densities. We describe some other analytically tractable applications of Theorem 2.2 in Section 5. We shall also, in Section 5, extend the analysis to deal with some examples where the supports of the bid and ask price distributions do not coincide. Remark 2. The form of the limiting density appearing in Corollary 2.3 can be deduced from equations (63)–(64) of [16, Section 3] after applying a coordinate transformation to convert between [0 ,∞) and [0, 1). In Figure 1, we show the exact limiting distribution of the highest bid for the binned LOB with uniform arrivals over 50 bins, along with the limiting distribution for the continuous LOB. Note the “shoulder” bin: in the binned LOB, the threshold happens to fall into the middle of a bin, so the long-term probability of having the rightmost bid in the bin is positive but below the continuous limit. While we have been able to compute analytically the distribution of the location of the rightmost bid, there are many related quantities for which we do not have exact expressions in steady-state (although the positive recurrence established in Theorem 2.1 implies that they are well-deﬁned and can be estimated consistently from simulation). Notably, except in the special case to be considered in Section 5.1.3, we have not been able to derive analytic expressions for the equilibrium height of the book (i.e. expected number of 6 bids or asks at a given price in the binned model), or for the joint distribution of the highest bid and lowest ask. For an illustration of the simulated joint density of the highest bid and lowest ask, see [26]. 2.1. Brief summary of notation. We summarize here our notation, as well as some of the main assump- tions used in the text. L: limit order book. P: price equivalence function, a monotone increasing function. Most of the time we use either P(x) =x or the function that places all prices into one of several bins. At, Bt: the counting measure of asks, respectively bids, at time t. Fa, Fb: CDFs of the prices of arriving ask and bid orders. Until Section 5.1.1, newly arriving orders are assumed to have equal probability of being a bid or an ask. In a binned model, we may write Fa,b(n) (with n an integer) to refer to the fraction of orders arriving into bins with index ≤n, i.e. the CDF evaluated at the rightmost endpoint of the interval. fa, fb: the corresponding densities, which are assumed to exist. For most results, fa and fb are assumed to be bounded above and below. αt,βt: the price of the lowest ask, respectively highest bid, at time t. Note that this is the actual price, not the bin containing it. JxK: in a binned LOB, the index of the bin containing price x. κa, κb: limiting prices above (respectively below) which only ﬁnitely many asks (bids) are ever executed. It is not obvious a priori that κa < 1 or κb > 0; we prove this fact in Step 3 of the proof of Proposition 4.2. For functions of two or more arguments, we may interchange arguments and subscripts: thus, fk,n(t)≡ fn(k,t )≡ f(k,n,t ). We will use notation fn(k,·) when we wish to consider f as a function of the third argument alone. 3. Preliminary results: monotonicity. Before proving the main results, we erect some scaﬀolding. Part of its purpose is to allow us to transition between continuous LOBs (for which we expect to get diﬀerential equations in the answer) and binned models (which can be modeled as countable-state Markov chains). It will also allow us to compare LOBs with diﬀerent arrival price distributions. Lemma 3.1 asserts that the state of the limit order book is Lipschitz in the initial state with Lipschitz constant 1: in particular, small perturbations in the arrival and matching patterns will lead to small per- turbations in the state of the book. Lemma 3.2 asserts that actions that decrease cumulative bid and ask queues by either shifting orders or removing them in bid–ask pairs will only decrease future queue sizes. Lemma 3.1 (Adding one order) . Consider a limit order book L, and let ˜L diﬀer fromL by the addition of one bid at time 0; let their arrival processes and price equivalence functions be the same. Then at all times ˜L diﬀers fromL either by the addition of one bid or by the removal of one ask. Proof. Proof. The roles of “bid” and “ask” are symmetric here. The claim clearly holds until the additional bid is the highest bid that departs from the system; once it does, L diﬀers from ˜L by the addition of a single ask, and the result follows by induction. □ Deﬁne cumulative queue sizes Qb(p,t ) = Bt(0,p ], Qa(p,t ) = At[p, 1). (Note that we count bids from the left and asks from the right.) When we want to highlight the dependence on only one of the variables, we will drop the other variable into a subscript. Lemma 3.2 (Decreasing queues) . Consider a limit order book L, and let ˜L diﬀer from L by modifying the initial state in such a way that ˜Qb(·, 0)≤ Qb(·, 0), ˜Qa(·, 0)≤ Qa(·, 0) (as functions of price), and also ˜Qb(1, 0)− ˜Qa(0, 0) = Qb(1, 0)−Qa(0, 0). In words, to get from L to ˜L, at time 0 we remove some bid–ask pairs, and/or shift some bids to the right, and/or shift some asks to the left. Then at all future times t≥ 0, ˜Qb(·,t )≤Qb(·,t ) and ˜Qa(·,t )≤Qa(·,t ) as functions of price. Proof. Proof. We show ˜Qb≤Qb, the argument for asks being identical. The argument proceeds by induction on time, i.e. the number of arrived orders. Throughout the proof, we use notation ft− = lims↘tf(s) for the left limit of a c` adl` ag functionf. 7 Consider ﬁrst the arrival of a bid at time t and price p. For it to upset the inequality, it must stay in ˜L but depart immediately in L; additionally, we need Qb(q,t−) = ˜Qb(q,t−) for some q ≥ p. Note that if the bid departs immediately in L, the leftmost ask at αt− must be compatible with p, and in particular there are no bids right of p: Qb(p,t−) = Qb(1,t−). This, together with Qb(q,t−) = ˜Qb(q,t−) and ˜Qb(·,t−)≤Qb(·,t−), implies that Qb(1,t−) = ˜Qb(1,t−). Since bid–ask departures occur in pairs, this in turn implies Qa(0,t−) = ˜Qa(0,t−). But it is easy to see that if ˜Qa(·,t−)≤Qa(·,t−) and they are equal at 0, then ˜αt− (the leftmost jump of ˜Qa(·,t−)) and αt− (the leftmost jump of Qa(·,t−)) satisfy ˜αt−≤αt−, and hence the arriving bid actually departs immediately in ˜L as well. Next consider the arrival of an ask at time t and price p. For it to upset the inequality, it must cause the departure of the highest bid in L, but not in ˜L, and we must have Qb(q,t−) = ˜Qb(q,t−) for some q≥βt− withP(βt−)≥P (p). Now, in ˜L there are no bids at prices ≥P (p), hence ˜Qb(1,t−) = limϵ→0 ˜Qb(p−ϵ,t−). However, this contradicts the inequality ˜Qb(·,t−)≤Qb(·,t−), since limϵ→0Qb(p−ϵ,t−)≤ limϵ→0Qb(βt−− ϵ,t−)≤Qb(1,t−)− 1. (Note that inequalities may not be equalities if there are multiple bids at the same price.) □ We can use this lemma to compare two limit order books L and ˜L with identical initial states and order arrival processes, but diﬀerent price equivalence functions. Suppose the price equivalence function ˜P merges some of the values that were distinguished by P. Then any bid–ask pair that is compatible in L is also compatible in ˜L; and possibly additional bid–ask pairs are compatible in ˜L as well. This lets us apply Lemma 3.2 to conclude that fewer orders will be present in ˜L. We can give an upper bound on the queue sizes in L by using a binned LOB with one more bin and a shifted arrival process. If L has a bid arrival at price x in bin k = JxK, we let ˆL have a bid arrival at some price in bin k− 1. The ask arrivals are identical in L and ˆL. (If bins of L are numbered 1 through N, then bins of ˆL are numbered 0 through N; bids arrive into bins 0 through N− 1 in ˆL, while asks arrive into bins 1 through N.) Under this arrangement, any bid–ask pair that is compatible in ˆL was compatible in L as well, so ˜L oﬀers an upper bound on the queue sizes of L. Consequently we can bound a continuous LOB L both from above and from below by two binned LOBs with slightly diﬀerent arrival price distributions. (Assuming the continuous LOB has arrival distributions supported on [0 , 1], the binned LOB providing the upper bound will have bid arrival distribution supported on [−ϵ, 1−ϵ] and ask arrival distribution supported on [0, 1].) Finally, when bin sizes are small, the diﬀerence in the arrival price distributions will be small, and we’ll use Lemma 3.1 to bound the rate at which the states of ˜L and ˆL diverge. This will let us show that the behavior of the continuous LOB converges in a suitable sense. 4. Proof of main results. We begin by stating a weaker form of Theorem 2.1. Proposition 4.1 (Weak thresholds). There exist prices κb and κa with the following properties: (1) For any ϵ >0 there exists, almost surely, a (random) time T0 <∞ such that βt > κb and αt < κa for all t≥T0. (2) For any ϵ> 0, inﬁnitely often there will be no bids with price exceeding κb +ϵ. Similarly, inﬁnitely often there will be no asks with price below κa−ϵ. (3) The threshold values κb and κa satisfy Fb(κb) = 1−Fa(κa). In addition, suppose that the bid and ask price densities (exist and) are bounded above by M. Then the following holds: (4) For any ϵ > 0, with probability 1, there exists a sequence of times Tn→∞ such that at time Tn there are no bids with prices above P(κb) +ϵ, and the number of asks with prices below P(κa)−ϵ is bounded above by 2(M + 1)ϵTn. Remark 3. Although the compatibility of bid–ask pairs is driven by the price equivalence functionP(x), the statements aboutκ are in terms ofx itself. This is because whenever there are compatible bid–ask pairs, the bid with the highest value of x and the ask with the lowest value of x always depart the book. In particular, in a binned model, κb andκa will usually fall in the middle of some bin; in this “shoulder” bin, a nontrivial 8 fraction of the arriving orders remain in the book forever. In Figure 1, κb is approximately half-way through the “shoulder” bin. (It is also possible for κb to form the edge of a bin.) Remark 4. Note that we make no assertions here about the behavior ofn−1Tn asn→∞ : for the purposes of this proposition, this sequence may well tend to zero. The proof of Theorem 2.1 will show that for any ϵ> 0 the sequence n−1Tn = n−1Tn(ϵ) is in fact eventually bounded away from zero, with the bound depending on ϵ. Proof. Proof. The ﬁrst two claims follow from Kolmogorov’s 0–1 law. Consider the events Eb(x) ={ﬁnitely many bids will depart from prices ≤x} Ea(x) ={ﬁnitely many asks will depart from prices ≥x}. Lemma 3.1 shows that these events are in the tail σ-algebra of the arrival process. Since the arrival process consists of a sequence of independent and identically distributed events, Kolmogorov’s 0–1 law ensures that for each x,Eb(x) has probability 0 or 1 (and similarly for Ea(x)). Now let (3a) κb = sup{x : P(Eb(x)) = 1}, κ a = inf{x : P(Ea(x)) = 1}. (If the set whose extremum is to be taken is empty, we letκb = 0 orκa = 1.) The ﬁrst two asserted properties now follow upon noticing that Eb(x)⊆E b(y) for x≥y, and that whenever there is a bid departure at price x, there must be no bids at prices higher than x. (The situation is similar for asks.) We next show thatFb(κb) +Fa(κa) = 1. From the strong law of large numbers for the arrival process and the 0–1 law above, we know that Fb(κb) is the smallest limiting proportion of arriving bids that stay in the system: (3b) Fb(κb) = lim inf t→∞ 1 t #(bids in the LOB at time t). A similar equality clearly holds for asks with 1−Fa(κa). Since bids and asks always depart in pairs, a further appeal to the strong law of large numbers for the arrival process shows that we must haveFb(κb) = 1−Fa(κa). The existence of times Tn as in part (4) of the theorem follows by a similar argument from the functional law of large numbers for the arrival processes. With probability 1, picking a large enough time Tn when there are no bids at prices above P(κb) +ϵ ensures that there are at most ( Fb(κa) + (M + 1)ϵ)Tn asks in the system. Since asks to the right of κa arrive at rate (1−Fa(κa)) =Fb(κb) and eventually never leave, for large enough Tn there will be at most 2(M + 1)ϵTn asks at prices below κa−ϵ. □ This result is weaker than the positive recurrence we wish to prove eventually: in particular, it does not show that the total number of both types of orders between κb and κa is ever zero. To obtain statements about positive recurrence, we shall need to use ﬂuid limit techniques, and our overall approach will be similar to that in [2, Chapter 4]. The ﬁnal proof of stability will use multiplicative Foster’s criterion (state-dependent drift), see [18, Theorem 13.0.1]. In order to get there, we need to show that whenever there are many bids or asks in (κb,κa), their number tends to decrease at some positive, bounded below, rate over long periods of time. This is a standard line of argument in queueing theory; but the challenge of the model is that the evolution of the queues depends on which queues are positive, rather than which queues are large. In general Markov chains of this form are very diﬃcult to analyze ([9] show that in general the stability of such chains is undecidable), but the special structure of our chain makes it amenable to analysis. The outline of the proof is as follows. (1) We work with binned LOBs. We begin by showing that, after appropriate rescaling, both the queue sizes and the local time of the highest bid (lowest ask) in each bin converge to a set of Lipschitz trajectories, which we call ﬂuid limits. We then proceed to develop properties of the ﬂuid limits. (2) We next show that all ﬂuid limits tend to zero for bins (strictly) between JκbK + 1 and JκaK− 1. We exploit the equations and inequalities satisﬁed by ﬂuid limits to show the following: (a) There is an interval [x0,y 0] on which, whenever the ﬂuid limit of the number of orders is positive, it decreases (at a rate bounded below). Therefore, after some time T0 (which depends on the initial state), the ﬂuid limit will be zero on [ x0,y 0]. The values x0 and y0 may not be bin boundaries. 9 (b) Following T0, we will be able to bound from below the rate of increase of the local time of the rightmost bid on [x1,x 0) for some x1 <x 0, and of the leftmost ask on (y0,y 1] for some y1 >y 0. Since whenever the highest bid is in [x1,x 0) it has a positive chance of departing (and similarly for asks in (y0,y 1]), we conclude that whenever the number of orders in [ x1,y 1] is large, it will decrease (at a rate bounded below). We repeat the argument until [ xn,yn]≈ [κb,κa]. The xi and yi may not be bin boundaries in this step. (3) We show that if on some interval, all ﬂuid limits converge to 0 in ﬁnite time, then the binned LOB is recurrent on that interval. (This step is standard for ﬂuid limit arguments.) Since the number of bids in a continuous limit order book can be bounded from above by binned ones, this will also show recurrence of the continuous LOB. 4.1. ODE of the limiting distribution. Our ﬁrst result shows that the ODE which should describe the unique limit, ast→∞ , of the empirical distribution of the highest bid does in fact describe some such limit. In the process, we also establish 0 <κ b <κ a < 1. Proposition 4.2 (Weak distribution of the highest bid). Suppose the arrival price distributions have densi- ties bounded above and below, and consider a sequence of binned LOBs with the number of bins, N, tending to inﬁnity. For each N and ϵ > 0, let Tn = Tn(N,ϵ ) → ∞be the sequence of times identiﬁed in part (4) of Proposition 4.1. Let πb(n,N,ϵ ) be the discrete normalized empirical density of the highest bid over the time interval [0,Tn]; that is, πb(n,N,ϵ,x ) = time up to Tn that the highest bid is in JxK Tn· (length of JxK) . (1) There exists a unique limit limn→∞, N→∞, ϵ→0πb(n,N,ϵ ) :=πb, and similarly for asks. (2) Denoting ϖb =πb/fb and ϖa =πa/fa, these satisfy the pair of integral equations (4a) Fa(x)ϖb(x) = ∫ 1 x ϖa(y)fa(y)dy, x∈ (κb,κa); ∫ κa κb ϖb(x)fb(x)dx = 1, (4b) (1 −Fb(x))ϖa(x) = ∫ x 0 ϖb(y)fb(y)dy, x∈ (κb,κa); ∫ κa κb ϖa(x)fa(x)dx = 1. (3) Moreover, whereverϖb is diﬀerentiable, it satisﬁes the ODE (5a) ( −1−Fb(x) fa(x) (Fa(x)ϖb(x))′ )′ =ϖb(x)fb(x) with initial conditions (5b) ( Fa(x)ϖb(x))|x=κb = 1, (Fa(x)ϖb(x))′|x=κb = 0 and the additional constraint ϖb(x)→ 0 as x↑ κa. The distribution of the leftmost ask satisﬁes a similar ODE. (4) The equation (5) has a unique solution; in particular, κb and κa are uniquely determined by it. Remark 5 (Normalization and initial conditions) . From the integral equation (4) it follows that ϖb will be a continuous function of price, whereas πb may not be. In particular, if we are interested in piecewise continuous functions fb and fa, then ϖb will satisfy the ODE (5a) on each of the segments where fb and fa are continuous, and can be patched together from the requirement that ϖb(x) and (Fa(x)ϖb(x))′ are both continuous. The initial conditions (5b) apply for LOBs with ﬁnite initial states. Consider instead a LOB ˜L with an inﬁnite bid order at some price p>κ b. As long as the threshold ˜κb of ˜L is positive, we can do away with the inﬁnite order at p by changing the price equivalence function so that P(0) =P(˜κb) =P(p): the evolution of ˜L and this new LOB ˆL will be the same at prices above p after the threshold time. In ˆL, there is yet another threshold ˆκb, and the initial conditions (5b) hold for all x∈ (ˆκb,p ], meaning ˆϖb(x) = 1/Fa(x) on that interval. Correspondingly, in ˜L, the distribution of the highest bid price has an atom at p of mass∫p ˆκb 1/Fa(x)dx. For the lowest ask price, we will of course have P(αt≤p) = 0, but it may be the case that ϖa(x)⁄→ 0 as x↓p: it may be discontinous at the location of the inﬁnite bid. 10 Remark 6. The computations in our Steps 2 and 3 below are similar to computations appearing in [16, Section 1]; we present the full argument for completeness. Proof. Proof. The proof proceeds as follows: (1) Fix the number of bins N, and consider the collection of empirical densities πb(n,N,ϵ ), πa(n,N,ϵ ). Along any sequence n→∞ , N→∞ , and ϵ→ 0 there is a convergent subsequence. (2) Any subsequential limit satisﬁes a certain pair of integral equations, hence some ODEs. (3) The ODEs will directly imply κb <κ a; in addition, 0 <κ b and κa < 1. (4) The solution to these ODEs is unique, and in particular the limit does not depend on the order of n→∞ , N→∞ , and ϵ→ 0. Step 1: The space of probability distributions with compact support is compact, so along any sequence of empirical distributions there will be convergent subsequences. Moreover, whenever the highest bid is in bin JxK, bid departures occur from the bin at rate≥Fa(x)πb(JxK), whereas bid arrivals occur into that bin at rate at most fb(x). Consequently, under the assumption of bounded densities fb,fa, the highest bid density πb(JxK)≤ fb(x)/Fa(x) is bounded uniformly in n, N, ϵ; this guarantees the existence of limiting densities along subsequences. Finally, the lower bound on fa and fb guarantees that ϖa and ϖb are bounded, and hence also converge along subsequences. For steps 2 and 3, πa,b and ϖa,b refer to any such subsequential limit, taken along a single subsequence for all four quantities. Step 2: The integral equations are expressing the idea that the rate of bid arrival should be equal to the rate of bid departure. Along a sequence of times where the queues are small (i.e. ϵ≈ 0), this is very nearly true; it will be exactly true in the limitϵ→ 0. The bid arrival rate at x isfb(x)P(αt >x ) =fb(x) ∫ 1 x πa(y)dy, and the bid departure rate at x isπb(x)Fa(x), so setting the two equal gives the result; the ODE is obtained by diﬀerentiating twice. Of course, if we ﬁx the number of bins N, the limit distribution will be described by a diﬀerence equation rather than an integral (or diﬀerential) equation. It is standard to see that the limit of solutions to the diﬀerence equations solves the diﬀerential (or integral) equation. Step 3: To see κb < κa, note that πb is bounded above by fb/Fa always, so if it integrates to 1 we must have κb < κa. To see κb > 0 (and κa < 1), we consider a binned LOB ˜L with three bins, with bin partitions atx andx+δ for somex∈ (κb,κa). By monotonicity, J˜κbK = 1 and J˜κaK = 3. For δ small enough, the number of orders in the middle bin will eventually be stochastically dominated by a geometric random variable. Indeed, whenever there are bids in bin 2, more bids arrive at rate Fb(x +δ)−Fb(x) and depart at the larger rate Fa(x +δ) (this is after asks from bin 3 stop departing). The situation is similar for asks. Consequently, in ˜L we must have ˜πb(2)> 0 and ˜πa(2)> 0. If ˜πb(1) and ˜πa(3) were such that (almost) all orders depart, then from ˜πb(1)Fa(x) =Fb(x) we ﬁnd ˜πb(1)Fa(x) =Fb(x) =⇒ ˜πb(2) = Fa(x)−Fb(x) Fa(x) =⇒ Fa(x)>F b(x). Now let δ be small enough that Fa(x) > Fb(x +δ), and solve for ˜πb(2) from the alternative expression ˜πb(2)Fa(x +δ) = (Fb(x +δ)−Fb(x))˜πa(3). This gives ˜πb(1) + ˜πb(2) = Fb(x) Fa(x) + Fb(x +δ)−Fb(x) Fa(x +δ) 1−Fa(x +δ) 1−Fb(x +δ) < 1. The contradiction shows that in fact in this LOB we must have ˜ πb(1)Fa(x) < Fb(x)−η for some η > 0, which implies Fb(˜κb)≥ η. By monotonicity, we obtain κb > 0 as well (for N large enough that the above bin of width δ is one of the original bins of the LOB). Step 4: The uniqueness of solution follows from the fact that we have a second-order ODE with two initial conditions (which, as we just showed, are ﬁnite). Note that an alternative argument for κb > 0 would be to show that πb(x)> 0 for some x> 0, since then the ODE forces πbFa/fb decreasing, and πb(x)∼ 1/x near 0, which is not integrable. However, it is not immediately obvious why in a binned LOB the highest bid couldn’t spend (almost) all of its time in the leftmost bin, hence we give the more involved argument above. It is at this moment possible that there are multiple solutions to the ODE with diﬀerent values for κb. Intuitively, this should not be the case, since any limiting κb should give the (unique) threshold value of the continuous LOB. We will derive the uniqueness of the quadruple (κb,κa,πb,πa) from Lemma 4.3 below, which shows that the solution of (5a) is monotonic in the initial conditions. This implies that the requirements 11 ∫κa κb πb(x)dx = 1 and Fb(κb) = 1−Fa(κa) pin down κb and κa uniquely, since decreasing κb increases the initial value of ϖb and d dxϖb. □ The second result we require about the ODE is monotonicity in the initial conditions: Lemma 4.3 (ODE monotonicity). Letϖb and ˜ϖb be two solutions of the ODE (5a) with initial conditions ϖb(x0)≥ ˜ϖb(x0), (ϖb)′(x0)≥ ( ˜ϖb)′(x0). Then for all x≥x0, ϖb(x)≥ ˜ϖb(x). Proof. Proof. We may reparametrize space monotonically so that Fa(x) =x. Then the ODE (5a) becomes (Fb(x)− 1) ( x d dxϖb(x) +ϖb(x) )′ +xfb(x) d dxϖb(x) = 0, which is a ﬁrst-order ODE in d dxϖb(x). Since solutions of ﬁrst-order ODEs are increasing in their initial conditions, we obtain d dxϖb(x)≥ d dx ˜ϖb(x), and the desired inequality follows trivially. □ Corollary 4.4. Suppose the initial conditions for ϖb come (5b), and the initial conditions for ˜ϖb are Fa(x0) ˜ϖb(x0) = 1, (Fa(x) ˜ϖb(x))′|x=x0 = 0 for some x0 >κ b. Then ϖb(x0)≤ ˜ϖb(x0) and d dxϖb(x)|x=x0≤ d dx ˜ϖb(x)|x=x0. Consequently, ϖb(x)≤ ˜ϖb(x) for x≥x0. Proof. Proof. Reparametrize space as before, so that Fa(x) =x. Then (xϖb(x))′ =−πa(x), ϖ b(x) = 1 x ( 1− ∫ x 0 ϖa(y)dy ) . From this it is clear that ϖb(x0)≤ ˜ϖb(x0). Further, x d dxϖb(x) =−πa(x)−ϖb(x) =− 1 x + 1 x ∫ x 0 (ϖa(y)−ϖa(x))dy. Now, in a LOB, (1−Fb(x))ϖa(x) is increasing (cf. xϖb(x) which is decreasing), meaning ϖa is increasing. Consequently, the integral above is nonpositive, and we see x0 d dxϖb(x)|x=x0≤− 1 x0 =x0 d dx ˜ϖb(x)|x=x0 as required. □ 4.2. Fluid limits. In this section we introduce the ﬂuid-scaled processes associated with the limit order book, discuss their convergence to ﬂuid limits, and determine properties of the limits. Throughout the section, we work with a binned limit order book. Let Bk(·) and Ak(·) be the arrival processes of bids and asks into bin k (indexed by time). The time structure of these processes is not important for our results, so we may assume that these are Poisson processes; by deﬁnition, they are independent. We will assume that the total arrival rate of bids is 1, and also of asks, so that if pb(k) (respectively pa(k)) is the probability that an arriving bid (ask) falls into bin k, this is also the arrival rate of bids (asks) into that bin. Let Qb(k,t ) (respectively Qa(k,t )) be the number of bids (asks) in bin k at time t. Let Tβ(k,t ) and Tα(k,t ) be the amount of time up to time t when the rightmost bid, respectively leftmost ask, is in bin k: that is, Tβ(k,t ) = ∫ t 0 1{JβsK =k}ds, T α(k,t ) = ∫ t 0 1{JαsK =k}ds. It is clear that the initial dataQb(k, 0),Qa(k, 0) together with the arrival processesBk(·),Ak(·) give suﬃcient information to determine the values of all of these processes at later times. We have the following expressions: 12 JβtK =k ⇐⇒ Qb(k,t )> 0, ∑ k′>k Qb(k′,t ) = 0 (6a) JαtK =k ⇐⇒ Qa(k,t )> 0, ∑ k′<k Qa(k′,t ) = 0 (6b) Qb(k,t ) =Qb(k, 0) + ∫ t 0 1{Jα(s)K>k}dBk(s)− ∑ k′≤k ∫ t 0 1{Jβ(s)K =k}dAk′(s)(6c) Qa(k,t ) =Qa(k, 0) + ∫ t 0 1{Jβ(s)K<k}dAk(s)− ∑ k′≥k ∫ t 0 1{Jα(s)K =k}dBk′(s)(6d) Tβ(k,t ) =Tβ(k, 0) + ∫ t 0 1{Jβ(s)K =k}ds(6e) Tα(k,t ) =Tα(k, 0) + ∫ t 0 1{Jα(s)K =k}ds(6f) We deﬁne the ﬂuid-scaled processes by Xn(t) =n−1X(nt) for any process X. We now have the following result on convergence to ﬂuid limits: Theorem 4.5 (Convergence to ﬂuid limits) . Consider a sequence of processes (Bn(k,·),An(k,·),Qb,n(k,·),Qa,n(k,·),Tβ,n(k,·),Tα,n(k,·)) whose initial state (at time 0) is bounded: ||Qa,n(k, 0),Qb,n(k, 0)||≤ 1. As n→∞ , any such sequence has a subsequence which converges, uniformly on compact sets of t, to a collection of Lipschitz functions (bk(·),ak(·),qb(k,·),qa(k,·),τβ(k,·),τα(k,·)). (Diﬀerent subsequences may converge to diﬀerent 6-tuples of Lipschitz functions.) We call the limiting 6-tuple a ﬂuid limit. Any ﬂuid limit satisﬁes the following equations almost everywhere (i.e. everywhere where the derivatives are deﬁned): b′ k(t) =pb(k), a ′ k(t) =pa(k) (7a) ∂ ∂t (τβ(k,t )) = 0 if ∑ k′>k qb(k′,t )> 0, ∂ ∂t (τα(k,t )) = 0 if ∑ k′<k qa(k′,t )> 0(7b) JκaK∑ k=JκbK−1 τβ(k,t ) =t, JκaK+1∑ k=JκbK τα(k,t ) =t(7c) qb(k,t )≥ 0, q a(k,t )≥ 0 (7d) ∂ ∂tqb(k,t ) = 0 if qb(k,t ) = 0, ∂ ∂tqa(k,t ) = 0 if qa(k,t ) = 0(7e) ∂ ∂tqb(k,t ) =pb(k) ∑ k′>k ∂ ∂tτα(k′,t )− ∂ ∂tτβ(k,t ) ∑ k′≤k pa(k′) (7f) ∂ ∂tqa(k,t ) =pa(k) ∑ k′<k ∂ ∂tτβ(k′,t )− ∂ ∂tτα(k,t ) ∑ k′≥k pb(k′).(7g) Proof. Proof. The expressions in (6) together with the functional law of large numbers for the arrival processes lead to the u.o.c. convergence along subsequences to a ﬂuid limit. The integral representation implies that limits must be Lipschitz functions. To see that any ﬂuid limit must satisfy (7), we note that (7a) follows directly for the functional law of large numbers for the arrival processes. Identities (7b) follows from the corresponding statement for prelimit processes: if ∑ k′>kqb(k′,s ) > ϵ >0 on a time interval s∈ (t−ϵ,t +ϵ), then for all suﬃciently large n,∑ k′>kQb,n(k′,ns )>nϵ/ 2> 0, so Jβ(ns)K>k andTβ,n(k,ns ) is not increasing. Identity (7c) holds because 13 the rightmost bid (leftmost ask) is eventually always in one of the bins in the prelimit processes, so this must be true in the limit. Identities (7d) follows for a similar reason: prelimit queues are nonnegative, hence the limit is nonnegative as well. Identity (7e) is a corollary of (7d): a process that is always nonnegative, diﬀerentiable at t, and equal to 0 at t must have derivative 0 there. Finally, identities (7f) and (7g) follow from (6a)–(6d) for the prelimit queues. More precisely, the rate at which the bid queue size changes is as follows: if the lowest ask is higher than bin k, then bids arrive into the queue at rate pb(k); and if the highest bid is in bin k, then all asks arriving at prices below k deplete the queue at k. Because the location of the highest bid or lowest ask does not show up in the ﬂuid limit, we instead use the local times tβ and tα. □ We introduce notation πβ(k,t ) = ∂ ∂tτβ(k,t ), πα(k,t ) = ∂ ∂tτα(k,t ). 4.3. Fluid limits drain. We will now show that in a LOB that starts with inﬁnitely many bids in JκbK + 1 and asks in JκaK− 1, the ﬂuid limit queue sizes drain, i.e. converge to 0 on the bins ranging from JκbK + 1 to JκaK− 1. We will assume that bin widths (and hence pb(k), pa(k)) are all small. This is the meat of the argument in the paper. Theorem 4.6 (Fluid limits drain) . Consider a ﬂuid limit corresponding to a binned LOB with N bins. Suppose the arrival process is symmetric ( pb(k) = pa(N−k)), the probabilities pa,b(k) are bounded below, and pb(k) is decreasing in k (pa(k) increasing in k). Suppose that initially there are inﬁnitely many bids in bin JκbK + 1 and inﬁnitely many asks in JκaK− 1; then the ﬂuid limit of queues can be described by qa,b(k,t ) for JκbK + 2≤k≤ JκaK− 2, and the ﬂuid limit of the local times can be described by πa,b(k,t ) for JκbK + 1≤k≤ JκaK− 1. Let the initial state of the ﬂuid limit satisfy‖(qb(0),qa(0)‖≤ 1. There exists ϵ =ϵ(N)→ 0 asN→∞ , and a time T depending on{pa(k),pb(k), bin widths}, such that for all bins k satisfying Jκb +ϵK<k< Jκa−ϵK, and all times t≥T , qb(k,t ) = 0, q a(k,t ) = 0, ∀t≥T. Further, in the interval Jκb +ϵK < k < Jκa−ϵK and for t ≥ T , the derivatives πβ(k,t ) satisfy the second-order diﬀerence equation ∆k (1−Fb(k) pa(k + 1)· ∆k (Fa(k) pb(k)πβ(k) )) =πβ(k + 1), where the operator ∆k is given by ∆k(f) =f(k + 1)−f(k). The initial conditions satisfy Fa(Jκb +ϵK) pb(Jκb +ϵK)πβ(Jκb +ϵK)≤ 1, ∆Jκb+ϵK (Fa(k) pb(k)πβ(k) ) ≤ 0. A similar equation holds for asks. As N → ∞, the solution of the diﬀerence equation converges to the solution of the ODE (5a) with initial conditions given by (5b). Note that κa and κb are the thresholds of an LOB with a ﬁnite starting state; the LOB with inﬁnite bid and ask orders can be thought of as having diﬀerent thresholds ˜ κb < κb and ˜κa > κa. For large N, Lemma 3.1 implies ˜κb≈κb and ˜κa≈κa. Proof. Proof. The proof proceeds in stages. Stage 0. Letx0 be given byFa(x0) =Fb(κa)−Fb(x0), and lety0 be given by 1−Fb(x0) = (1−Fa(κb))− (1−Fa(y0)). Equivalently, Fa(x0) +Fb(x0) = 2x0 =Fb(κa), so x0 = 1 2Fb(κa), and y0 = 1 2(1 +Fa(κb)). Claim 0.1: κb≤x0 <y 0≤κa. Proof: Note that Fa(κb) is a lower bound on the rate of bid departure from the Markov chain when there are any bids present, while Fb(κb)−Fb(κa) is an upper bound on the rate of bid arrival. Consequently, if Fa(κb) > Fb(κb)−Fb(κa), then the number of bids on the entire interval ( κb,κa) would be stochastically bounded, whereas it should scale as a random walk. A similar argument gives y0≤κa. Finally, 1 2Fb(κa) = 1 2(1−Fa(κb))< 1 2(1 +Fa(κb)), since κb > 0 by Proposition 4.2. □ Claim 0.2: There existsT0 =T0(M) such that for all timest≥T0 and all ﬂuid models,∑Jy0K−1 k=Jx0K+1(qb(k,t )+ qa(k,t )) = 0. 14 Proof: Since these processes are absolutely continuous and nonnegative, it suﬃces to show that when- ever there are any ﬂuid orders in the interval (and all the derivatives are deﬁned), the ﬂuid number of orders in the interval decreases at a rate bounded below. By (7f) and (7g), we see that for Q(t) =∑ Jx0K+1≤k≤JκaK−1qb(k,t ), Q′(t)≤ { 0, Q (t) = 0∑JκbK−1 k=Jx0K+1pb(k)−∑ k′≤Jx0K+1pa(k)<F b(κb)−Fb(x0)−Fa(x0)−ϵ, Q (t)> 0. Consequently, after a ﬁnite amount of timeTb,0, there will be no ﬂuid bids in bins≥ Jx0K+1. Similarly, after a ﬁnite amount of time Ta,0, there will be no ﬂuid asks in bins ≤ Jy0K− 1; we may takeT0 = max(Tb,0,Ta,0). Claim 0.3: There exists ϵ0 > 0 such that for all times t≥T0 and all ﬂuid models, ∑ k≤Jx0Kπβ(k,t )≥ϵ0 and∑ k≥Jy0Kπα(k,t )≥ϵ0. (This result requires bins to be suﬃciently small.) Proof: Note that equations (7f) and (7g) hold at all times, even when there are no ﬂuid orders in the bin; thus, for t≥T0 and all k∈ [Jx0K + 1, Jy0K− 1] we have pb(k) ∑ k′>k πα(k′,t ) =πβ(k,t ) ∑ k′≤k pa(k′), p a(k) ∑ k′<k πβ(k′,t ) =πα(k,t ) ∑ k′≥k pb(k′). Omitting the dependence on t for clarity, these equations, together with the observation that ∑ kπα(k) =∑ kπβ(k) = 1, can be rearranged to give two decoupled second-order diﬀerence equations for πα(k) and πβ(k). We abuse notation to write Fa(k) =∑ k′≤kpa(k′) and similarly for Fb(k). (8a) ∆ k (1−Fb(k) pa(k + 1)· ∆k (Fa(k) pb(k)πβ(k) )) =πβ(k + 1), Jx0K + 1≤k≤ Jy0K− 1. (There is a corresponding equation for πa, of course.) If we had two initial conditions for this second-order diﬀerence equation, we would be able to solve it. Unfortunately, in general we do not have such initial conditions, but we have bounds on them, namely (8b) Fa(Jx0K) pb(Jx0K)πβ(Jx0K)≤ 1, ∆Jx0K (Fa(k) pb(k)πβ(k) ) ≤ 0. These inequalities would hold with equality in a diﬀerent limit order book ˜L0, in which we assign the same low price to all the bins up through Jx0K + 1, and the same high price to all the bins from Jy0K− 1 up. (We nonetheless keep track the bins containing the highest bid and lowest ask of ˜L.) Corollary 4.4 shows that the solutions to (8) on Jx0K + 1≤k≤ Jy0K− 1 are bounded from above by the solution for ˜L. (The result is in continuous space, but the arguments work just as well for diﬀerence equations.) We refer to the solution for ˜L as ˜πβ and ˜πα. Using the trivial upper bound on ˜πβ(k) for k≥ Jy0K, we ﬁnd (9) ∑ k≤Jy0K−1 πβ(k)≤ Jy0K−1∑ k=Jx0K+1 ˜πβ(k) + JκaK−1∑ k=Jy0K pb(k) Fa(k). Notice that ˜πβ must equal (Fa(k))−1pb(k) for J˜κbK+ 1≤k≤ Jx0K, as bids will not be queueing in those bins. Consequently, for the ﬁrst term in the right-hand side of (9) we have the bound Jy0K−1∑ k=Jx0K+1 ˜πβ(k)≤ 1− Jx0K∑ k=J˜κbK+1 pb(k) Fa(k)≤ 1− JκaK−1∑ k=Jy0K pb(k) Fa(k)−ϵ0, as long as the bins are narrow enough. Indeed, notice that x0− ˜κb >x 0−κb =κa−y0 (from monotonicity ofL vs. ˜L and symmetry), the denominator is increasing in k, and the bid arrival density decreases with translation to the right. We require the bins to be narrow enough that the sums are all nonempty. Stage 1. We now letx1,y 1 be deﬁned byFb(x0)−Fb(x1) =ϵ0Fa(x1) andFa(y1)−Fa(y0) =ϵ0(1−Fb(y1)). Similarly to the argument for Stage 0, there exists a time T1 such that for all t≥T1 there will be no ﬂuid queues on [ Jx1K + 1, Jy1K− 1]. Indeed, if there are ﬂuid bids in the interval [ Jx1K + 1, Jx0K], then whenever the highest bid is below Jx0K it is in fact in this interval; the deﬁning inequality then means that the ﬂuid amount of bids in this interval decreases, and similarly for asks. 15 Next, we use the diﬀerence equation description on [ Jx1K + 1, Jy0K− 1] to show that after T1, the highest bid spends at least ϵ1 > 0 of its time below x1. This will require comparison against a diﬀerent restricted LOB ˜L1, where we merge all prices up to Jx1K + 1 and from Jy1K− 1. Subsequent stages. We can now construct a nested sequence of intervals ... < x2 < x1 < x0 < y0 < y1 < y2 < ... , where the inequalities are strict provided bins are narrow enough. It remains to show that limk→∞,N→∞xk = κb and limk→∞,N→∞yk = κa. (Note that N→∞ , i.e. thinner bins, is certainly necessary for this to hold!) This result follows from the fact that ϵi can be taken to be bounded below: (10) ϵi≥ JxiK∑ k=J˜κbK+1 pb(k) Fa(k)− JκaK−1∑ k=JyiK pb(k) Fa(k)≥ ( 1 Fa(JxiK)− 1 Fa(JyiK) ) (Fb(JxiK)−Fb(J˜κbK + 1)). As long as xi is bounded away from κb (and bin widths are small enough), this will be bounded below, and therefore xi−xi+1 and yi+1−yi will be bounded below. Convergence to ODE. The convergence of bounded solutions to diﬀerence equations to solutions of an ODE is standard. The argument above gives an inequality for the initial conditions, but note that as we approachκb the initial conditions become exact. Indeed, Fa(κb +ϵ)ϖb(κb +ϵ) = ∫ 1 κb+ϵ ϖa(x)fa(x)dx→ 1, since the lowest ask will never be below κb. Also, (Fa(x)ϖb(x))′|x=κb+ϵ =−ϖa(κb +ϵ) =−(1−Fb(κb +ϵ))−1 ∫ κb+ϵ 0 ϖb(x)fb(x)dx→ 0, since the highest bid density is bounded. Putting this result together with Proposition 4.2 shows that, for symmetric distributions pb, pa with pb decreasing, the ﬂuid limits πβ(k,t )/pb(k), πα(k,t )/pa(k) will approach, as t→∞ and N→∞ , the solution of the ODE (5), uniformly on compact subsets of ( κb,κa). Remark 7. The argument leading to the inequality (10) implies that the joint density of the highest bid and lowest ask must be bounded away from zero on at least a fraction of the boundary of the support, i.e. the probability of the event “there are no asks below κa and the highest bid is at κb +x” should be O(x) but not o(x). In fact, the simulated joint density in [26] is bounded away from 0 everywhere except the very corner (highest bid at κb and lowest ask at κa). It remains to show that stability of ﬂuid limits implies positive recurrence of the Markov chain. Lemma 4.7 (Fluid stability and positive recurrence) . Consider a LOB satisfying the assumptions of Theo- rem 4.6. Suppose that on some interval of bins k0≤k≤k1, all ﬂuid limits with initial state bounded above by 1 satisfy the following: there exists a time T (depending on{pa(k),pb(k), bin widths}), such that for all times t≥T , qb(k,t ) = 0, q a(k,t ) = 0, k 0≤k≤k1, t≥T. Consider a limit order book ˜L started with inﬁnitely many bids in bin k0− 1 and inﬁnitely many asks in bin k1 + 1; its state is described by the Markov chain of queue sizes in bins k0≤k≤k1. The Markov chain associated with ˜L is positive recurrent. Proof. Proof. To go between ﬂuid stability and positive recurrence, we use multiplicative Foster’s criterion [18, Theorem 13.0.1]. Let Q(t) =‖(Qb(k,t ),Qa(k,t ))k0≤k≤k1‖, and let C be suﬃciently large. Let Q(0) =q >C, and consider the ﬂuid scaling Qa,b(k,t ) =q−1Qa,b(k,qt ). By Theorem 4.5, ifC and henceq is large enough, there exists a ﬂuid limit (qa(k,t ),qb(k,t ),τα(k,t ),τβ(k,t ))k0≤k≤k1 satisfying‖qa(k,t ),qb(k,t )‖ = 1, such that P( ‖‖Qa(k,t )−qa(k,t ),Qb(k,t )−qb(k,t ) ‖‖>ϵ )≤ϵ for all t∈ [0,T ]. 16 In particular, P(‖Qa(k,qT ),Qa(k,qT )‖ > ϵq) < ϵ. Note further that ‖Qa(k,qT ),Qb(k,qT )‖≤ A(qT ) + B(qT ) is bounded by the arrival process, and hence has all moments. Thus, we conclude Eq[‖Qa(k,qT ),Qb(k,qT )‖]≤ϵ(1 + 2T )q. Choosing ϵ< (1 + 2T )−1 completes the proof. □ 4.4. General order price distributions. It remains to remove the extra conditions (symmetric and de- creasing) on the order price distributions, and ﬁnish the argument for continuous limit order books. This requires two observations: (1) Recall that a continuous LOB could be bounded by two discrete LOBs with diﬀerent arrival price distributions (in one of them, we shift all arriving bids one bin to the left). This shifted arrival distribution no longer satisﬁes the absolute continuity conditions, but nevertheless, Lemma 3.1 shows that all of the above ﬂuid-scaled arguments work for it as bin size shrinks to 0. Speciﬁcally, we model the bid arrivals as shifting the rightmost bin of bids all the way to the left, and then the diﬀerence between the two books is at most two bins’ worth of arrivals over the ﬂuid time interval [0 ,T ], which will be small provided bins are narrow. This allows us to conclude the positive recurrence of a continuous LOB with inﬁnitely many bids at price P(κb) +ϵ and inﬁnitely many asks at price P(κa)−ϵ, provided the densitiesfa,fb are bounded above and below, symmetric, andfb is decreasing. (2) By Lemma 3.2, replacing the bid arrival price distribution by another distribution with stochasti- cally higher prices, and/or replacing the ask arrival price distribution by another distribution with stochastically lower prices, results in fewer orders in a book. In particular, if we have shown the positive recurrence of an LOB with an inﬁnite supply of bids at price p and asks at price q with a particular arrival distribution, the LOB will remain positive recurrent when we switch to an arrival price distribution with bids further right, and asks further left. Notice that as long as there are bids in the interval (p,q ), they evolve on that interval identically whether or not there is an inﬁnite supply of bids at p; and similarly for asks. This can be used to show that ﬂuid limits drain in the new LOB on the interval (p,q ). In the new LOB with the shifted price distribution, ( p,q ) may not be close to (˜κb, ˜κa), so we will be wanting to extend the interval, as in Claim 0.3 of Theorem 4.6. The argument there does not use the full extent of the symmetry and monotonicity conditions; they are only used to prove the inequality JpK∑ k=JκbK+1 pb(k) Fa(k)≥ JκaK−1∑ k=JqK pb(k) Fa(k) +ϵ for some ϵ> 0. For this inequality to hold, it is entirely suﬃcient to have (11) ∫ p ˆκb fb(x) Fa(x)dx≥ ∫ ˜κa q fb(x) Fa(x)dx +ϵ, with no constraints on what happens between p and q. Consequently, for a general pair of densities ( fb,fa) bounded below and above, we begin by ﬁnding fb,0,fa,0 with Fb,0≥ Fb, Fa,0≤ Fa which are symmetric and for which fb,0 is decreasing. (For example, we may takefb,0 =fa,0 = min(fa,fb) on most of the interval, with fb,0 taking a large value near 0, and fa,0 taking a large value near 1.) We use Theorem 4.6 to show that ﬂuid limits drain for fb,0,fa,0 (and hence, by Lemma 3.2, also for ( fb,fa)) on an interval (κb,0,κa,0). We then modify fb,1 on (0,κa,0) and fa,1 on (κb,0, 1) to ﬁnd the next pair of bounded densities ( fb,1,fa,1) for whichFb,0≥Fb,1≥Fb,Fa≤Fa,1≤Fa,0, and (11) holds. We already know from monotonicity that ﬂuid limits will drain for these distributions on ( κb,0,κa,0), and we use the inequality for p≤ κb,0 and q≥κa,0 to extend ﬂuid stability to the bigger interval ( κb,1,κa,1). We repeat the process until the interval (κb,n,κa,n) approaches the entire interval (˜κb, ˜κa) for (fb,fa). To see that it will indeed approach the entire interval, notice that all that really matters for the thresholds of a LOB is Fa,b(x),κb≤ x≤ κa; it is immaterial what fb and fa do outside of those intervals, so long as they integrate to the correct amounts. Consequently, if κb,n > ˜κb +ϵ, it must be that Fb,n < Fb or Fa,n > Fa somewhere on [κb,n,κa,n], which means that the process won’t get “stuck” until κb,n↘ ˜κb and κa,n↗ ˜κa. 17 5. Discussion. In this section we discuss several applications of our methods and results. We begin with a discussion of market orders and then consider various simple trading strategies. 5.1. Market orders. The orders we have considered so far, each with a price attached, are called limit orders. Suppose that, in addition to limit orders, there are also market orders which request to be fulﬁlled immediately at the best available price. Suppose that limit order bids and asks arrive as independent Poisson processes of rates νb,νa respectively; and that the prices associated with limit order bids, respectively asks, are independent identically distributed random variables with density fb(x), respectively fa(x). Without loss of generality we may assume that x∈ (0, 1). In addition suppose that there are independent Poisson arrival streams of market order bids and asks of rates µb,µa respectively. Then these correspond to extreme limit orders: we simply associate a price 1 or 0 with a market bid or market ask respectively. Note that, in addition to market orders, we have also allowed an asymmetry in arrival rates between bid and ask orders. The intuition behind equations (1) leads to the generalization (12a) νbfb(x) ∫ κa x πa(y)dy =πb(x) ( µa +νa ∫ x 0 fa(y)dy ) (12b) νafa(x) ∫ x κb πb(y)dy =πa(x) ( νb ∫ 1 x fb(y)dy +µb ) although now the existence of a solution to these equations satisfying the required boundary conditions is not assured, and the deduction of the recurrence properties necessary for an interpretation of πb(x),πa(x) as limiting densities may fail. To illustrate some of the possibilities we shall look in detail at a simple example. Suppose fa(x) = fb(x) = 1,x ∈ (0, 1), νa = νb = 1−λ and µa = µb = λ. Thus a proportion λ of all orders are market orders. Use the notation πb(λ;x),πa(λ;x) for the solution to equations (12) satisfying the required boundary conditions in this example. Then provided λ < w≈ 0.278, the unique solution of wew =e−1, this solution has πa(λ;x) =πb(λ; 1−x) and (13) πb(λ;x) = 1−λ 1 +λ·πb (1 +λ 1−λx− λ 1−λ ) , x ∈ (κ(λ), 1−κ(λ)) where πb(·) is the earlier solution (2) and κ(λ) = 1 +λ 1−λ· w 1 +w− λ 1−λ. Indeed, provided λ < wthe model is simply a rescaled version of the earlier model with distribution (13) having a support increased from ( κ, 1−κ) to the wider interval ( κ(λ), 1−κ(λ)). The inclusion of market orders in the model causes the price distributions to have atoms and not to be absolutely continuous with respect to each other; but nevertheless the analysis of earlier sections continues to apply since the market orders arrive outside of the range (κ(λ), 1−κ(λ)). Next we explore this example as λ↑w and the support becomes the entire interval (0, 1). In our model a market order bid, respectively ask, which arrives when there are no ask, respectively bid, limit orders in the order book waits until it can be matched. When λ<w there is a ﬁnite (random) time after which the order book always contains limit orders of both types and no market orders of either type and hence the analysis of previous sections applies. But if λ > wthen inﬁnitely often there will be no asks in the order book and inﬁnitely often there will be no bids in the order book, with probability 1. Now the diﬀerence between the number of bid and ask orders in the limit book is a simple symmetric random walk and hence null recurrent. There will inﬁnitely often be periods when the state of the order book contains limit orders of both types and no market orders of either type, but such states cannot be positive recurrent. In the model described above an arriving market order which cannot be matched immediately must wait until it can be matched. If instead such orders are lost then we obtain a model which can be analyzed by the methods in Section 5.2.1: namely, we start the LOB with an inﬁnite bid order at 0 and an inﬁnite ask order at 1. 18 5.1.1. Diﬀering arrival rates. Our analysis in earlier sections assumed bids and asks arrived at the same rate. This was without loss of essential generality, as it is convenient to illustrate now with a discussion of equations (12) whenfa(x) =fb(x) = 1,x∈ (0, 1),νa,νb > 0 andµa =µb = 0. The solution to equations (12) satisfying the required boundary conditions is then (14) πb(x) =κa ( 1 x + log (1−x x ) − 1 κa − log (1−κa κa )) , x ∈ (κb,κa) where (15) νaκa =νb(1−κb) and κb is the unique solution to log ( (1−κb)2 κb(νa/νb− 1 +κb) ) = ( 1 +νa νb ) 1 1−κb . Althoughνa andνb may diﬀer, provided they are both positive the thresholds κa andκb are both inside the interval (0, 1) and ensure the necessary balance (15) between bids and asks that are matched. If there are market orders, that is if µa,µb≥ 0, then this results in a rescaling of the distribution (14) provided the support of the rescaled distribution remains contained within the interval (0 , 1). 5.1.2. Market impact. As a further illustration, consider the case where fa(x) = fb(x) = 1 ,x ∈ (0, 1), νa = νb = 1 and µa,µb≥ 0. Use the notation πb(µa,µb;x),πa(µa,µb;x) for the solution to equations (12) satisfying the required boundary conditions in this case. Then providedµa/(1+µb),µb/(1+µa)<w (≈ 0.278) this solution has πa(µa,µb;x) =πb(µb,µa; 1−x) and (16) πb(µa,µb;x) = πb ((1 +µb)x +µa(1−x)) 1 +µa +µb , x ∈ (w(1 +µb)−µa w + 1 , 1− w(1 +µa)−µb w + 1 ) where πb(.) is the earlier solution (2). An important assumption for our mathematical development has been that all orders are for a single unit, and an outstanding question concerns the extent to which the model can be generalized. In practice, a long-term investor who wishes to buy or sell a large number of units may choose to spread the order in line with volume in the market, so as not to unduly move the price against her [8]. We are able to analyze the market impact of a particularly simple approach, when the investor leaks the order into the market according to an independent Poisson process over a relatively long period, where the market relaxes to the new equilibrium dynamics over that period. Thus the impact of a large market order to buy will be to increase the parameter µb to say µb +ϵ. As ϵ increases the time taken to complete the order decreases, but the impact on the distribution (16) increases, leading to an overall less advantageous trading price. Similarly if a large limit order is leaked into the market as an independent Poisson process, this can also modeled by a perturbation of equations (12). In markets with a relatively small set of participants with large orders there may be advantages in market designs where large transactions may be quickly arranged at ﬁxed prices; [7] discuss trading protocols that complement limit order books for large strategic investors. 5.1.3. One-sided markets. Toke [25] has considered a special case where analytic expressions for various quantities such as the expected number of bids in a given interval are readily available, as we now describe. Suppose that fb(x) = 1,x∈ (0, 1), νa = µb = 0 and µa > νb > 0. Thus all bids are limit orders and all asks are market orders, a one-sided market. Then πb(x) = νb/µa,x ∈ (κb, 1) where κb = 1−µa/νb. And, further, for x > κb the number of bids present in the interval ( x, 1), that is B(x, 1), is a birth and death process whose stationary distribution is geometric with mean νb(1−x)/(µa−νb(1−x)). Thus, for example, E[B(x,y )] can be readily calculated. Various generalizations are also tractable, provided the market remains one-sided [25]. For example, suppose each bid entering the LOB is cancelled after an independent exponentially distributed time with parameter θ unless it has been previously matched. Then the number of bids present in the interval ( x, 1) is again a birth and death process. Now the entire LOB is a positive recurrent Markov process, and it is straightforward to verify that, as θ↓ 0, bids to the left of κb are seldom matched and the stationary distribution of the rightmost bid approaches πb(x) =νb/µa,x∈ (κb, 1), as we would expect. 19 5.2. T rading strategies. Next we consider a few simple strategies that can be analyzed using our model. For simplicity, we present the results for the case when the bid and ask price distributions are equal and uniform on (0, 1), but the analysis easily extends to other arrival distributions. The limiting densities of the rightmost bid and leftmost ask for this model were determined in Corollary 2.3. 5.2.1. Market making. We begin by considering a single market maker who places an inﬁnite number of bid, respectively ask, orders at p, respectively q = 1−p, where κb <p<q <κ a. Thus whenever q is the lowest ask price, the trader obtains all bids that arrive at prices above q, and whenever p is the highest bid price, she obtains all asks that arrive at prices below p, making a proﬁt of q−p per bid–ask pair so acquired. Call the orders placed by the trader artiﬁcial, to distinguish them from the natural orders. The rate at which the trader is able to match her orders is proportional to p times the probability that the rightmost bid is exactly p. Placing an inﬁnite supply of bids at a level below κ has no asymptotic eﬀect on the evolution of the LOB. Forp>κ ≈ 0.218 no ask is accepted at a price less than p, and there will be a positive probability that the rightmost bid is exactly p (i.e., there are no bids at prices above p). To ﬁnd this probability, we consider the following alternative model ˜L: there is an inﬁnite supply of bids placed at 0, but the price equivalence function ˜P is constant on [0,p ]. (Otherwise, the initial state, arrival processes, and price equivalence functions coincide inL and ˜L.) In ˜L, the bids and asks above p will interact just as in L, so the probability that the rightmost bid is the inﬁnite order in L is equal to the probability that the rightmost bid is at or below p in ˜L. Note that only ﬁnitely many of the bids placed at 0 will ever be fulﬁlled in ˜L. By Lemma 3.1, pathwise, at all times the diﬀerence between the bid/ask queue sizes in ˜L and a limit order book without the inﬁnite supply of bids at 0 will be bounded by the overall number of bids departing from that inﬁnite supply. Hence the inﬁnite bid at 0 is irrelevant for the analysis of the steady-state distribution of the highest bid, since in the limit t→∞ the diﬀerence will disappear. In ˜L, asks at prices below p cannot stay in the book, i.e. ϖa(x) = 0 for x≤p. By Remark 5, the density of the highest bid ϖb(x) is equal to 1/x on [κb,p ), and to C ( 1 x + log 1−x x ) on [p,q ] (the latter is obtained as in Corollary 2.3). Recall that ϖb is continuous, which allows us to determine C and κb (since ϖb integrates to 1). This allows us to ﬁnd κb as κb = p e (1−p p )C and to deduce that the rightmost natural bid has density ϖb(x) =    1 x, p e (1−p p )C ≤x≤p; C ( 1 x + log 1−x x ) , p ≤x≤q; whereC = (1 +p log((1−p)/p))−1. The probability the rightmost natural bid isp or less is thus 1−C log((1− p)/p), and this is therefore the probability that the rightmost bid is exactly p in the model with inﬁnitely many artiﬁcial bids at p and inﬁnitely many artiﬁcial asks at q = 1−p, where κ<p< 1/2<q. To maximize the proﬁt rate we need to solve the optimization problem maximize (1 − 2p)p ( 1−C log 1−p p ) where C = ( 1 +p log 1−p p )−1 subject to p∈ [κ, 1/2]. The maximum is attained at p≈ 0.377, and gives a proﬁt rate of ≈ 0.054. 5.2.2. Sniping. We next consider a trader with a sniping strategy: the trader immediately buys every bid that joins the LOB at price above q, and every ask that joins the LOB at price below p (withq = 1−p still). Now the trader has lower priority than the orders already in the queue, but she obtains a better price for the orders that she does manage to buy. The eﬀect on the LOB of the sniping strategy is to ensure there are no queued bids aboveq and no queued asks below p; for p < q, the set of bids and asks on ( p,q ) has the same distribution in the sniping and the market making model, and therefore the probability that p is the highest bid is the same as in the market 20 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 Sniping vs. market maker p profit Figure 2. Proﬁt from sniping and market making strategies. Solid line is the sniping strategy, dashed line is the market making strategy. (Sniping with p < 1/2 is shown for completeness; as argued in the text, it does not maximize the proﬁt.) making model as well. (The proﬁt rates for the trader are diﬀerent.) But it also makes sense to consider the sniping strategy with p>q , when it ensures that there are no queued orders of any kind in the interval (q,p ): they are all sniped up by the trader. (An ask arriving at price a∈ (q,p ) cannot be matched with a queued bid, because there are no queued bids above q.) The trader makes a net proﬁt of zero on the orders in (q,p ); the point of sniping them is to increase the probability of being able to buy a bid at a high price. Summarizing, if p > qthen the LOB has no queued orders between p and q. Since all the bids are at prices belowq, and the ask density there is zero, we seefrom Proposition 4.2 that the density of the rightmost bid is ϖb(x) = 1/x on [κb,q ); since ϖb integrates to 1, we ﬁnd κb =q/e. Notice that the distribution of the rightmost bid stochastically decreases as q decreases, hence the probability of acquiring an ask at low price a< 1/2 increases as q decreases. This shows that the proﬁt rate from sniping bids above q and asks below p for p >1/2 is strictly higher than the proﬁt rate from sniping bids above p and asks below q. Thus, it suﬃces to consider the case of p> 1/2>q . We thus solve maximize ∫ 1−p κb (1− 2x) log x κb dx where κb = 1−p e subject to p∈ [1/2, 1]. The maximum is attained at 1−p =q =e/(e2 + 1)≈ 0.324 and gives a proﬁt rate of ≈ 0.060. Figure 2 presents a comparison between the proﬁt rates from the market making and sniping strategies, as a function of p (which, recall, is the price below which the trader would like all asks) – for completeness, p< 1/2 is included for the sniping strategy as well. 5.2.3. A mixed strategy. It is possible to consider a mixture of the above strategies: the trader places an inﬁnite supply of bids at P (thus acquiring all asks that arrive below P wheneverP is the highest bid price), but in addition attempts to snipe up all the additional asks that land at prices x<p . We assume the trader gets the best of the two possible prices when both p and P are larger than the price of the arriving ask. There are several possible cases corresponding to the relative arrangement of p, P , and 1/2: (1) If p < P(this means that there are no additional asks to snipe up), this degenerates to the mar- ket maker strategy, with a proﬁt of (1 − 2P ) per bid–ask pair bought, with pairs bought at rate 21 Figure 3. Proﬁt rate from the mixed strategy as a function of sniping threshold p and inﬁnite bid order location P . P log(P/κb). (The probability of the highest natural bid being below P is log(P/κb); when it is there, asks arrive at prices below P at rate P .) Clearly, one wants P <1/2 in this case, otherwise the proﬁt is negative, so we can write this case as p<P < 1/2. (2) If P < p <1/2, then one gets additional asks at price x at rate log(x/κb), for a proﬁt of (1 − 2x), for all x from P to p. (3) If P <1/2<p , there are two further cases: we may have P <1−p or P >1−p. (a) If P < 1−p <1/2 < p <1−P , then the trader snipes all orders between 1 −p and p for a net proﬁt of 0. Proﬁt (1 − 2P ) from a bid–ask pair matching the inﬁnite orders is generated at rate P log((1−p)/κb), and proﬁt 1 − 2x, P≤ x≤ 1−p, from sniping is generated at rate 1 + log(x/κb). By Remark 5, the highest bid density is 1 /x on (κb, 1−p], so κb = (1−p)/e. (b) If 1−p<P < 1/2< 1−P <p, thenP is always the best bid, which means that the trader gets all the asks that arrive below P , generating proﬁt at rate (1 − 2P )P . Orders arriving between P and 1−P cancel each other, and all the asks arriving between 1 −P and p are bought up for a loss (negative proﬁt) of (1 − 2x). (4) Finally, the case P >1/2 is silly, because every bid–ask pair bought will be bought at a loss. Figure 3 shows the proﬁt for the two-parameter space. The largest proﬁt is obtained whenP = 1−p = 1/4, and the proﬁt is then acquired at rate 1 /8 = 0.125. This corresponds to the trader placing an inﬁnite bid order at 1/4 (thus buying all asks that arrive with price below 1/4 for 1/4), an inﬁnite ask order at 3/4, and sniping up all orders that join the LOB at prices between 1 /4 and 3/4. 5.3. Competition between traders. Finally we comment on the situation that arises when multiple traders compete using the simple strategies described in Section 5.2. Consider ﬁrst the case of two competing traders, the ﬁrst of whom has the ability to employ a sniping strategy of the form described in Section 5.2.2, and the second of whom cannot act quickly enough to snipe but does have the capacity to employ a market making strategy of the form described in Section 5.2.1. Suppose then the market maker places an inﬁnite number of bid, respectively ask, orders at P , respectively 1−P , where P ≤ 1/2. And suppose the sniper immediately buys every bid that joins the LOB at price aboveq, and every ask that joins the LOB at price below 1 −q, where P≤q≤ 1/2. 22 For given P and q the behavior of the LOB is as analyzed in Section 5.2.3: but incentives for the two traders are diﬀerent. Given P andq the proﬁt rate for the sniper is ∫q P (1−2x) ln(ex/q)dx and for the market maker (1− 2P )P ∫P q/e 1/x dx= (1− 2P )P log(eP/q) provided P >κb =q/e. If P <q/e the market maker’s orders are outside of the recurrent range ( κb, 1−κb) of the LOB and so are not matched. It is natural to suppose the sniper follows the market maker: that is the sniper observes the choice P of the market maker and chooses q accordingly. The maximizing choice for the sniper is then q = √ P (1−P ). Given this, the optimum choice for the market maker, that maximizes his proﬁt rate, is P≈ 0.340. At this equilibrium, the proﬁt rate of the market maker is 0.073 and of the sniper 0.020. Consider next the case of two or more traders using either the market making strategies of Section 5.2.1 or the mixed strategies of Section 5.2.3. Each trader will have an incentive to improve slightly the prices at which she places inﬁnite orders of bids and asks, thus gaining all the proﬁt from those orders for herself alone. The Nash equilibrium has the traders compete away the bid-ask spread and with it all their proﬁts. The model becomes an example of the Bertrand model of price competition and, as there, the conclusion is softened with more realistic assumptions on, for example, capacity constraints or cost asymmetries. Next consider competition between two or more traders using the sniping strategies of Section 5.2.2; for example between traders who attempt to snipe a limit order as it arrives with an exactly matching limit order. If multiple traders attempt to simultaneously snipe the arriving order, than one of them will succeed and the others will cancel their own orders immediately as they detect that their orders have not been successful. There is clearly an advantage for a trader who can snipe an arriving order more quickly than the other traders, and indeed such a trader can enforce the optimum sniping strategy of Section 5.2.2 and exclude slower traders from the market. It has been argued that competition on speed is wasteful (see [3]), and there are proposals to encourage traders to compete on price, rather than speed, as for example in the proposal of [4] where a market continuous in time is replaced with frequent batch auctions, held perhaps several times a second. We shall explore the consequences of competition on price between sniping traders who can all react at the same speed to a new order entering the LOB. In such a competitive environment traders will have an incentive to increase the price q above which they snipe bids, and decrease the price p below which they snipe asks, towards 1/2: they will refrain from sniping orders on which they would expect to make a loss. At the Nash equilibrium, each trader will snipe at all asks with prices below 1/2 and at all bids with prices above 1 /2 (getting the order with the same probability as each of the other traders). The rightmost bid will then have density 1/x on (1/(2e), 1/2) by Remark 5. This results in a combined proﬁt rate 1 /(2e)− (1 +e2)/(8e2)≈ 0.042. Thus price competition between sniping traders has decreased their combined proﬁt rate only slightly, from 0 .060 to 0.042. Alternatively, one can view this reduction as the eﬀect of a batch rather than a continuous market. Next we comment on the impact of traders on the bid-ask spread. The mean of the distribution (2) can be calculated and is simply (1−κ)/2. Thus without traders the mean spread between the highest bid and the lowest ask in the LOB is κ≈ 0.218, while the maximum spread is 1 − 2κ≈ 0.564. At the Nash equilibrium between sniping traders both are increased, the mean spread to 1 /e≈ 0.368 and the maximum spread to 1− 1/e≈ 0.632. For comparison, with a single sniping trader both are further increased, the mean spread to 1− 2(e− 1)/(e2 + 1)≈ 0.590 and the maximum spread to 1− 2/(e2 + 1)≈ 0.762; and at the equilibrium between a market making trader and a sniping trader the mean and maximum spread are as low as 0.228 and 0.320 respectively. These calculations are of course for a speciﬁc example, but they do illustrate the tractability of the model and its insights. As a ﬁnal remark we comment on the inventory of traders under the Nash equilibrium between sniping traders described above. Observe that the LOB below 1/2 evolves independently of the LOB above 1/2, and both processes are positive recurrent inside their corresponding thresholds. Consider the net position of the traders collectively, that is all the bids they have matched minus all the asks they have matched, observed at those times when the LOB is empty. This evolves as a symmetric random walk, and is null recurrent. Slight variations of the traders’ strategies would moderate this conclusion: for example, a trader might refrain from sniping bids close enough to 1/2 when his net position is large. And of course such variations will be essential over longer time-scales than those considered in this paper where the arrival price distributions may vary. 23 Acknowledgments. The authors are grateful to Darrell Duﬃe for valuable early comments on this work, and to the associate editor and the referees for their careful reviews. The authors thank Jan Swart for drawing their attention to the references [16, 19, 22] and his preprint [24], and for pointing out a mistake in an earlier statement of part 1 of Theorem 2.1. (Using diﬀerent methods [24] proves and gives an extensive discussion of part 3 of Theorem 2.1, while part 2 of Theorem 2.1 solves open problems from [24].) The second author’s research was partially supported by NSF Graduate Research Fellowship and NSF grant DMS-1204311. References [1] I. Adan and G. Weiss. Exact FCFS matching rates for two inﬁnite multitype sequences. Operations Research, 60:475–489, 2012. [2] M. Bramson. Stability and Heavy Traﬃc Limits for Queueing Networks: St. Flour Lectures Notes . Springer, 2006. http: //www.math.duke.edu/~rtd/CPSS2007/Bramson.pdf. [3] E. Budish, P. Cramton, and J. Shim. The high-frequency trading arms race: Frequent batch auctions as a market design response. http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/eric.budish/research/HFT-FrequentBatchAuctions.pdf, 2013. [4] E. Budish, P. Cramton, and J. Shim. Implementation details for frequent batch auctions: Slowing down markets to the blink of an eye. American Economic Review, 104:418–424, 2014. [5] R. Cont and A. de Larrard. Price dynamics in a markovian limit order book market. SIAM Journal of Financial Mathe- matics, 4:1–25, 2013. [6] R. Cont, S. Stoikov, and R. Talreja. A stochastic model for order book dynamics. Operations Research, 58:549–563, 2010. [7] D. Duﬃe and H. Zhu. Size discovery. NBER Working Paper No. 21696, 2015. http://dx.doi.org/10.3386/w21696. [8] D. Easley, M. L. de Prado, and M. O’Hara. The volume clock: Insights into the high frequency paradigm. The Journal of Portfolio Management, 39:19–29, 2012. [9] D. Gamarnik and D. Katz. The stability of the deterministic Skorokhod problem is undecidable. Queueing Systems, pages 1–29, 2014. [10] X. Gao, J. G. Dai, A. B. Dieker, and S. J. Deng. Hydrodynamic limit of order book dynamics. http://arxiv.org/pdf/ 1411.7502.pdf, 2014. [11] M. D. Gould, M. A. Porter, S. Williams, M. McDonald, D. J. Fenn, and S. D. Howison. Limit order books. Quantitative Finance, 13:1709–1742, 2013. [12] D. Kendall. Some problems in the theory of queues. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society , 13(2):151–185, 1951. [13] A. Lachapelle, J.-M. Lasry, C.-A. Lehalle, and P.-L. Lions. Eﬃciency of the price formation process in presence of high frequency participants: a mean ﬁeld game analysis. http://arxiv.org/pdf/1305.6323v3.pdf, 2014. [14] P. Lakner, J. Reed, and F. Simatos. Scaling limit of a limit order book model via the regenerative characterization of L´ evy trees. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.2340, 2013. [15] P. Lakner, J. Reed, and S. Stoikov. High frequency asymptotics for the limit order book. Submitted, 2013. http://people. stern.nyu.edu/jreed/Papers/LimitFinal.pdf. [16] H. Luckock. A steady-state model of the continuous double auction. Quantitative Finance, 3(5):385–404, 2003. [17] C. Maglaras, C. C. Moallemi, and H. Zheng. Queueing dynamics and state space collapse in fragmented limit order book markets. Columbia Business School Research Paper No. 14-13, 2014. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2403884. [18] S. Meyn and R. L. Tweedie. Markov Chains and Stochastic Stability . Cambridge University Press, second edition, 2009. [19] J. Plaˇ ckov´ a.Shluky volatility a dynamika popt´ avky a nab´ ıdky. Master Thesis, MFF, Charles University Prague, 2011. (In Czech). [20] I. Ro¸ su. A dynamic model of the limit order book. Review of Financial Studies , 22:4601–4641, 2009. [21] F. Simatos. Coupling limit order books and branching random walks. Journal of Applied Probability , 51:625–639, 2014. [22] G. Stigler. Public regulation of the securities markets. The Journal of Business , 37(2):117–142, 1964. [23] A. L. Stolyar and E. Yudovina. Systems with large ﬂexible server pools: Instability of “natural” load balancing. Annals of Applied Probability, 23:2099–2138, 2013. [24] J. Swart. Rigorous results for the stigler-luckock model for the evolution of an order book. Submitted, 2016. arXiv: 1605.01551. [25] M. Toke. The order book as a queueing system: average depth and inﬂuence of the size of limit orders. Quantitative Finance, 14, 2014. [26] E. Yudovina. Collaborating Queues: Large Service Network and a Limit Order Book. Ph.D. thesis, University of Cambridge, 2012. [27] S. A. Zenios, G. M. Chertow, and L. M. Wein. Dynamic allocation of kidneys to candidates on the transplant waiting list. Operations Research, 48:549–569, 2000. Frank Kelly, Statistics Laboratory, Centre for Mathematical Sciences, University of Cambridge, Wilberforce Rd, Cambridge CB3 0W A, E-mail: fpk1@cam.ac.uk, Elena Yudovina, Department of Mathematics, University of Minnesota, 127 Vincent Hall, 206 Church St. S.E., Minneapolis, MN 55455, E-mail: eyudovin@umn.edu 24