Optimum Liquidation Problem Associated with the Poisson Cluster Process Amirhossein Sadoghi 1, Jan Vecer Frankfurt School of Finance & Management, Frankfurt am Main Abstract In this research, we develop a trading strategy for the discrete-time optimal liquidation problem of large order trading with diﬀerent market microstruc- tures in an illiquid market. In this framework, the ﬂow of orders can be viewed as a point process with stochastic intensity. We model the price im- pact as a linear function of a self-exciting dynamic process. We formulate the liquidation problem as a discrete-time Markov Decision Processes, where the state process is a Piecewise Deterministic Markov Process (PDMP). The numerical results indicate that an optimal trading strategy is dependent on characteristics of the market microstructure. When no orders above certain value come the optimal solution takes oﬀers in the lower levels of the limit order book in order to prevent not ﬁlling of orders and facing ﬁnal inventory costs. Keywords: Optimum Liquidation Problem, Discrete order books, Markov-modulated Poisson process, PDMP, Hawkes processes 1Corresponding Author, address: Sonnemannstrae 9-11 60314 Frankfurt am Main, Tel: +49(069)154008-873. We are grateful for the comments of participants of First Berlin-Singapore Workshop on Quantitative Finance & Financial Risk, Berlin, 2014. Bachelier Finance Society 8th World Congress Brussels, 2014. SIAM Conference on Financial Mathematics & Engineering, Chicago, 2014. 38th conference Stochastic Processes & their Applications, 2015, Oxford. JEL classiﬁcation : C60, C61, D4, G1. Email addresses: a.sadoghi@fs.de (Amirhossein Sadoghi ), j.vecer@fs.de (Jan Vecer) Preprint submitted to Journal October 16, 2018 arXiv:1507.06514v2 [q-fin.TR] 25 Dec 2015 1. Introduction In an illiquid market, due to lack of counterparties and uncertainty about the assets’ value, trading of assets by fair value is not guaranteed. In a market like this, a trader faces liquidity restrictions, and behaves diﬀerently in comparison to an unconstrained market. Depending on the elasticity of the market, the eﬀect of an increased oﬀer will be compensated by a drop in prices. Eﬀectively, the initial price impact partially is temporary, and vanishes after the execution of the order depending on the elasticity of the market. Early liquidation causes an unfavorable inﬂuence on the stock price, and a late execution has liquidity risk since the stock price can move away from that at the beginning of the period. Most practitioners deal with this dilemma by predicting the trend of stock price and adjusting their order execution speed. While the stock price starts to go down, they send positive signals to market by decreasing rapidly the size of order; otherwise, they should wait until the end of execution period when the position becomes urgent to liquidate. In such a situation, when they expect the stock price starts to rise, they split orders and execute with oﬀers in deeper levels in the order book to gain an advantage from increas- ing stock prices. Liquidation of large block orders has an impact on market resilience and market depth. Lack of transparency in a market and splitting trade share help larger traders to avoid reorganization by other participants, who can move against them. In this research, we determine the optimal liquidation strategy of a single trader, who wants to liquidate a large portfolio in an illiquid market. We formulate the liquidation problem as a multi-stopping problem with Poisson arrival patterns of order in a discrete-time model. We set up a stochastic control framework to maximize the expected revenue of trading in the entire execution time taking into consideration the liquidity restriction of trading a large order. The assumption of the discrete-time framework is not far from the classical trading algorithms. In most continuous liquidation problem setups, it is assumed that supply and demand are in balance; this is only possible in a liquid market. We show how the current state of the arrival rates of limit orders in the order book can be used to compute price impact in terms of the conditional distribution of price changes. 2 The optimal liquidation problem can be deﬁned as an optimal control problem to determine optimal strategies for trading stock portfolios by min- imizing the entire cost function. These strategies depend on the state of the market as well as price and size of stocks available during the execution of the limit orders. To ﬁnd an optimal solution, we need to consider a trade-oﬀ between liquidity risk and changing the stock price. The former resulting in in slow order execution and latter caused by exogenous events or a rapid liquidation. Optimal liquidation problems seeks optimal strategies for trad- ing stock with regards to both liquidity risks and non-execution risks. These risks are attributable to liquidity restrictions and time delay of execution orders. The study of the optimal execution problem dates back to 1990’s, and mainly focuses on the discrete-time models that optimal strategies are deter- mined as optimal liquidation rates per unit time. Bertsimas and Lo (1998) studied the optimal liquidation of a large block of shares with linear per- manent price impact in a ﬁxed time horizon. Almgren and Chriss (2001) as one of the most cited optimal execution models, used a diﬀusion price process in a continuous-time trading space. They constructed an eﬃcient frontier of execution strategies via mean-variance analysis of expected costs of liquidation and divided the price impact into temporary and/or linear per- manent impact. From a traditional view point on this problem (e.g. (Alfonsi and Schied, 2010), and (Alfonsi et al., 2010)), the optimal liquidation de- pends on existence of a suﬃciently large limit order in the limit order book, and price impact is a function of the shape and depth of the limit order book. Bayraktar and Ludkovski (2014) formulated the liquidation problem as a Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman equation association with the depth function of the limit order book. A recent study by Horst and Naujokat (2014) addressed the problem of optimal trading in illiquid markets. They studied a trading algorithm with a two-sided limit order market as well as market orders in a dark pool by controlling the bid-ask spread. Their algorithm determined the optimal time of crossing the bid-ask spread which is a primary problem of algorithmic trading. Under the same market condition, Horst and Nau- jokat (2011) studied optimal trading problems in an option market. In their mathematical framework, risk-neutral and risk averse investors hold Euro- pean contingent claims and the price evolution of the underlying is aﬀected by agents’ trading. They proved the existence and uniqueness of equilibrium 3 for a number of interacting players of the market. An optimal stopping problem is a link between the control theory and market microstructure. This problem has been studied as a single or multi- stopping problem in the classical house selling problems or best choice prob- lems by using homogeneous Poisson processes. Single stopping time problem governed with Poisson Process was formulated as a best choice problem in the late 1950’s by Lindley (1961). The optimal k-stopping problem with ﬁnite and inﬁnite time horizon was presented with the complete solution by Peskir and Shiryaev (2006) in a Bayesian formulation. A similar problem, which has been considered in the market microstructure literature by (Garman, 1976), studied a trading problem of a market maker who maximizes her proﬁt by assuming order arrival rates depending on the price dynamics governed by the Poisson process. Smith et al. (2003) simulated the buy and sell order with thr Poisson process in which the arrival rates are independent of the state of the order book. Recent study by (Cont et al., 2010) used Laplace transforms to analyze the behavior of the order-book with Poisson arrivals of buy and sell orders. The homogeneous Poisson Process of sell and buy orders arrival rate was the main assumption of past studies. Garman (1976) explained conditions necessary and suﬃcient for the order arrival patterns to be modeled by a ho- mogeneous Poisson processor. In this framework, none of the agents’ trading can dominate other agents or they place a large number of limit orders in a ﬁnite time. Nevertheless, most of these assumptions are violated in the high-frequency trading. Empirical studies of high-frequency data show that there are signiﬁcant cross-correlation patterns of the arrival rate of similar limit buy or sell orders and signiﬁcant autocorrelation in durations of events, (see: Cont (2011)). Some empirical studies like Bacry et al. (2013) showed that high frequency data can be modeled by Hawkes processes, introduced by HAWKES (1971). The irregularity properties of high frequency ﬁnancial data can be explained by self-exciting and mutually-exciting properties of the Hawkes processes. Engle and Lunde (2003) modeled trade and quote arrivals with bivariate point processes. In the illiquid market, the disparity between supply and demand causes 4 illiquidity, which means the executing larger positions need longer time. We formulate the liquidation problem as a discrete-time Markov Decision Pro- cesses (MDP) where the state process is a Piecewise Deterministic Markov Process (PDMP), which is a member of right continuous Markov Process family introduced by Davis (1984). By applying a MDP approach, we decom- pose the liquidation problem as a continuous-time stochastic control problem into multiplies deterministic optimal control problems and construct an ap- proximation of value function with a quantization method proposed by Bally et al. (2003). In our numerical simulation, we compare the performance of our algorithm with regard to various market characteristics and price impact functions. The numerical results show that the trading strategy is dependent on the characteristics of market microstructure and dynamics of incoming orders. In the case of favorite oﬀers are not coming, our algorithm will reduce the speed of trading and allows the trader to go deeper into limit order book to avoid not ﬁlling of orders and facing an ultimate inventory penalty. The simulated results indicate that higher probability of same types of orders’ occurrences (self-exciting property of the point process), creates more proﬁtable trading opportunities. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the statistical model of order book. Section 3 explains the market model setup and present the problem statement. Section 4 presents the stochastic dynamic of the intensity of the order arrival process. In section 5, we turn to model price impact. Section 6 describes the procedure of solution with using discrete-time Markov Process. In section 7, we explain the numerical method for optimal stopping time and simulate with diﬀerent micromarket structures. Section 8 summarizes the results, and concludes the paper with further remarks. 2. Statistics Model of Limit Order Book To understand the behavior of market participants, we need to analyze the stochastic ﬂuctuation of stock price and the reaction of players in the market. These ﬂuctuations can be explained by a sequence of equilibria of demand and supply in the market. In order-driven markets, buy and sell or- ders arrive at diﬀerent time points and wait in the LOB (Limit Order Book) 5 to be traded. The limit order book contains information about orders like quantity, price and type of orders. This information can be used to reduce the complexity of the relation between price ﬂuctuations and limit order book dynamic. It also help to predict diﬀerent market’s quantities conditional on the current state of the order book. On other hand, this Information might be used against counter-parties to take advantage of price movement. The idea of the dark pool to reduce the information linkage and adverse price risk. Cont et al. (2010) shows that this information contains short-term price movements and might change quickly during the trading period. In illiquid markets, the relation between limit order book dynamics and the price be- havior shows that the less liquid assets wait for a longer time to be executed. Therefore queue type models can be applied to analyze the orders arrival in the limit order book. Cont et al. (2010) developed a tractable stochastic model of limit order markets to capture the main statistical features of limit order books. The statistical characteristics of the limit order book are well-documented by Smith et al. (2003). Garman (1976), Bayraktar et al. (2007) studied the ﬂuctuation of the orders arrival in the electronic trading market. Some stud- ies explained the unconditional and steady-state distributions of the order book while Cont et al. (2010) showed the short-term price movements could be explained by the information on the current state of the limit order book. Their model is based on the dynamics of the best bid and oﬀer queues since the best orders can move the price. Underlying our approach is that the dynamics of limit orders arrivals fol- low a Poisson pattern of prices depending on rates of trading. We study the stochastic dynamics of the arrival rate of limit order with the help of order statistics. Distribution of a limit order book We assume in a ﬁnancial market, the price processes ( Sj t )(j=1···d) of limit orders satisfy the following stochastic dynamic in a ﬁnite discrete-time hori- zon t∈τ ={1<T 1··· <T m <n}: Sj t =Sj 0(µjdt +dCj t ), (2.1) 6 where Ct = ∑Nt n=1Jn, and Jn is an independent and identically distributed random variable and Nt counting process. Given a vector of price of buy (sell) orders (Sj t )1≤j≤d on the probability space (Ω;F; P), the orders are sorted into a vector ( S(1) t ,S (2) t ,··· ,S (j) t ) satisfy: (S(1) t ≤S(2) t ,··· ,≤S(j) t ) The vector (S(1) t ,S (2) t ,··· ,S (j) t ) is a so-called vector of order statistics of the price processes (Sj t ). Let L be the number of unexecuted orders at the time point s. In the time interval (s,t ), the rate of arrival of limit orders is governed by a Poisson process. It is assumed that noisy traders cannot have a strong inﬂuence on the market, and no cancellation or strategic cancellation of orders can occur. Hence, this model is a pure birth Poisson process with intensity λ, and the arrivals of orders in the non-overlapping intervals are independent. In a small time interval dt , the probability that a limit order arrives and sits in the limit order book is: P (N(dt) = 1) = λdt 1! e−λdt =λdt +O(dt) Similarly, the probability that no limit order appears in the limit order book in this interval is: P (N(dt) = 0) =e−λdt = 1−λdt +O(dt) Figure 1: Orders’ arrival governed by Poisson process Theorem 1 (Distribution of the limit order book ). Denote by L the number of unexecuted orders at time s. We assume that in the interval (0,t ), the number of orders (Nt) is a random variable with the Poisson distribution 7 with mean value λt. Vector{S1 t,··· ,SNt t } represents the prices of buy (sell) orders with distribution F (S) on the probability space (Ω;F; P). U is the number of unexecuted orders with prices greater thanY = max{S1 t,··· ,SNt t }, then the probability of having k unexecuted orders with prices greater than Y is: P (U =k|Ns =L) = e−λY·λk Y k! , where λY =λ[1−F (Y )t− ln(eλF (Y )− λL+1 (L + 1)!)]. (Proof is given in the appendix) With givenk = 0 , equation 2.2 gives the probability of best orders (i.e. none of orders with price (Si t)i∈{1,···,Nt} has greater price than Y ), with k = 1 gives the probability of the second best order,and so on. 3. Market Model Setup It is assumed that our ﬁnancial market consists of an illiquid asset, it can be considered as a risky asset, and a risk-free asset as a numeraire with the interest rate r. The market for the risk-free asset is liquid, that means traders can liquidate a large amount of this security without facing costs of price impact. In a complete ﬁnancial market with a ﬁnite discrete-time horizon τ = {1<T 1··· <T m <n}, the price process St is a stochastic process on a com- plete ﬁltered probability space (Ω;F; F; P) where F is the ﬁltration generated by{Ft}t∈τ. This space is bounded by a maturity time T . The assumption of the ﬁnite discrete-time space is contradiction to con- ventional liquidation problems. However, it is not far away from reality; order arrival patterns of buy and sell orders are not the same. Because of the ﬂuctuation in the stock market, especially in a high-frequency environment, orders might not appear regularly in the LOB. Some empirical studies show that in a short period of time, the percentage changes of the stock price are 8 not uniformly distributed with same centrality, but price process can be in- ternally steady state processes. Therefore, the model should be solved and interpreted in the discrete time and space. We use these facts and propose a model with the rate of incoming buy orders as a Poisson process in a ﬁnite discrete-time and space. 3.1. Trading Boundaries Traders often follow trends of the prices and construct trading bound- aries built in on market depth. They submit limit orders at touch with an optimum volume when the stock prices hit one of these trading boundaries. Market depth reﬂects the information related to the prices of buy and sell orders for the price and depends on trade volume, and minimum price incre- ment known as tick size. It is constantly changing, and reﬂects the valuable information about the current orders sitting in the limit order book. Know- ing this information helps traders to understand hidden patterns of price movements and price impact. Traders can use this potential information, and regulate their orders in response to the net order ﬂow. Cont et al. (2014) studied the link between price impact and market depth and showed that there is a linear relationship between an orders ﬂow imbal- ance and price changes in high-frequency markets. Kempf and Korn (1999) measured the market depth as a surplus demand amount that is needed for the jumping of one unit price. They also showed that the price is sensitive to change from counterparties’ demand. They concluded that there is a non- linear relation between market depth and price impact of the orders ﬂow. Bessembinder and Seguin (1993) studied price, trading volume, and market depth in futures markets, and showed that the price impact has negative relationships to liquidity, i.e. liquidity provisions decrease during trading ac- tivities in an illiquid market. Market depth gives the overall picture of market conditions and a short term prediction to determine an optimum strategy, e.g. price movement towards selling pressure or buying strength in the short time, especially in illiquid markets. Some platforms apply a number of restrictions for market participants to observe or trade at the best level; we assume all orders are observable and accessible for traders. Market depth can be aﬀected by the transparency of markets in such away that some levels are hidden, and just 9 Figure 2: Schematic model of trading boundaries built on market depth with Poisson arrival patterns latest submitted orders are available. Limiting trading and adjusting mini- mum price increment, known as the tick size are important mechanisms to improve the eﬃciency of the market. In illiquid markets, lower price levels of market depth are more attractive than upper levels; these depth levels include orders with signiﬁcantly larger volumes. Most optimal liquidation methods focus on the best sell and buy price levels since their imbalance can move prices. By cause of the lack of available liquidity, we need to take the lower level of market depth into ac- count. We will show how to explain the dynamic of diﬀerent levels of market depth with Point processes. 3.2. Problem statement The dynamics of the price is described by a right-continuous process (St)(t≥0) changing while the times when the book order process meets bound- ary conditions. Later on, we will discuss the impact of the current trade on the underlying price by using a particular approach to model price impact based on exogenous factors as well as characteristics of the stock price pro- cesses. We will show how to model the dynamics of the intensity of orders 10 arrival corresponding feedback eﬀects of trading and the state of the market during orders execution period. We consider a discrete-time problem for an investor holding a large volume (Q0) shares of illiquid assets and a risk-free asset. The objective of the shareholder is to maximize her proﬁt with subject to liquidity constraints and a limited execution time. The illiquid asset, also can be considered a risky asset with the following dynamic in a ﬁnite discrete-time horizon τ ={0<T 1··· <T m <n}: dSt =S0(µtdt +σtwt) t∈τ and a risk-free asset used as a numeraire with the interest rate r with the following dynamic: dBt =B0ert Let ˆS =e−rtSt be a martingale with respect to the measure P on a complete ﬁltered probability space(Ω;F; P). The trading strategy of the trader is characterized by a trading rate ( γt)t∈τ . The vector γ contains the information on the amount of trading at each time point t. The dynamics of the inventory of the investor holdingQ0 shares of an illiquid asset with the trading rate γ as a control process is given with the following counting process: dqt γ =−∆ γtdNt γ where the ∆ is a fraction of Q0 shares, assumed to be constant at each stopping time i.e. either we ﬁll whole orders or reject oﬀers. This assumption can be questionable, but from the theoretical point of view, it reduces the complexity of the problem. Let Nt be a counting process, and Ft be a cash ﬂow process with dynamics: dFt γ = ˆSt∆γtdNt γ The investor has a ﬁnite time to liquidate her risky assets and maximize her wealth: 11 sup γ∈Ψ(Q0) (WT ) whereWT is the amount of the cash at the end of time horizon T . We deﬁne Ψ(Q0) as a set of admissible strategies with given initial inventory with Q0 shares to have nonnegative inventory at all times: A(Q0)≡{ γ : γ is a predictable process, and admissible strategy from the initial inventory Q0} We shall useA≡A (Q0) for the set of admissible strategies γ. The liquidation problem can be formulated as a multi-stopping prob- lem with discrete time sequences {T1,··· ,Tn}. The trader can liquidate her shares in the m stops 1 ≤ T1 <··· < Tm≤ n with a discrete limit order book. The goal is to maximize the expected gain at each stopping sequence Ti (i≤ m). The interaction between price impact and price dynamics that makes the execution-cost control a dynamic optimization problem. We ap- ply the Bellman’s optimality equation in a recursive format to solve the m-stopping problem. max[Expected Revenue] = max[Immediate Exercise + Continuation] The trader holds Q0 number of shares and places a selling order an k = ∆γ illiquid asset in the market with the trading rate γ in the time horizon T , the performance criteria with the strategy γ is given by: H γ(t,Q 0) = [ hγ(t,k ) + Et,q[H γ(t + 1),Q 0−k]] with a boundary condition: h(T, 0) =h(0,Q 0) = 0. At the stopping time, when one of these expected boundaries (see ﬁgure 2)is hit by the stock price, we execute some proportion of the inventory via limit order at the LOB with the depth function h(t,k ): h(t,k ) = max[( S(t,k)− ES(t,k), 0)] = ( S(t,k)− EX(t,k))+ 12 where: S(t,k) = n∑ i=n−k+1 S(i) t 1(i≤k) ES(t,k) = n∑ i=n−k+1 P (i≤k)S(i) t Let ES(t,k) be the expected boundaries, constructed from the set of best limit orders in the LOB by using the distribution of the order book at the stopping time t. The goal of the investor is to maximize her wealth at end of the time period T associated to this dynamic problem, the value function can be deﬁned by: V (t,q ) = sup γ∈A Et,q[H γ(t,q )], t ∈τ, q ∈ [0,Q 0]. The terminal wealth value function of the investor who maximizes her wealth at the end of time period T and give discounted price process ˆS, and inven- tory Q0, associated to optimal trading rate γ, can be expressed with the following lemma: Lemma 2. Let V (T,Q 0) be the continuation value that is obtained from optimal trading of Q0 shares until the end of period T and the intensity processλt be deﬁned as a rate of arrival of limit orders. The expected revenue from execution of limit orders with arrival patterns with Poisson distribution is equal to: V (T,Q 0) = sup γ∈A Et,q[ ∫ T′ 0 e−rτ∆γtStλtdt], whereT′ =T∧inf{t≥ 0 :Q0−qt = 0} is trading time and trading process γt is a control process, which has inﬂuence over the cash process, the inventory process, and the dynamics of prices. (Proof is given in the appendix) 13 4. Modeling Stochastic Intensity The rate of arrival of limit orders depends on the price and size of orders; the cheaper orders will be remained for a shorter time on the limit order book. It is empirically shown that the distribution of the price is not con- stant and depends on the current state of the limit order book. The existence of signiﬁcant autocorrelation of price movement and correlations across time periods rejects the natural assumption of a constant intensity of order ar- rivals rate (see. e.g., : Cont (2011)). In an illiquid market, bid and ask orders do not arrive consistently, and counterparties do not meet their demands regularly. These irregular propri- eties of a high-frequency environment lead to applying point process to model time series of bid or ask price movements. Avellaneda and Stoikov (2008) and Garman (1976) proposed models which order arrivals are governed by a point process with constant intensity. There are several conditions in pre- vious trading models that do not hold our setting. Firstly, a small number of traders cannot dominate the market with a large-scaled orders. Second condition is the submitting of orders are independent and mainly we have a assumption of eﬃciency of the market. These conditions are essential to have a constant intensity of order arrivals. However, the structure of the market is dynamic, and high-frequency traders dominate over seventy per- cents of the market; therefore, none of these above conditions can be satisﬁed. Hawkes process as a point process introduced by HAWKES (1971), was initially is applied to model earthquake occurrences. Some recent empirical studies show that Hawkes process can ﬁt with high-frequency data to explain its irregularity properties based on the positive and negative jumping behav- ior of the asset prices. Cartea et al. (2014b) used the Hawkes processes to express the dynamics of market orders, the limit order book as well as eﬀects of adverse selection. This process is a general form of a standard point pro- cess, the intensity is conditional on the recent history, are increase the rate of arrival the same type event (Self-exciting property), and it captures the im- pact of arrivals of orders on other type of orders (Mutually-exciting property). The concept of a point process is fundamental to the stochastic process. Before we explain the dynamic of the Hawkes process, we state the following formal deﬁnition of a point process, a counting process and an intensity 14 process: Deﬁnition 1. Point Process : Let ti (i ∈ N) be a sequence of non-negative random variables, which is measurable on the probability space (Ω;F; P), in such a way that ∀i∈ N,ti < ti+1, is deﬁned as a point process on R. Deﬁnition 2. Counting Process : The right-continuous processN(t) = ∑ i∈N 1ti≤t ,with given a point processti (i∈ N), is a so-called counting process if it measures the number of discrete events up and including the time point t. Deﬁnition 3. Intensity Process : With given Nt as a point process adapted to a ﬁltration F, the intensity processλ as a left-continuous process is deﬁned by: λ(t|Ft) = lim ∆t→0 E[Nt+∆t−Nt ∆t |Ft] (4.1) = lim ∆t→0 P 1 ∆t[Nt+∆t−Nt|Ft] (4.2) To be more precise, a intensity process λt is determined by a counting process Nt with the following probabilities: P(Nt+∆t−Nt = 1) = λ∆t +O(∆t) (4.3) P(Nt+∆t−Nt = 0) = 1 −λ∆t +O(∆t) (4.4) P(Nt+∆t−Nt > 1) = O(∆t) (4.5) Homogeneous Poisson process is a so-called intensity process that is in- dependent of the probability of the occurrence in the small interval ∆ t and a ﬁltrationFt. A general form of a linear self-exciting process can be expressed: λt =λ0 + ∫ t −∞ σf (t−s)dNs (4.6) whereλ0 is a deterministic long run ”base” intensity,which is assumed to be constant. The function f(t) expresses the impact of the past events on 15 the current intensity process, and the parameter σ explains the magnitude of self-exciting and the strength of an incentive to generate the same event. As a result of converting the integrated intensity into independent compo- nents via exponentially distributed variables, we can apply most of analytical methods to analyze these statistical random variables. One can calibrate the parameters of the Hawkes process with parametric estimation methods like maximum likelihood estimation (Ozaki (1979)), or with non-parametric esti- mators like Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm (Bacry et al. (2012)). The goodness of the ﬁt of these models also can be examined with conven- tional statistical tests. Figure 3: Hawkes Process with 31 events 5. Price Impact Model Estimating and modeling price impacts is a crucial research in the market microstructure literature. It can be expressed as a relationship between trad- ing activities and price movements. Monitoring and controlling the impact of trading are the main part of algorithm trading. To minimize the market impact, traders split their orders into smaller chunks based on the current liquidity in the limit order book. Price impact might be dependent on ex- ogenous factors like trade rate and some endogenous factors such as liquidity 16 and volatility. It is empirically observed that there is a changing of volatility of prices on trading activities. Kyle (1985) proposed a simple model for the evolution of market prices and price movement. In his model, noise traders and inform traders submit orders and in the each step, and a market maker executes the orders. The price is adjusted to a linear relationship between the trade size and a proxy for market liquidity. As a consequence of trading, price moves permanently, information aﬀect the price for a long time, and price changes are strongly autocorrelated. The most recent literature on the market microstructure shows that for liquid markets price impact cannot be permanent. In highly liquid markets, outstanding shares are small and need less time to be liquidated. In illiquid markets, the temporary price impact governs the enduring im- pact, and after a considerable number of trades, the price movement shows a high resilience. Empirical studies show that an elastic market can be con- verted to a plastic (inelastic) market as a consequence of lacking counterpar- ties, such that high volume trading have a long-lasting impact. In this market traders face diﬃculty to ﬁnd counterparties at the particular time, and they should wait for a longer time to execute the orders or else cooperate with counterparties. The eﬀect of price impact corresponding to the liquidation strategy can be signiﬁcantly large for substantial risk aversion traders who liquidate shares at a fast rate. Modeling of price impact on illiquid markets is not so well studied; we review some diﬀerent generations of price impact modeling in literature. We can loosely classify price impact models based on their eﬀects and how long they have inﬂuence over the dynamics of the prices in four categories: The ﬁrst class is a permanent price impact. As a consequence of a signif- icant discrepancy between supply and demand in the market and a spread of bulk trading information, the dynamic of price have stable shifts. Kyle (1985) proposed a basic microstructure model to analyze the price impact. Permanent impact was one the component of Bertsimas and Lo (1998) and Almgren and Chriss (2001) price model. Empirical researches show that in a liquid market trading activities cannot alter the dynamics of the price for a long time. Conversely, this component can be one of the basic building blocks of price impact models in the illiquid market. The second tier of the price impact model is related to modeling the tem- 17 porary impacts that just have an eﬀect on the current orders for a short time and not for the entire trading time. This component cannot alter the dynamics of price for a long period and just has an impact on the immediate execution of the trades. The transient impact is a third class of price impact; this component can be signiﬁcant for a ﬁnite period, and it eventually vanish [Gatheral (2010)]. Alfonsi et al. (2008); Predoiu et al. (2011)) modeled price impact by considering this component. The last class of the price impact modeling is to control the rate of ar- rival of limit orders via the trading rate process. Alfonsi and Blanc (2014) introduced a mixed market impact Poisson model to analyze a temporary shift of dynamics of the rate of order arrival. This model used the advantage of the self-exciting property of the Hawkes process to change the direction of trading in the same or opposite direction of order arrivals. Bayraktar and Ludkovski (2014) and Gu´ eant et al. (2012) controlled the intensity of limit orders for the liquidation problem in a risk-neutral and risk averse model, respectively. In this paper, we introduce a stochastic intensity process to measure the price impact of order executions. This model is associated with a counting process using the mutual-exciting property of the Hawkes process. In illiquid markets, the imbalance between supply and demand causes illiquidity and the execution of a larger position need a longer time and aﬀect on the arrival of the new orders or stay longer in the limit order book. Also, we explained the coming pattern of orders governed by a stochastic point process. There- fore, the intensity of order arrival is inﬂuenced by the arrival time of orders and the orders’ value, and indirectly the price, will be aﬀected by trading. According to fundamental concepts of economics, in equilibrium, the re- lationship between supply and demand determines the price that traders are willing to take positions during a speciﬁed period (see: ﬁgure 4). The price movement occurs when a change in demand is caused by a change in a number of market orders. This change in the price equilibrium is sensitive to shifts in both prices, and quantity demanded, which is called the ”price elasticity of demand.” We model this impact with close form solutions for the dynamics of price impact. Let function f(γt) be a general form of the impact market, condi- tional on the state of liquidity of the market. Similar to Kyle (1985) model, 18 Figure 4: Changes in equilibrium price as a result of increasing and decreasing of demands we use parameter α, as inverse liquidity of the market, to measure price impact. Function Γ( t−s) is the decay of price impact function, which is independent of the state of the market. This function can be shown by the exponential or power law decay of price impact. Diﬀerent types of price impact and decay functions have been used in the algorithm trading and market microstructure literature. We deﬁne two well-known impact functions: exponential and power law functions, linked to the exponential decay function. The parameter α is a proxy for the inverse of the market liquidity: • Power law impact function: f(γ) = γα, α> 0 • Exponential impact function: f(γ) =exp(αγ), α> 0 Gatheral (2010) examined the dynamic-arbitrage for diﬀerent combinations of the market impact function and decay function to not admit price ma- nipulation strategies. (Alfonsi and Schied (2010), proposition 2) proved the 19 convex and non-constant exponential price impact, leads to the strictly posi- tive deﬁnite property, to avoid arbitrage implication, which is already stated in Gatheral (2010). Nonlinear impact function that is not a related state of the market is questionable; however, above functions deﬁned in an illiquid market depend on the state of market. Hawkes process We model the dynamics of trade arrivals intensity with the Hawkes pro- cess as a point process. This model can capture irregular properties of the high frequency data like the strength of an incentive to generate the same event with parameter σ. With choosing the price impact function f as a function of a trading rate γt and the parameter κ as the exponent of the decay of market impact, we can model an impact of liquidation of a large position on the trade arrival dynamics as a particular form of the Hawkes process with the following SDE: dλt = (f(γt)−κλt)dt +σdNt (5.1) In the following proposition, we model the impact of trading on the rate of arrivals based on the Hawkes process: Proposition 3. Price Impact Model Let f be a price impact function and a function of a trading rate γt. σ and κ represent the magnitude of self-exciting and the exponent of the decay of market impact, respectively. The solution of the SDE is expressed by: λt = ∫ t 0 (f(γs)Γ(t−s))ds +σ ∫ t 0 e−κ(t−s)dNs (5.2) where the function Γ is the decay of impact, (Proof is given in the appendix) Lemma 4. The impact stochastic intensity (equation: (.10)) is a general function of price impact. It can then measure a instantaneous price impact in the short term, and a permanent price impact on the long run. (Proof is given in the appendix) Assumption 1. Continuity and concavity of the value function We assume that the value function V is a continuous and bounded function. It is also strictly concave in q, increasing in t and non-negative. The diﬀer- entiability condition of the value function is not necessary to be satisﬁed. 20 6. Solving Model by Discrete-Time MDP The liquidation problem .9 is a continuous-time stochastic control prob- lem. Bayraktar and Ludkovski (2014) formulated this problem as a Hamilton– Jacobi–Bellman equation, and provided viscosity solutions as closed-form so- lutions associated with the limit order book model and its depth function. The classical stochastic control approach solves nonlinear partial diﬀerential equations, and it is necessary the diﬀerentiability of the value function to be satisﬁed. In contrast, a discrete-time Markov Decision Processes (MDP) approach provides a set of optimal policies, condition on the diﬀerentiability of the value function. B¨ auerle and Rieder (2009) used this approach and by applying dynamic programming principles, proved the existence and unique- ness of the solution. This liquidation problem is a mathematical abstraction of real problems in which an investor should make a decision on several stopping times to gain certain revenue at each stage. The investor has a ﬁnite period to liquidate a position, and maximize the total revenue at the end of the period. There- fore, in this problem with a ﬁnite number of sub-periods, a mapping function should be applied to compute optimal policies through the limited number of steps of the dynamic programming algorithm. She must ﬁnd an equilibrium to minimize the cost of the present exten- sive trading against the future abandon risk where the overall cost is not predictable. This problem can be formulated as a deterministic or stochas- tic optimal control problem with Markov or semi-Markov decision property under diﬀerent setups. Bertsekas and Shreve (1996) distinguished between the stochastic optimal control problems from its deterministic form regarding available information. In a deterministic optimal control problem, we can specify a set of states and policy as a control process in advance. Thereby, a succeeding state is the function of the present state and its control process. On the other hand, in the stochastic control problem, controlling the succeeding state of the system leads to evaluate unforeseen states; therefore control variables that are no longer appropriate or have ceased to exist. In this paper, we use a Piecewise Deterministic Markov Decision Model (PDMD) to decompose the liquidation (problem: .9) as a continuous-time stochastic control problem 21 into discrete-time problems. 6.1. Solution by PDMP Piecewise Deterministic Markov Process (PDMP), introduced by Davis (1984), is now largely applied in various areas such as natural science, engi- neering, optimal control, and ﬁnance. The PDMP is a member of the c´ adl´ ag Markov Process family; it is a non-diﬀusion stochastic dynamic model, with a deterministic motion that is punctuated by a random jump process. Deﬁnition 4. Piecewise Deterministic Markov Process A piecewise-deterministic Markov process (PDMP) is a c´ adl´ ag Markov pro- cess with deterministic emotion controlled by the random jump at jump time. This process is characterized by three measurement quantities. The ﬁrst feature is the transition measure k, which selects the post-jump location. The other quantities are deterministic ﬂow motion φ between jumps and the intensity of the random jump Λt, deﬁned as Borel measures on the Borel sets of the state space E, and the control action space A. In the state space E, set (t,x ) donates the desired process value at the jump time point t. In an embedded Markov chain as a discrete-time Markov chain, the state of the PDMP process can be deﬁned as a set of components of the continuous trajectory Zk = (Tk,XTk)k=1,···,n where Tk is an increasing sequence of the jump time component and Xt and Zt are a jump location component and a post jump location component, respectively: ( Zt = Xt if t =tk). This process starts at the state xt, and jumps with the Poisson rate pro- cess Λt (ﬁxed or time dependent) to the next state or hits the boundary of the state space. Stochastic Kernel K(.|xt,at) by measuring the transmission probability selects the next location of the jump given the current informa- tion on state and action. Each Markovian policy is a function of the jump time component (Tk) and the post jump location ( ZTk) with the following condition: Zt = { φ(Xt), for t<T, Xt, for t =T. (6.1) 22 Figure 5: Iterative Procedure of PDMP Figure 5 shows the iterative procedure of the PDMP: starting point of the PDMP is X0 = Z0, then X0 follows the ﬂow φ until T1 to determine ﬁrst jump location X1 =φ(X0). The stochastic Kernel K(.|φ(X1),. ) selects the next location of the post-jump Z1 =K(.|φ(X1),. ). Latter, similar to the ﬁrst jump, Xt follows the ﬂow φ until T2 so X2 = φ(Z1). In next step is the selection of a location of the post-jump Z2 = K(.|φ(Z1),. ) by using the stochastic Kernel K(.|φ(Z1),. ). This iterative procedure will be continued until it hits a boundary of the state space. As mentioned earlier , the process of the illiquid asset in a ﬁnite discrete- time horizon τ ={0<T 1··· <T m <n} is: St =S0exp(µtdt +σtwt)) t∈τ and at time of jump (if t∈ [Ti,Ti+1)) the price process is: STi−STi+1 =STiJi where Ji is an independent and identically distributed random variable. The price process St is a so-called piecewise-deterministic Markov process (PDMP). 6.1.1. Markov Process Components General speaking, Markov process models, which are not stationary in our setup, include a set of the following terms: 23 • Let A be an action space includes the action at which denotes the quantity of shares to be liquidated at time t. at =γt∆ t∈ [0,··· ,T ] whereγt is an admissible strategy which satisﬁes the condition γt≤ q ∆ to have a non-negative inventory. • With a given action set A, the set E is deﬁned as a state space, that contains the state x of inventory after applying action a. The process state Xt denotes the amount of not liquidated shares at jump time t. Xt = Q0− ∫ t 0 qsdNs = Q0− ∫ t 0 γs∆dNs • Let K be a stochastic transition kernel from E×A, as a set of all state-action, to a set of states E. We measure the probability of the next state and action with transition kernel K(.|xt,at) based on the transition law at Markov decision model. • The reward function R represents the expected gain as a result of ap- plying the strategy γ, of each state at the jump point time t: R(t,x,γ ) = ∫ t 0 γs∆SsdNs = ∫ t 0 γs∆Ssλsds (6.2) = ∫ t 0 U γ(Xs)dNs (6.3) where the functionU : (0,∞)→ R+ is an increasing concave function, which represents the preference over a set of limit orders or satisfaction of the trader from oﬀers in the market and Xs is the process state Xt represents the amount of not liquidated shares at jump time t. • The deterministic ﬂow motion φ measures the movement of the inven- tory of investor between two jumps with a given the strategy η: φη(Xt) = ∫ t 0 ηs∆dNs (6.4) 24 To be more precise on how we can solve the liquidation problem with PDMD, we explain the formal expression of deterministic optimal control problems, which is well documented in Bertsekas and Shreve (1996). In a formal deterministic optimal control problem, xi presents the state of the system at stage i and function ci is a corresponding control at that stage. System equationxi+1 =f(xi,ci) is the generating function of next state xi+1 from current statexi and its controlci. Functiong(xi,ci(xi)) is the rewarding function of state i a associate with function ci. The total expected revenue after N decision steps is deﬁned by: JC(x0) = Et,x[ N∑ i=0 gC(xi,ci(xi))] (6.5) The set C contains all control functions ( ci)i={0,···,N}, i.e. the expected total revenue is set of states and corresponding a sequence of Markovian de- cision controls. Let Π ={π1,π 2,··· ,πN} be the sequence of all Markovian decision con- trols πi. These decision controls are corresponding to Markovian policy for predictable admissible process γ deﬁned in the set Ψ. Each Markovian policy is a function of the jump time component ( Tk) and the post jump location (ZTk). In the each stage, the reward obtained as a result of sequential Markovian decisions after the jump by applying the strategy πi is: R(Zi,πi(Zi)) = ∫ t 0 Uπ(φs(Xi))dNs (6.6) The total expected revenue after N steps is deﬁned by: Ψπ(t,x ) = Et,x[ N∑ i=0 R(Zi,πi(Zi))] (6.7) In the following theory, we explain how the above equation is mathemat- ically equivalent to our main problem: (.9). Theorem 5. Suppose policy set Π ={π1,π 2,··· ,πN} is a Markovian policy set and Z ={Z1,Z 2,··· ,Zn} is a set of post jump location of PMDP and 25 R is the reward function (equation: 6.3). Then the value function is the expected reward of the PDMP under the Markovian policy Π at time point t and in the state x: V (t,q ) = sup π∈Π Ψπ(t,x ), t ∈τ, q ∈ [0,Q 0] where Ψπ(t,x ) = Et,x[ N∑ i=0 R(Zi,πi(Zi))]. (Proof is given in the appendix) 6.2. Uniqueness of solution We started to model the optimal liquidation problem as a stochastic con- trol model (equation 3.1) and used the piecewise-deterministic Markov pro- cess to ﬁnd an equivalent deterministic model for this problem. We also proved this problem can be constructed as a summation of the sequence of state processes and corresponding control processes in the set Π. The formu- lation has been given in the equation 3.1 and is more consistent with dynamic programming principle. Bertsekas and Shreve (1996) deﬁned the universal measurable mapping T to map equation 3.1 from 6.3 as follows: T π(Ψ)(x) =H[x,π, Ψ] (6.8) Therefore the operatorT πn can be decomposed to T π0·T π1·T π2···T πn−1 . From above deﬁnitions, we have: Ψπn = T πn(r) = T π0T π1···T πn−kΨπn−k The mappingT π is an universal measurable mapping, letT π0 = 0 andk≤n, (see: Bertsekas and Shreve (1996)(chapter 1) we have: Ψπk =T π0T π1···T πk−1Ψπ0 In the following theorem, we prove the uniqueness of the solution by applying a piecewise-deterministic Markov process model. 26 Theorem 6. Uniqueness of the solution Let V (t,q ) be a revenue function and the optimal solution of the liquida- tion problem is a concave and decreasing function in q and increasing in t. Then the solution of the liquidation problem by applying a PMDP model is converging to a unique solution. (Proof is given in the appendix) 7. Numerical method and Simulation In this section, we apply a simulation method to assist the performance of our model under various market microstructures’ characteristics. The trader will decide to take a number of oﬀers in the LOB at given prices. The optimum trading rate is dependent on the dynamics of orders’ arrival as well as time to maturity. We approximate the value function with a quantization method. 7.1. Approximation of the value function As we explained before, the solution of the value function V of the op- timal liquidation problem is obtained by the summing rewards of sequential Markovian decisions with corresponding the Markovian policies π and a set of post jump process of the PMDP: V (t,Q 0) = sup γ∈A Et,q[V (t + 1,Q 0−q) +h(t,q )] = sup γ∈A Et,q[ ∞∑ i=0 R(Zi,πi(Zi))1Ti<T +h(t,q )1Ti≥T ] We approximate the value function V with the function ˆV , such that |V− ˆV|Lp is minimized for the Lp norm. To approximate the continuous state space by a discrete space, we use a technique that is called Quantization method. Bally et al. (2003) and Bally et al. (2005) developed quantization methods to compute the approximation of a value function of the optimal stochastic control. De Saporta et al. (2010) explained the implication of the numerical solution to PMDP, such that transmission function cannot be computed explicitly from local characteristics of PMDP. De Saporta et al. (2010) expressed a numerical solution for Embedded Markov chain, while 27 the only source of randomness is a set of the post jump process ( Tn,Zn). By quantization ofZn = (XTn;Tn), we can transfer the conditional expectations into ﬁnite sums, and least upper bound of the value function (sup) into its maximum value (max) in discretized space of [0 ,T ]. We deﬁne ˆV as an approximation of the value function as follows: ˆV (t,Q 0) = max γ∈A Et,x[ ∞∑ i=0 R( ˆZi,πi( ˆZi))1 ˆTi<T +h(t,q )1 ˆTi≥T ] De Saporta et al. (2010) estimated the error and the convergence rate of the approximated value function with Lipschitz assumption of local charac- teristics of PMDP, and showed it is bounded by the constant rate of quanti- zation error Qe. |V (t,Q 0)− ˆV (t,Q 0)|≤Qe (7.1) 7.2. Simulation Conditional expectation of value function can be computed with some numerical methods in ﬁnite dimensional space, such as regression method Longstaﬀ and Schwartz (2001) or on Malliavin calculus (as in Cont and Fourni´ e (2010)). Bally et al. (2003) proposed a quantization method to approximate the state space of problem; from each time step Tk, a sate function ˆZ can be projected to the grid Υ k :={ˆzTi k }1≤i≤N (see: ﬁgure 6) ˆZTk = ∑ 1≤i≤N ˆzTi k 1Ti k∈Bk i (7.2) whereBk i is a Borel partition of Rd (see: Bally et al. (2003)). As previously stated, at each stage, the reward obtained for each stage of sequential Markovian decision after a jump by applying strategy πi is: ˆVk =R( ˆZTk,π ( ˆZTk)) (7.3) By applying dynamic programming principle for n ﬁxed grids Υ 0≤k≤n, ˆVk satisﬁes the backward dynamic programming condition: ˆVn =R( ˆZTn,π ( ˆZTn)) (7.4) 28 Figure 6: Quantization of state space ( Zi,Ti) ˆVk = max(R( ˆZTk,π ( ˆZTk), E( ˆVk+1| ˆZTk)) (7.5) We have used a particular SDE form of the Hawkes process of the intensity of the rate of order arrivals to express the impact of order execution on the market: dλt = (f(γt)−κλt)dt +σdNt (7.6) wheref(γt) is a function of trade rate γt,σ explained the strength of the incentive to generate the same event , and κ is the exponent of the decay of market impact. The Hawkes process can capture both exogenous impacts and endoge- nous inﬂuence of past events to measure the probability of occurrences of events. This intensity is based on modeling with ( σ > 0 ) to capture the contribution of past events to amplify the chance of an occurrence of the same type of events (Self-exciting property of the Hawkes process). By us- ing this endogenous mechanism, (while σ < 0), the model can explain the signiﬁcant aspect of the strategic function of market participants known as a ”market manipulation” (see:, e.g., Cartea et al. (2014b)). It is often used by traders to submit or cancel orders strategically to detect hidden liquidity or to manipulate markets. 29 If trading activity with reducing possibility occurrence has an adverse inﬂuence on the arrival of orders, the jump process has an adverse impact on its intensity and makes imbalance in supply and demand of the market exponentially. This damping factor can be measured with Hawkes model the magnitude of self-exciting and the strength of the incentive while it is negative (self-damping property). 7.3. Result of Simulation In this part, we present the numerical solution of the optimal liquida- tion problem. To study characteristics of the value function and the level of inventory associated with the control variable γ as the rate of trading, we compute some numerical examples using diﬀerent scenarios from empirical studies. Our simulation is an abstract of real problems. We consider a trader who wants to liquidate Q0 shares of a risky asset within a short time and ﬁxed time horizon T . In an illiquid market, she expects a longer time to liq- uidate the whole position. Her goal is to minimize the implicit and explicit cost of trading and keep the low-level inventory by controlling the trading rate. We implement our model in the discrete state space. We choose time steps small enough to increase the chance to catch orders and larger than the usual tick time to make sure that quotes are not outside of the market bid-ask spreads. We assess the performance of our model by quantizing the value function at a ﬁxed position in the space and time of the mesh reﬁne- ment. To illustrate in more detail how our model behaves, we study the inven- tory level associated with the optimal trading rate control for both types of price impact Hawkes models: self-damping and self-exciting properties. Concerning our simulation scenarios, we choose values of the parameters of the model: (a) the parameter σ as the magnitude of self-exciting, (b) the parameter κ as the exponent of the decay of market impact and (c) the size of the bid-ask spread is used as a proxy to measure the illiquidity. These parameters can be estimated from the real market data. Plotting the trading boundaries (ﬁgure 8) shows that the optimal trading level depends on the price process, the remainder of the inventory, and time 30 to maturity. Due to market’s conditions and asset’s characteristics, an agent with the higher degree of risk aversion, cares more about the execution risk and price ﬂuctuations. She starts the trading with available orders at a deeper level of the limit order book to avoid the risk execution and lack of oﬀers in the future. She splits the original order into smaller slices to mitigate price impacts. (a) (b) Figure 7: (a): Inventory level of a trader with given the initial inventory Q0 and time to maturity T, (b): Trading rate of liquidation problem with constant order size∆ Table 1 summarizes results of simulations by our model, including the level of inventory and its corresponding optimal trading rate for diﬀerent scenarios of implementations of strategies. In the case of coming of not favorite oﬀers, the algorithm reduces the speed of trading (panel I: self-damping property) and waited for a longer time to ﬁnd better matching counterparties. In un- stable market conditions, are indicated with the higher level of self-damping, the trader should pay for ﬁnal inventory to liquidate the whole position of initial shares. At this point, the best strategy is to accept oﬀers in the limit order book to avoid to never face severity penalties at the end of period. If estimated parameters of markets might show that the higher chance of same 31 Figure 8: Trading boundary condition for multi-Stopping time and with Poisson arrival types of orders’ occurrences (panel II: self-exciting property), algorithm re- duces the trading rate in the hope of getting better oﬀers. The second column shows the related entries of the value function as a result of the implicit and explicit cost of trading. The results demonstrate that the second type of the market characteristics with the higher level of self-exciting property can be more proﬁtable. Having a look on the graphs (ﬁgure 9) showing the optimal trading rate of diﬀerent scenarios, one can conclude that there are more ﬂuctuations in trading if the probability of arrival new oﬀers is reduced. Our numerical results also show that the proportion of the gain of the liquidation model considerably depends on the speciﬁcation of the price im- pact function. It indicates that market conditions have an eﬀect on the ﬁnal inventory level and causes a substantial dropping in the ﬁnal wealth of the trader. An important aspect of the optimal strategies, which we have de- 32 Panel I Quantile Self-damping Revenue 10% 25% 50% 75 % 100% κ = 0.6 $50,067 Trad˙rate 0.36 6.17 12.75 19.28 44.16 σ =−0.6 Inven˙level 6205.45 14980.97 22618.06 31680.03 70000 κ = 0.2 $50,352 Trad˙rate 0.27 5.69 11.92 19.09 44.59 σ =−0.1 Inven˙level 6479.85 15814.89 23071.59 31534.80 70000 κ = 0.6 $50,000 Trad˙rate 0.13 5.53 11.36 21.00 40.38 σ =−0.1 Inven˙level 4159.49 14490.57 20724.59 30499.13 70000 Panel II Quantile Self-exciting Revenue 10% 25 % 50% 75% 100% κ = 0.6 $50,779 Trad˙rate 0.59 6.17 12.54 19.27 43.20 σ = 0.1 Inven˙level 3229.40 14751.81 22830.39 30507.01 70000 κ = 0.2 $62,539 Trad˙rate 0.03 5.74 13.16 22.15 48.74 σ = 0.1 Inven˙level 1593.42 11177.87 18155.91 31810.18 70000 κ = 0.6 $94,691 Trad˙rate 0.34 9.68 16.12 26.71 72.67 σ = 0.6 Inven˙level 2153.13 7580.03 19473.28 36405.45 70000 Table 1: Summary of the result of simulation the level of inventory and its corresponding optimal trading rate under diﬀerent market conditions veloped, is to take into account the execution risk in an illiquid market i.e. inability to liquid shares at the given time. The main assumption of the majority of limit order models is to trade at best bid and ask prices (see: Cao et al. (2008), Battalio et al. (2014)). We allow the trading procedure go to deeper into the limit order book to avoid not ﬁlling the order and face last minute inventory penalties. 8. Discussion and Further works In this paper, we proposed an analytical solution for the optimal liqui- dation problem with a dynamic approach and build numerical boundaries of multi-stopping problems in an illiquid market. We simulated the opti- mal splitting orders models according to the existing liquidity in the order book with diﬀerent parameters and price impact models. We have used a Piecewise Deterministic Markov Decision Model (PDMD) to decompose the 33 Figure 9: Trading rate of liquidation Problem with diﬀerent speciﬁcation liquidation problem, as a continuous-time stochastic control problem, into discrete period problems and applied Markov decision rules to obtain the solution. We studied the uniqueness and existence of the optimal solution. We indicated that that the percentage gain of the liquidation model depends on the market conditions and speciﬁcation of the price impact function. In direct opposition to majority the limit order models for liquidating market which only trading at best bid and ask prices, our model allows the trading to go deeper into limit order book to avoid not ﬁlling of the order and face last minute inventory punishment. We believe that an attractive extension of our work would be to study; Cartea and Jaimungal (2014) discussed sophisticated models to trade at mar- ket order and post limit order; Cartea et al. (2014a) found optimal combi- nations of market and limit orders with learning from market dynamics to trade in the direction of price ﬂuctuations. Modeling the orders’ arrival ﬂow with a Poisson process is quite robust ap- proach. Cartea et al. (2013) addressed several uncertainties about the arrival rate of orders, the risk of not ﬁlling with limit orders, and misspeciﬁcation in the dynamics of the stock’s midprice, with the robust portfolio optimization 34 approach. Iyengar (2005) proposed a robust formulation which is systemat- ically alleviated the sensitivity of the Markovian policy on the uncertainty of transition probabilities. We would like to examine the robustness of our ﬁndings with relaxing some assumptions of the model. 35 Reference References A. Alfonsi and A. Schied. Optimal trade execution and absence of price manipulations in limit order book models. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics, 1(1):490–522, 2010. doi: 10.1137/090762786. URL http: //dx.doi.org/10.1137/090762786. Aur´ elien Alfonsi and Pierre Blanc. Dynamic optimal execution in a mixed- market-impact hawkes price model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1404.0648, 2014. Aur´ elien Alfonsi, Antje Fruth, and Alexander Schied. Constrained portfolio liquidation in a limit order book model. Banach Center Publ , 83:9–25, 2008. Aur´ elien Alfonsi, Antje Fruth, and Alexander Schied. Optimal execution strategies in limit order books with general shape functions. Quantitative Finance, 10(2):143–157, 2010. Robert Almgren and Neil Chriss. Optimal execution of portfolio transactions. Journal of Risk , 3:5–40, 2001. Marco Avellaneda and Sasha Stoikov. High-frequency trading in a limit order book. Quantitative Finance, 8(3):217–224, 2008. E. Bacry, K. Dayri, and J.F. Muzy. Non-parametric kernel estimation for symmetric hawkes processes. application to high frequency ﬁnancial data. The European Physical Journal B , 85(5):157, 2012. ISSN 1434-6028. doi: 10.1140/epjb/e2012-21005-8. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjb/ e2012-21005-8. E. Bacry, S. Delattre, M. Hoﬀmann, and J. F. Muzy. Modelling mi- crostructure noise with mutually exciting point processes. Quantitative Finance, 13(1):65–77, 2013. doi: 10.1080/14697688.2011.647054. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14697688.2011.647054. Vlad Bally, Gilles Pages, et al. A quantization algorithm for solving mul- tidimensional discrete-time optimal stopping problems. Bernoulli, 9(6): 1003–1049, 2003. 36 Vlad Bally, Jacques Printems, et al. A quantization tree method for pricing and hedging multidimensional american options. Mathematical ﬁnance, 15 (1):119–168, 2005. Robert H Battalio, Shane A Corwin, and Robert H Jennings. Can brokers have it all? on the relation between make take fees & limit order execution quality. On the Relation between Make Take Fees & Limit Order Execution Quality (March 5, 2014) , 2014. Nicole B¨ auerle and Ulrich Rieder. Mdp algorithms for portfolio optimization problems in pure jump markets. Finance and Stochastics , 13(4):591–611, 2009. Erhan Bayraktar and Michael Ludkovski. Liquidation in limit order books with controlled intensity. Mathematical Finance, 24(4):627–650, 2014. Erhan Bayraktar, Ulrich Horst, and Ronnie Sircar. Queueing theo- retic approaches to ﬁnancial price ﬂuctuations. Papers math/0703832, arXiv.org, March 2007. URL http://ideas.repec.org/p/arx/papers/ math-0703832.html. Dimitri P.. Bertsekas and Steven Eugene Shreve. Stochastic optimal control: The discrete time case . Athena Scientiﬁc, 1996. Dimitris Bertsimas and Andrew W Lo. Optimal control of execution costs. Journal of Financial Markets , 1(1):1–50, 1998. Hendrik Bessembinder and Paul J Seguin. Price volatility, trading volume, and market depth: Evidence from futures markets. Journal of ﬁnancial and Quantitative Analysis , 28(01):21–39, 1993. Charles Cao, Oliver Hansch, and Xiaoxin Wang. Order placement strategies in a pure limit order book market. Journal of Financial Research , 31(2): 113–140, 2008. ´Alvaro Cartea and Sebastian Jaimungal. Optimal execution with limit and market orders. Forthcoming: Quantitative Finance, 2014. Alvaro Cartea, Ryan Donnelly, and Sebastian Jaimungal. Robust market making. Available at SSRN 2310645 , 2013. 37 ´Alvaro Cartea, Sebastian Jaimungal, and Damir Kinzebulatov. Algorithmic trading with learning. Available at SSRN 2373196 , 2014a. ´Alvaro Cartea, Sebastian Jaimungal, and Jason Ricci. Buy low, sell high: A high frequency trading perspective. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathe- matics, 5(1):415–444, 2014b. R. Cont. Statistical modeling of high-frequency ﬁnancial data. Signal Pro- cessing Magazine, IEEE , 28(5):16–25, Sept 2011. ISSN 1053-5888. doi: 10.1109/MSP.2011.941548. Rama Cont and David-Antoine Fourni´ e. Change of variable formulas for non- anticipative functionals on path space. Journal of Functional Analysis, 259 (4):1043–1072, 2010. Rama Cont, Sasha Stoikov, and Rishi Talreja. A stochastic model for order book dynamics. Operations Research, 58(3):549–563, 2010. doi: 10.1287/ opre.1090.0780. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/opre.1090.0780. Rama Cont, Arseniy Kukanov, and Sasha Stoikov. The price impact of order book events. Journal of ﬁnancial econometrics , 12(1):47–88, 2014. Mark HA Davis. Piecewise-deterministic markov processes: A general class of non-diﬀusion stochastic models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), pages 353–388, 1984. Benoˆ ıte De Saporta, Fran¸ cois Dufour, Karen Gonzalez, et al. Numerical method for optimal stopping of piecewise deterministic markov processes. The Annals of Applied Probability , 20(5):1607–1637, 2010. Robert F Engle and Asger Lunde. Trades and quotes: a bivariate point process. Journal of Financial Econometrics , 1(2):159–188, 2003. Mark B. Garman. Market microstructure. Journal of Financial Economics , 3(3):257 – 275, 1976. ISSN 0304-405X. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ 0304-405X(76)90006-4. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/0304405X76900064. Jim Gatheral. No-dynamic-arbitrage and market impact. Quantitative Finance, 10(7):749–759, 2010. URL http://EconPapers.repec.org/ RePEc:taf:quantf:v:10:y:2010:i:7:p:749-759. 38 Olivier Gu´ eant, Charles-Albert Lehalle, and Joaquin Fernandez-Tapia. Op- timal portfolio liquidation with limit orders. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics, 3(1):740–764, 2012. ALAN G. HAWKES. Spectra of some self-exciting and mutually exciting point processes. Biometrika, 58(1):83–90, 1971. doi: 10.1093/biomet/ 58.1.83. URL http://biomet.oxfordjournals.org/content/58/1/83. abstract. Ulrich Horst and Felix Naujokat. On derivatives with illiquid underlying and market manipulation. Quantitative Finance, 11(7):1051–1066, 2011. Ulrich Horst and Felix Naujokat. When to cross the spread? trading in two- sided limit order books. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics , 5(1): 278–315, 2014. Garud N Iyengar. Robust dynamic programming. Mathematics of Operations Research, 30(2):257–280, 2005. Alexander Kempf and Olaf Korn. Market depth and order size. Journal of Financial Markets, 2(1):29–48, 1999. Albert S Kyle. Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , pages 1315–1335, 1985. D. V. Lindley. Dynamic programming and decision theory. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series C (Applied Statistics) , 10:39–51, 1961. Francis A Longstaﬀ and Eduardo S Schwartz. Valuing american options by simulation: A simple least-squares approach. Review of Financial studies , 14(1):113–147, 2001. Ragnar Norberg. Vasiˇ cek beyond the normal.Mathematical Finance, 14(4): 585–604, 2004. T. Ozaki. Maximum likelihood estimation of hawkes’ self-exciting point processes. Annals of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics , 31(1):145– 155, 1979. ISSN 0020-3157. doi: 10.1007/BF02480272. URL http: //dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF02480272. 39 Goran Peskir and Albert Shiryaev. Optimal stopping and free-boundary problems. Optimal Stopping and Free-Boundary Problems, pages 123–142, 2006. S. Predoiu, G. Shaikhet, and S. Shreve. Optimal execution of a general one-sided limit-order book. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics , 2: 183–212, 2011. Eric Smith, J Doyne Farmer, Laszlo Gillemot, and Supriya Krishna- murthy. Statistical theory of the continuous double auction. Quantita- tive Finance, 3(6):481–514, 2003. URL http://ideas.repec.org/a/taf/ quantf/v3y2003i6p481-514.html. 40 9. Appendix Proof of Theorem 1. If the number of orders is a random variable with the Poisson distribution and the mean valueλ in a ﬁnite interval of lengtht. We consider the order with maximum price of N (0,t) number of limit orders as: Y = max{S1 t,··· ,SN (0,t) t } We deﬁneFN (0,t)(Y ) FN (0,t)(Y ) = P [(S1≤Y )∩ (S2≤Y )∩,··· ,SN≤Y )] = F (Y )N (0,t) The generating function with distribution function F (St) is Gt(F (y)) = E[F (Y )N (0,t) ] Gt+dt(F (Y )) = E[F (Y )N (0,t+dt) ] = E[F (Y )N (0,t)+N (t,t+dt) ] = E[F (Y )N (0,t) E[F (Y )N (t,dt) ] = Gt(F (Y ))(1−λdt +λdt.F (Y )) Gt+dt(F (Y ))−Gt(F (Y )) dt =−λ(1−F (Y ))Gt(F (Y )) d dt(Gt(F (Y )) =−λ(1−F (Y ))Gt(F (Y )) d dt ln(Gt(F (Y )) =−λ(1−F (Y )) Gt(F (Y )) =e−λt(1−F (Y )) 41 With assumption of a L number of unexecuted orders at the time point s, (s<t ), the generating function for the time interval (0 ,s ) is: Gs(F (y)) = λ0 0!e−λ(F (Y )0) +λ1 1!e−λ(F (Y )1) (.1) + ··· + λL L!e−λ(F (Y )L) (.2) = e−λ((λF (Y ))0 0! + (λF (Y ))1 1! +··· + (λF (Y ))L L! ) (.3) Use Taylor series with remainder: Gs(F (Y )) =e−λ(eλ(F (Y ))− f(c)λL+1 (L + 1)! ) (.4) Forc∈ [0, 1],f(c) =F (Y )L+1≈ecλ. For the sake of simplicity, it is assumed that c = 0. Gt(F (Y )) = Gs+(t−s) (.5) = Gs(F (Y ))Gt−s(F (Y )) (.6) From equations .1 and .4, the generating function of time interval ((t−s),t ): Gt−s(F (Y )) = e−λ(1−Fx(y)) e−λ ln(e λ(F (Y ))− λL+1 (L+1)! ) (.7) = e−λ[(1−Fx(y))t−ln(eλF (Y )− λL+1 (L+1)! )] (.8) Consider the number of orders in the coming stopping time is a random variable with Poisson distribution and mean valueλt. From above generating function, we can deﬁne the probability that no order arrival in time interval (0,t ) is said to have a Poisson distribution greater than Y : P (U =k|N (0,s) =L) = e−λY·λk Y k! λy =λ[(1−F (Y )t− ln(eλF (Y )− λL+1 (L + 1)!)] 42 where F (Y ) is the distribution of the price process and L is the number of unexecuted orders up to time point s. Where k = 0 , it gives the probability of the best order, k = 1 is the second the best order, etc. Proof of Lemma 2. It is assumed the limit orders arrival rate is a point pro- cess with intensity rate λt and we liquidate ∆γt at each stopping time: τ ={0<T 1 <T 2 <··· <T n≤T} V (T,Q 0) = sup γ∈A Et,q[V (T,Q 0)] = sup γ∈A Et,q[ n∑ i=1 e−rTi∆γtSt1(Ti≤T )] (when n→∞ )(t∈τ) = sup γ∈A Et,q[ ∫ T′ 0 e−rt∆γtStdNt] = sup γ∈A Et,q[ ∫ T′ 0 e−rt∆γtStλtdt] Proof of Proposition 3. Following SDE represents the impact of trading on the dynamics of the rate of orders’ arrival: dλt = (f(γt)−κλt)dt +σdNt (.9) In order to prove, we can move the ﬁrst term of SDE to the left side, then multiply it by eκt (see : Norberg (2004)) or alternatively we can deﬁne an initial guess for the solution of above SDE as follows: λt =λ0 + ∫ t 0 (f(γs)Γ(t−s))ds +σ ∫ t 0 e−κ(t−s)dNs (.10) 43 Verify by Itˆ o’s lemma oneκtλt eκtλt = eκt ∫ t 0 (f(τs)e−κ(t−s))ds +eκtσ ∫ t 0 e−κ(t−s)dNs(.11) = ∫ t 0 (f(γs)eκs)ds +σ ∫ t 0 eκsdNs (.12) κeκtλtdt +eκtdλt = ( f(γt)eκt)dt +σeκtdNt (.13) κλtdt +dλt = ( f(γt))dt +σdNt (.14) dλt = ( f(γt)−κλt)dt +σdNt (.15) (.16) Proof of Lemma 4. of a buy order (.10). lim t→∞ D(t) = lim t→∞ ∫ t 0 (f(γs)Γ(t−s))ds = lim t→∞ ∫ t 0 (f(γs)e−κ(t−s))ds = lim t→∞ e−κt ∫ t 0 (f(γs)eκs)ds = lim t→∞ ∫t 0 (f(γs)eκs)ds eκt (apply l’Hˆ opital’s rule) = lim t→∞ (f(γt)eκt) κeκt = lim t→∞ exp(αγt) κ = lim t→∞ 1 +αγt +O(αγt) κ ≈ 1 +αγT κ =λ∞ We deﬁned the liquidation problem as a ﬁnite time investing problem on a limited time horizon T . λ∞ represents the long run trading impact on the intensity of order arrivals rate, we can think of it as a permanent price impact as ”base” intensity part of stochastic intensity. It is a linear function of trading rate to avoid dynamic arbitrage Gatheral (2010). We can express the permanently eﬀected stochastic intensity by: 44 λPerm t =λ∞ +σ ∫ t 0 e−κ(t−s)dNs (.17) Instantaneous market impacts can be measured from the small interval of trading, and the diﬀerence between the pre-trade and post-trade price movements: lim ε→0 D(t) = lim ε→0 ∫ t+ε t (f(γs)Γ(t−s))ds = lim ε→0 ∫ t+ε t (exp(αγs)e−κ(t−s))ds≈exp(−κt +αγε) =λε We can simply deﬁne the instantaneously aﬀected stochastic intensity by: λInst t =λε +σ ∫ t 0 e−κ(t−s)dNs (.18) Proof of Theorem 5. By using the information on the jump location from Z = (Z1,Z 2,··· ,Zn) as a set of post jump of PMDP , we have: Vπ(t,q ) = Et,q[ ∫ T′ 0 e−rt∆γtst ˆλtdt] ( t∈τ) (refer to equation:6.3) = Et,x[ ∫ T′ 0 Uπ(XT′)dNt] = Et,x[ N∑ i=0 [ ∫ Ti+1∧T′ Ti Uπ(φ(XTi))dNt] (Zi deﬁne as Zi = [Ti,XTi]) = Et,x[ N∑ i=0 Et[ ∫ Ti+1∧T′ Ti Uπ(φ(XTi))dNt|Zi]] = Et,x[ N∑ i=0 R(Zi,πi(Zi))] = Ψ π(t,x ) 45 We deﬁne a set Π ={π1,π 2,··· ,πN} as a sequence of all Markovian decision controlsπi corresponding to the Markovian policy for the predictable admis- sible process γ included in the set Ψ. We can then decompose this optimal control problem into the piecewise-deterministic Markov process: V (t,q ) = sup π∈Π Ψ(t,x ) Proof of Theorem 6. In the theorem 5, we have shown that V (t,q ) = sup γ H γ(t,q ) = sup π∈Π Ψπ(t,x ) with deﬁning the sequence of Π = {π1,π 2,··· ,πn} as set of Markovian poli- cies (Bertsekas and Shreve (1996)), we have: Ψπn = lim n→+∞ T π0·T π1·T π2···T πn−1Ψπ0(x0) = lim n→+∞ (T πn)n(Ψπ0(x0)) = T n(Ψπn(x0)) Therefore under the same condition, the optimal solution is deﬁned as: Ψ(x) = sup π∈Π (Ψπ(x)) Equally Ψ(x) =T (Ψ(x)) which is a subset of the Banach space, so we can apply the Banach ﬁxed point theorem and show that V is an unique ﬁxed point of the operator T on the set Π. 46