arXiv:1507.06477v1 [q-fin.ST] 23 Jul 2015 Novel and topical business news and their impact on stock market activities Takayuki Mizuno∗§¶‖ , Takaaki Ohnishi †‖, Tsutomu Watanabe ‡‖ ∗National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan mizuno@nii.ac.jp †Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Uni versity of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan ohnishi.takaaki@i.u-tokyo.ac.jp ‡Graduate School of Economics, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, J apan watanabe@e.u-tokyo.ac.jp §Department of Informatics, SOKENDAI (The Graduate Univers ity for Advanced Studies), Tokyo, Japan ¶PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Tokyo, Japan ‖The Canon Institute for Global Studies, Tokyo, Japan Abstract—We propose an indicator to measure the degree to which a particular news article is novel, as well as an indica tor to measure the degree to which a particular news item attract s attention from investors. The novelty measure is obtained b y comparing the extent to which a particular news article is similar to earlier news articles, and an article is regarded as novel if there was no similar article before it. On the other hand, we say a news item receives a lot of attention and thus is highly topical if it is simultaneously reported by ma ny news agencies and read by many investors who receive news from those agencies. The topicality measure for a news item is obtained by counting the number of news articles whose content is similar to an original news article but which are delivered by other news agencies. To check the performance of the indicators, we empirically examine how these indicat ors are correlated with intraday ﬁnancial market indicators su ch as the number of transactions and price volatility. Speciﬁc ally, we use a dataset consisting of over 90 million business news articles reported in English and a dataset consisting of min ute- by-minute stock prices on the New York Stock Exchange and the NASDAQ Stock Market from 2003 to 2014, and show that stock prices and transaction volumes exhibited a signiﬁcan t response to a news article when it is novel and topical. Keywords-novelty; topicality; exogenous shocks; ﬁnancial markets; business news; I. I NTRODUCTION Financial markets can be regarded as a non-equilibrium open system. Understanding how they work remains a great challenge to researchers in ﬁnance, economics, and statistical physics. Fluctuations in ﬁnancial market prices are sometimes driven by endogenous forces and sometimes by exogenous forces. Business news is a typical example of exogenous forces. Casual observation indicates that stock prices respond to news articles reporting on new develop- ments concerning companies’ circumstances. Market reac- tions to news have been extensively studied by researchers in several different ﬁelds [1]–[13], with some researchers attempting to construct models that capture static and/or d y- namic responses to endogenous and exogenous shocks [14], [15]. The starting point for neoclassical ﬁnancial economi sts typically is what they refer to as the “efﬁcient market hypothesis,” which implies that stock prices respond at the very moment that news is delivered to market participants. A number of empirical studies have attempted to identify such an immediate price response to news but have found little evidence supporting the efﬁcient market hypothesis [16]– [21]. Investors seek to forecast what will happen in the near future, and buy and sell securities based on such forecasts. Through this process, some newsworthy developments are factored into market prices before they occur, so that stock prices do not respond at all when they are reported [22]. This means that it is important for researchers to distingui sh between anticipated and unanticipated news and focus only on unanticipated news in detecting the immediate response to news. To do this, we need to measure the extent to which a news article is novel to market participants, which is the ﬁrst issue we will discuss in this paper. On the other hand, even if a particular piece of news is unanticipated, market responses differ depending on the importance of that piece of news to market participants. Speciﬁcally, it has been shown that market reaction to news differs depending on how it is interpreted by market participants [23], on how it is report ed by the media (i.e., whether it is reported in a pessimistic or an optimistic context) [24], and on how many times the same news item is reported [25]. It has also been shown that transaction volumes tend to be greater for stocks with a larger number of searches on the internet [26]. All of these pieces of evidence suggest that we need to distinguish news that attract a lot of attention from market participant s and news that receive little attention, and focus on news attracting a lot of attention in assessing the market respon se to such news. This means that we need to measure the extent to which a news item attracts attention from market participants, which is the second issue we will discuss in this paper. Our approach to measure the novelty and topicality of news is closely related to recent studies on the application of text mining techniques to the analysis of ﬁnancial market activities. Speciﬁcally, it has been shown that linguistic and statistical characteristics of news articles extracted us ing text mining techniques contain useful information to predi ct future stock prices and trading volumes [27]–[32]. Also, in the context of information ﬁltering, several new methods for detecting and eliminating redundant text in blogs and on twitter have been developed and applied to the identiﬁ- cation of the novelty content of social networking service (SNS) texts [33]–[37]. Our paper is most closely related to studies by the Thomson Reuters Corporation, which propose to measure the novelty of news by counting the number of linguistically similar news articles that are found in a particular time period in their news products [38], [39]. Based on this method, it was shown that ﬁnancial market activities respond more strongly to follow-up news than to initial news [40]. Another study closely related to ours is ref [41], which attempts to measure the importance of a news article by counting the number of retweets of a tweet mentioning the article [41]. In this paper, we measure the novelty of a news article by comparing it with other news articles reported before tha t article in terms of linguistic similarity: the article is regarded as novel if there was no linguistically similar news article before it. This approach is almost the same as that taken in previous studies. On the other hand, we say a news item attracts a lot of attention and thus is highly topical if it is simultaneously reported by multiple news agencies and read by many investors who acquire news from those agencies. The topicality measure for a news article is obtained by counting the number of news articles which have a similar content to the original news article but are delivered by other news agencies. This measure is similar to the measure proposed by ref [41] but differs from it in that our measure is able to capture the extent to which a news article is topical immediately after it is delivered, while the measur e proposed by ref [41] does not work that quickly because the number of retweets of a tweet mentioning the article increases only gradually. To check the performance of the indicators, we empirically examine how they are correlated with intraday ﬁnancial market indicators such as the number of transactions and price volatility. Speciﬁcally, we use a dataset consisting of over 90 million business news article s reported in English and a dataset consisting of minute- by-minute stock prices on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and the NASDAQ Stock Market from 2003 to 2014, and show that stock prices and transaction volumes exhibited a signiﬁcant response to a news article when it is novel and topical. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst provide a detailed description of our dataset containing ov er 90 million English-language business news articles, and show that breaking news have much more impact on stock prices and transaction volume than other news. Next, we Figure 1. Market activities of GM stock around GM’s ALERT and HEADLINE are displayed. When ∆t = 0 , news articles with keyword “GM.N” are displayed on RTRS’s electronic trading platform . Upper right side ﬁgure shows semilogarithmic graph. Solid and dashed li nes show market response to ALERT and HEADLINE, respectively. Black lines follow exponential function ( = 0.45 exp(−0.073∆t) + 1). examine the statistical laws regarding linguistic similar ity among news articles, and propose a measure for the novelty of a news article as well as a measure for the topicality of an article. We then examine how these indicators are correlate d with intraday ﬁnancial market indicators. II. N EWS DATASET The Thomson Reuters Corporation (RTRS) and the Dow Jones & Company Inc. (DJ) deliver news to market partici- pants around the world within fractions of a second through electronic systems [42], [43]. News items published by over 300 third parties are displayed on RTRS’s electronic tradin g platform. In this paper, we use only English-language news articles published by RTRS, the Business Wire News Service (BSW), the Canada Newswire News Service (CNW), Mar- ketwire (MKW), the PR Newswire News Service (PRN), and Market News Publishing Inc. (VMN) on RTRS’s platform as well as all of the English-language news articles by DJ from 2003 to 2014. The total number of news articles exceeds 90 million. Journalists include keywords in their articles on RTRS’s platform. For example, news articles for General Motors Company, LLC have a keyword, GM.N, where .N means the New York stock exchange (NYSE). There are three types of news events on RTRS’s platform. ALERT articles, which provide a one-line summary of breaking news, are displayed in red. HEADLINE articles provide a one-line summary of non-breaking news. An ALERT and a HEADLINE are up to 80-100 characters long. A STORY shows a complete news article. The percentages of ALERTs and HEADLINEs in our dataset are about 12% and 42%, respectively. On the other hand, DJ’s news also has keywords like GM. In this paper, we use the ALERTs, the HEADLINEs, and the titles of DJ’s news. III. M ARKET REACTION TO ALERT AND HEADLINE ARTICLES To observe intraday market reaction to news, we measure market activities by volatility, the number of transaction s, Figure 2. Market activities of 78 stocks for three minutes af ter ALERT and HEADLINE were displayed. Ticker of each stock n umber is in Table I. Table I TICKER THAT CORRESPONDS TO STOCK NUMBER IN FIG. 2. Number Ticker Number Ticker Number Ticker Number Ticker Num ber Ticker Number Ticker NYSE 0 AA 1 ABT 2 AET 3 AIG 4 AMD 5 APA 6 APC 7 AXP 8 BA 9 BAC 10 BBT 11 BBY 12 BHI 13 BK 14 BLK 15 BMY 16 C 17 CAT 18 CHK 19 COF 20 COP 21 CVS 22 DD 23 DIS 24 DOW 25 EMC 26 F 27 FCX 28 GD 29 GE 30 GM 31 GS 32 HAL 33 IBM 34 JCP 35 JNJ 36 JPM 37 KO 38 LLY 39 LMT 40 MDT 41 MO 42 MRK 43 MRO 44 NEM 45 NOC 46 NOK 47 PEP 48 PFE 49 PG 50 PNC 51 S 52 SLB 53 TWX 54 UNH 55 UPS 56 USB 57 UTX 58 VIP 59 VLO 60 WFC 61 WLP 62 WMT 63 XOM NASDAQ 64 AAPL 65 AMGN 66 AMZN 67 BIIB 68 BRCM 69 CMCSA 70 CSCO 71 DELL 72 DISH 73 EBAY 74 INTC 75 MSFT 76 QCOM 77 YHOO and transaction volume every minute for each stock. V olatil- ity is deﬁned by the absolute value of stock price log-return for one minute: V ′(d, t) = | log P (d, t + 1) − log P (d, t)|, (1) where d and t express the date and the time of day [minutes] (e.g., d =5/18/2015, t =9:30 a.m.), respectively. Market activities have seasonal and daytime variations. We remove them from typical market cycles to correctly estimate the market impact on market activities for a day by introducing the normalized volatility, the normalized number of transactions, and the normalized volume as follows: V (d, t) = V ′(d,t) ⟨V ′(d,t)⟩d ⟨ V ′(d,t) ⟨V ′(d,t)⟩d ⟩t , (2) N (d, t) = N ′(d,t) ⟨N ′(d,t)⟩d ⟨ N ′(d,t) ⟨N ′(d,t)⟩d ⟩t , (3) V ol(d, t) = V ol′(d,t) ⟨V ol′(d,t)⟩d ⟨ V ol′(d,t) ⟨V ol′(d,t)⟩d ⟩t , (4) where N ′(d, t) and V ol′(d, t) are the number of transactions and their volume at time t on date d. Since ⟨· · ·⟩d expresses the mean on date d, daily seasonality is removed from the market activities by the ﬁrst term in the equations. ⟨· · ·⟩t also expresses the mean at time t in all the sample periods. The second term removes the intraday cycles of the market activities. Next, we investigate the intraday market reaction to news that was displayed on RTRS’s electronic trading platform. We observe three different market activities of GM stock in NYSE at time ∆t (i.e., V (∆t), N (∆t), V ol(∆t)), knowing that there was an ALERT or a HEADLINE with “GM.N” at time ∆t = 0. Fig. 1 shows the mean of the market activities: ⟨V (∆t)⟩, ⟨N (∆t)⟩, ⟨V ol(∆t)⟩. In the ALERT case, the mean jumped about 60% at time ∆t = 0 and slowly decayed in an exponential function ( = 0.45 exp(−0.073∆t) + 1). On the other hand, the mean hardly moved when a HEADLINE was displayed. We also investigate the intraday market reaction to the news of 64 NYSE stocks and 14 NASDAQ stocks in Table I. For each stock, the numbers of ALERTs and HEADLINEs are over 500 articles, and their total exceeds 3000 articles for the entire sample period. Fig. 2 shows the conditional mean of the market activities of each stock for three minutes afte r news was displayed: ⟨V (∆t)|0 ≤ ∆t < 3⟩, ⟨N (∆t)|0 ≤ ∆t < 3⟩, ⟨V ol(∆t)|0 ≤ ∆t < 3⟩. In the ALERT case, we observe a jump in market activities in almost all the stocks. The mean of these jumps is 36.5%. On the other hand, none of the stocks responded greatly to HEADLINE. These results suggest that we need to distinguish news that attract a lot of attention from market participants and news that receive little attention, and focus on news attracting a lot of attention in assessing the market response to such news. For the following sections, we examine the statistica l laws regarding linguistic similarity among news articles, and propose measures for the novelty of a news article and for the topicality of an article. IV. S IMILARITY AMONG NEWS ARTICLES We use Inverse Document Frequency (IDF) and cosine similarity to measure the similarity among news articles. Such stop-words as “and,” “with,” and “the” are not good keywords to measure similarity, unlike such less common words as “Chevrolet,” “antitrust,” and “bankrupt.” IDF, which is a popular measure to determine whether a term is common or rare across all the articles in Natural Language Processing, is deﬁned as a logarithm of the ratio of the total number of articles in a news dataset to the number of articles containing the given word in this paper. Let A = {a1, · · ·, an} be a set of articles and W = {w1, · · · , wm} be a set of distinct words occurring in A. An article is represented as m-dimensional vectors ⃗ wa. As mentioned previously, we use the id fvalue as word weights and describe the vectors as follows: ⃗ wa = (δ(a, w1)id f(w1), · · · , δ(a, wm)id f(wm)),{ δ(a, wk) = 1 ( wk ∈ a) δ(a, wk) = 0 ( wk /∈ a) . (5) When articles are represented as vectors, the similarity of two articles corresponds to the correlation between the vectors. This is quantiﬁed as the cosine of the angle between vectors: the so-called cosine similarity. Given two articl es, ai and aj, their cosine similarity is SIM (ai, aj) = ⃗ wai ⃗ waj | ⃗ wai || ⃗ waj | . (6) As a result, the cosine similarity is bounded between [0, 1]. We also investigate the similarity among news articles in a time direction. Function Sa(∆t) expresses the mean of the cosine similarity between the articles at different tim es t and t + ∆t. Throughout this paper, we call Sa(∆t) the auto cosine similarity function for convenience. Fig. 3(a) show s the auto cosine similarity functions of RTRS news articles with keywords “GM.N,” “IBM.N,” “PFE.N,” “AAPL.O,” and “YHOO.O” (PFE.N and AAPL.O stand for Pﬁzer Inc. and Apple Inc., where .O means NASDAQ). The functions are almost constant, Sa(∆t) = 0 .3, at ∆t ≤ 200 minutes. After that, the functions decay slowly until about ∆t = 5 × 105 minutes ≈ 1 year and are Sa(∆t) ≈ 0.02 at ∆t = 1 year. Figure 3. (a) Auto cosine similarity function, (b) Cross cos ine similarity function of news articles for GM, IBM, PFE, AAPL, and YHOO. Da shed line follows a power law with exponent −0.35. The decay follows a power law, Sa(∆t) ∝ ∆t−0.35 when 102 ≤ ∆t ≤ 105 minutes. These results suggest that news content tends to be remembered for several months. We next focus on the similarity between news articles in the cross-sectional direction. Function Sc(∆t), which expresses the mean of cosine similarity between RTRS’s news at time t and the news of other news agencies at time t+∆t, is called the cross cosine similarity function through- out this paper for convenience. Fig. 3(b) shows the cross cosine similarity functions for the articles with keywords “GM.N,” “IBM.N,” “PFE.N,” “AAPL.O,” and “YHOO.O.” The functions decay sharply compared to the auto cosine similarity function, and Sc(∆t) ≤ 0.03 at |∆t| ≥ 60 minutes. A similarity peak is observed around ∆t = 0 , Sc(∆t) ≈ 0.3. This value is almost the same as the auto cosine similarity function at ∆t ≤ 200 minutes, suggesting that multiple news agencies tend to simultaneously report similar news. V. N OVELTY AND TOPICALITY DETECTION Investors seek to forecast what will happen in the near future, and buy and sell securities based on such forecast. Therefore, it is important to distinguish between anticipa ted and unanticipated news. In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the novelty measure for a news article and check whether novel news article identiﬁed by this measure using initial and follow-up news articles. On the other hand, even if a particular piece of news is unanticipated, market response s differ depending on the importance of that piece of news to investors. We assume a news article attracts a lot of attention and thus is highly topical if it is simultaneously reported by multiple news agencies and read by many investors who acquire news from those agencies. Based on this assumption, we next create the topicality measure for a news article. We also check whether topical news articles are caught by this measure using ALERTs and HEADLINEs. News articles about common topics frequently use com- mon words. By applying this characteristic, we deﬁne the novelty of news article at at time t by counting the number of linguistically similar news articles reported before th e article at as follows: N ov(at) = ∑ 0<∆t≤τ SIM (at, at−∆t), (7) when news articles at time t and t − ∆t exist in a news dataset. Novelty is high when N ov(at) is close to 0. In this paper, we set maximum time lag τ to one week at which the auto cosine similarity function is around 0.1 (Fig. 3(a)). We check whether novel news article identiﬁed by novelty N ov(at) using RTRS’s follow-up articles for GM, IBM, and PFE that are included in our news dataset. Fig. 4 shows the mean of N ov(at) that is conditioned by the number of follow-ups. This conditional mean increases in proportion to the number of follow-ups. In Fig. 4, we compared the con- ditional mean for the ALERT and HEADLINE follow-ups. The novelty of ALERT is higher than that of HEADLINE except for initial news. Next, by applying the results of the cross cosine similarity function in Fig. 3(b), we deﬁne the topicality of news articl e at,k at time t at given news agency k by counting the number of news articles which have similar content to the original news at,k but are delivered by other news agencies as follows: T op(at,k) = ∑ j⁄=k,j∈K SIM (at,k, at,j), (8) when news articles at,k and at,j exist in a news dataset, where K = {k1, · · · , kl} is a set of news agencies. Topicality is high when T op(at,k) is large. Since topical news is actually reported by multiple news agencies at almost the same time, we consider the 30-minute periods before and after time t as equal to time t. The cross cosine similarity function at 30 minutes is smaller than 0.05, as shown in Fig. 3(b). We check whether topical news articles are caught by topicality T op(at,k) comparing ALERT with HEADLINE. Table II expresses the means of topicality T op(at,k) of RTRS’s ALERT and HEADLINE for GM, IBM, and PFE. The topicality of ALERT exceeds that of HEADLINE. Figure 4. Mean of novelty of ALERT and HEADLINE follow-up new s articles for GM, IBM, and PFE. Table II MEAN OF TOPICALITY T op(at,k) OF RTRS’S NEWS FOR GM, IBM, PFE, AAPL, AND YHOO. GM IBM PFE AAPL YHOO ALERT 0.696 0.863 0.969 0.778 0.778 HEADLINE 0.175 0.171 0.245 0.106 0.119 VI. D IFFERENCE IN MARKET REACTION BY NOVELTY AND TOPICALITY OF NEWS Using novelty N ov(at) and topicality T op(at,k) of news, we investigate the intraday market reactions to both novel and topical news. Fig. 5 shows the market activities (i.e., volatility ⟨V (∆t)⟩, number of transactions ⟨N (∆t)⟩, and transaction volume ⟨V ol(∆t)⟩ deﬁned by Eqs. (2)-(4)) of AAPL stock before and after ALERT with “AAPL.O” was reported. When N ov(at) ≥ ⟨N ov⟩, market activities sharply increased just after the ALERT was reported at time lag ∆t = 0 . When N ov(at) < ⟨N ov⟩, the market has already responded to the previous ALERTs and HEADLINEs before additional current ALERT occurs. We investigate the relationship between market reaction and topicality T op(at,k) of news (i.e., ALERT and HEAD- LINE). As shown in Fig. 6, when T op(at,k) ≥ ⟨T op⟩, the market responds greatly; when T op(at,k) < ⟨T op⟩, the mar- ket tends to avoid responding to the news article. The size of the response three minutes just after the news article was reported (i.e., ⟨V (∆t)|0 ≤ ∆t < 3⟩, ⟨N (∆t)|0 ≤ ∆t < 3⟩, ⟨V ol(∆t)|0 ≤ ∆t < 3⟩) is proportional to its news topicality T op(at,k). VII. C ONCLUSION We observed that the stock market strongly responds to the ALERTs that were displayed on RTRS’s electronic trading platform. On the other hand, none of the stocks greatly responded to the HEADLINEs through which most news articles are reported. These results suggest that we need to measure the importance of news to predict market responses to it. In this paper, we focused on an indicator Figure 5. Market activities of AAPL stock around high and low novelty ALERTs with “AAPL.O”. Solid lines show market activities wh en novelty of ALERT N ov(at) is above average. Dashed lines show market activities when novelty of ALERT N ov(at) is below average. Figure 6. (a) Market activities of GM stock around high and lo w topicality news with “GM.N”. Solid lines show market activities when to picality of news T op(at,k) is above average. Dashed lines show market activities when topicality of news T op(at,k) is below average. (b) Relationship between topicality and mean of market activity for three min utes just after news was reported for GM, IBM, PFE, AAPL, YHOO. For IBM, PFE, AAPL, YHOO, market activity expresses mean of number of tran saction, volume, and volatility. to measure the degree to which a particular news article is novel, as well as an indicator to measure the degree to which a particular news article acquires attention from investor s. The novelty measure is obtained by comparing a news article with other news articles reported before that article in ter ms of linguistic similarity. On the other hand, we say a news article attracts a lot of attention and thus is highly topical if it is simultaneously reported by other news agencies and read by many investors who acquire news from those agencies. The topicality measure for a news article is obtained by counting the number of news articles which have similar content to the original news article but are delivered by other news agencies. In order to check whether novel or topical news articles are caught by these indicators, we observed that the novelty of follow-up news is lower than that of initial news and conﬁrmed that the topicality of ALERT exceeds HEADLINE. We found the characteristics of intraday market reactions to both novel and topical news. For a news article with high novelty, market activities (i.e., number of transacti ons, volume, volatility) sharply increased just after the news article was reported. On the other hand, for a news article with low novelty, market activities have already increased based on past similar news before the news article was reported. The increase of market activities based on news is proportional to its topicality. By these results, we can empirically relate price move- ments to particular news to ﬁnd convincing supportive evidence for efﬁcient market hypothesis. Exogenous shocks often trigger or burst ﬁnancial bubbles. Future work will investigate the characteristics of novel and topical news t hat cause bubbles to burst. ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work was partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 24710156. REFERENCES [1] T. Ito and V . V . Roley, “News from the US and Japan: which moves the yen/dollar exchange rate?,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 19, pp. 255-277, 1987. [2] W. S. Chan, “Stock price reaction to news and no-news: dri ft and reversal after headlines,”Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 70, pp. 223-260, 2003. [3] C. Vega, “Stock price reaction to public and private info rma- tion,” Journal of Financial Economics , vol. 82, pp. 103-133, 2006. [4] S. DellaVigna and J. M. Pollet, “Investor inattention an d Friday earnings announcements,” The Journal of Finance , vol. 64, pp. 709-749, 2009. [5] A. M. Petersen, F. Wang, S. Havlin, and H. E. Stanley, “Market dynamics immediately before and after ﬁnancial shocks: Quantifying the Omori, productivity, and Bath laws ,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 82, 036114, 2010. [6] A. M. Petersen, F. Wang, S. Havlin, and H. E. Stanley, “Quantitative law describing market dynamics before and after interest-rate change,” Phys. Rev. E , vol. 81, 066121, 2010. [7] G. Mitra and L. Mitra, Eds., The handbook of news analytics in ﬁnance. Wiley, 2011. [8] J. G. Rangel, “Macroeconomic news, announcements, and stock market jump intensity dynamics,” Journal of Banking & Finance, vol. 35, pp. 1263-1276, 2011. [9] J. E. Engelberg and C. A. Parsons, “The causal impact of media in ﬁnancial markets,” The Journal of Finance , vol. 66, pp. 67-97, 2011. [10] T. Mizuno, K. Takei, T. Ohnishi, and T. Watanabe, “Temporal and cross correlations in business news,” Progress of Theo- retical Physics Supplement , vol. 194, pp. 181-192, 2012. [11] J. Elder, H. Miao, and S. Ramchander, “Jumps in oil price s: the role of economic news,” Energy Journal, vol. 34, pp. 217- 237, 2013. [12] L. A. Smales, “Non-scheduled news arrival and high- frequency stock market dynamics: Evidence from the Aus- tralian Securities Exchange,” Research in International Busi- ness and Finance . vol. 32, pp. 122-138, 2014. [13] A. Storkenmaier, Financial markets and public information . KIT Scientiﬁc Publishing, 2014. [14] V . Filimonov and D. Sornette, “Quantifying reﬂexivity in ﬁnancial markets: Toward a prediction of ﬂash crashes,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 85, 056108, 2012. [15] V . Filimonov, S. Wheatley, and D. Sornette, “Effective measure of endogeneity for the Autoregressive Conditional Duration point processes via mapping to the self-excited Hawkes process,” Communications in Nonlinear Science and Numerical Simulation, vol. 22, pp. 23-37, 2015. [16] D. Cutler, J. Poterba, and L. Summers, “What moves stock prices?” Journal of Portfolio Management, vol. 15, pp. 4-12, 1989. [17] G. McQueen and V . V . Roley, “Stock prices, news, and business conditions,” Review of Fin Studies , vol. 6, pp. 683- 707, 1993. [18] M. J. Fleming and E. M. Remolona, “What moves the bond market,” Economic Policy Review, vol. 3, pp. 31-50, 1997. [19] R. Fair, “Events that shook the market,” Journal of Business, vol. 75, pp. 713-731, 2002. [20] A. Joulin, A. Lefevre, D. Grunberg, and J. P. Bouchaud, “Stock price jumps: news and volume play a minor role,” e-print arXiv:0803.1769, 2008. [21] O. Erdogan and A. Yezege, “The news of no news in stock markets,” Quantitative Finance, vol. 9, pp. 897-909, 2009. [22] A. N. Bomﬁm, “Pre-announcement effects, news effects, and volatility: Monetary policy and the stock market,” Journal of Banking & Finance , vol. 27, pp. 133-151, 2003. [23] G. Birz and J. R. Lott Jr., “The effect of macroeconomic n ews on stock returns: New evidence from newspaper coverage,” Journal of Banking & Finance, vol. 35, pp. 2791-2800, 2011. [24] P. C. Tetlock, “Giving content to investor sentiment: T he role of media in the stock market,” The Journal of Finance , vol. 62, pp. 1139-1168, 2007. [25] F. Lillo, S. Micciche, M. Tumminello, J. Piilo, and R. N. Man- tegna, “How news affect the trading behavior of different categories of investors in a ﬁnancial market,” Quantitative Finance, vol. 15, pp. 213-229, 2014. [26] I. Bordino, N. Kourtellis, N. Laptev, and Y . Billawala, “Stock trade volume prediction with yahoo ﬁnance user browsing behavior,” In Data Engineering (ICDE), 2014 IEEE 30th International Conference on , pp. 1168-1173, 2014. [27] R. P. Schumaker and H. Chen, “Textual analysis of stock market prediction using breaking ﬁnancial news: The AZFin text system,” ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS) 27, Article No. 12, 2009. [28] J. Bollen, H. Mao, and X. Zeng, “Twitter mood predicts the stock market,” Journal of Computational Science , vol. 2, pp. 1-8, 2011. [29] G. M. Mian and S. Sankaraguruswamy, “Investor sentimen t and stock market response to earnings news,” The Accounting Review, vol. 87, pp. 1357-1384, 2012. [30] R. Hisano, D. Sornette, T. Mizuno, T. Ohnishi, and T. Wat an- abe, “High quality topic extraction from business news explains abnormal ﬁnancial market volatility,” PLoS ONE , vol. 8, e64846, 2013. [31] G. Ranco, I. Bordino, G. Bormetti, G. Caldarelli, F. Lil lo, and M. Treccani, “Coupling news sentiment with web browsing data predicts intra-day stock prices,” e-print arXiv:1412.3948, 2014. [32] R. Luss and A. d’Aspremont, “Predicting abnormal retur ns from news using text classiﬁcation,” Quantitative Finance , vol. 15, pp. 999-1012, 2015. [33] Y . Zhang, J. Callan, and T. Minka, “Novelty and redun- dancy detection in adaptive ﬁltering,” Proceedings of the 25th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval , pp. 81-88, August, 2002. [34] E. Gabrilovich, S. Dumais, and E. Horvitz, “Newsjunkie : providing personalized newsfeeds via analysis of informat ion novelty,”Proceedings of the 13th international conference on World Wide Web, pp. 482-490, 2004. [35] L. Zhao, M. Zhang, and S. Ma, “The nature of novelty detection,” Information Retrieval, vol. 9, pp. 521-541, 2006. [36] K. W. Ng, F. S. Tsai, L. Chen, and K. C. Goh, “Novelty detection for text documents using named entity recognitio n,” In Information, Communications & Signal Processing, 2007 6th International Conference on , pp. 1-5, 2007. [37] H. Liang, F. S. Tsai, and A. T. Kwee, “Detecting novel business blogs,” In Information, Communications and Signal Processing, 2009. ICICS 2009. 7th International Conferenc e on, pp. 1-5, 2009. [38] Thomson Reuters, “Reuters Newsscope Sentiment Engine : Guide to sample data and system overview,”Thomson Reuters White Paper, 2008. [39] Thomson Reuters, “Reuters Newsscope Sentiment Engine : Output image and ﬁle format,” Thomson Reuters White Paper, 2008. [40] A. Gross-Klussmann and N. Hautsch, “When machines read the news: Using automated text analytics to quantify high fr e- quency news-implied market reactions,” Journal of Empirical Finance, vol. 18, pp. 321-340, 2011. [41] S. Phuvipadawat and T. Murata, “Breaking news detectio n and tracking in twitter,” In Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology (WI-IAT), 2010 IEEE/WIC/ACM Interna- tional Conference on , vol. 3, pp. 120-123, 2010. [42] Thomson Reuters EIKON. [Online]. Available: http://ﬁnancial.thomsonreuters.com/en/products/tools-applications/trading-investment-tools/eikon-trading-software.html. (Accessed: 1st June 2015) [43] Dow Jones Factiva. [Online]. Available: http://new.dowjones.com/products/factiva/. (Accessed : 1st June 2015)