Designating market maker behaviour in Limit Order Book markets Efstathios Panayi†∗ ∗ Gareth W. Peters‡ ⋆∗ Jon Danielsson∗ Jean-Pierre Zigrand∗ † Department of Computer Science, University College London ‡ Department of Statistical Science, University College London ⋆ Associate Fellow, Oxford Mann Institute, Oxford University ∗ Systemic Risk Center, London School of Economics and Political Science August 19, 2015 Abstract Financial exchanges provide incentives for limit order book (LOB) liquidity provision to certain market participants, termed designated market makers or designated sponsors. While quoting requirements typically enforce the activity of these participants for a certain portion of the day, we argue that liquidity demand throughout the trading day is far from uniformly distributed, and thus this liquidity provision may not be calibrated to the demand. We propose that quoting obligations also include requirements about the speed of liquidity replenishment, and we recommend use of the Threshold Exceedance Duration (TED) for this purpose. We present a comprehensive regression modelling approach using GLM and GAMLSS models to relate the TED to the state of the LOB and identify the regression structures that are best suited to modelling the TED. Such an approach can be used by exchanges to set target levels of liquidity replenishment for designated market makers. Keywords: Limit Order Book, liquidity, resilience, GLM, GAMLSS JEL codes: C41, C52, D47 ∗The support of the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) in funding the Systemic Risk Centre is gratefully acknowledged [grant number ES/K002309/1]. Corresponding author. Email: efstathios.panayi.10@ucl.uk 1 arXiv:1508.04348v1 [q-fin.ST] 18 Aug 2015 1 Introduction Financial exchanges have diﬀerent modes of operation, or market models, for diﬀerent assets. This is often determined by an asset’s liquidity in the prevailing period, and an exchange will endeavour to choose a market model that facilitates trading in the asset. As an example, the electronic trading system Xetra, operated by Deutsche B¨ orse, oﬀers continuous trading for the most liquid assets, and the same mode of operation is oﬀered for the second most liquid category of assets, but supplemented with a ‘Designated Sponsor’, who has market-making obligations. Other securities, such as structured products, feature a single market maker, while the less liquid assets are traded instead in ‘continuous auction’ mode, which features a specialist. The classiﬁcation of assets in most electronic exchanges is performed according to their liquidity which is averaged over a particular period of time (typically quarterly). For assets which feature a Designated Sponsor (termed a Designated Market Maker in other exchanges), there are requirements regarding the maximum spread, minimum quote size and the eﬀective trading time. In return for fulﬁlling their quoting obligations, Designated Sponsors receive a full reimbursement of the transaction fees incurred. In this paper, we argue that in order to ensure high-frequency liquidity provision, exchanges need to consider not only the average liquidity over time, but also the time required for liquidity to be replenished, which we will explain and quantify as an indication of liquidity resilience. This is because large orders are increasingly being partitioned by execution algorithms into multiple smaller tranches, and traders take advantage of liquidity replenishment to improve execution 1. Such replenishment is swift when market liquidity is resilient, and the eﬀect of resilience on e.g. optimal execution has been considered in the past in the models of Obizhaeva and Wang [2012] and Alfonsi et al. [2010]. However, these models generally considered resilience to be constant or have a very simple parametric form. Thus, they failed to attribute the resilience characteristics to interpretable features of the limit order book structure. The model of Panayi et al. [2014] instead introduced a new notion of resilience explicitly mea- suring the time for liquidity to return to a previously-deﬁned threshold level. This approach was agnostic to the particular class of liquidity measure considered, and could therefore accommodate volume-based, price-based and cost-of-return-trip-based measures. They showed that resilience was not constant, but was instead related to the state of the LOB. This allowed them to understand the eﬀect of diﬀerent LOB structural explanatory variables on the resilience metric constructed, and as part of this, they considered a regression based speciﬁcation. In particular, they considered simple log-linear regression structures to relate the response (the duration of liquidity droughts) to instantaneous and lagged limit order book structural regressors intra-daily. Using Level 2 LOB data from the multi-lateral trading facility Chi-X, we have access to the state variables considered by Panayi et al. [2014], and can therefore consider this notion of resilience further in the study undertaken in this manuscript. We signiﬁcantly extend their resilience modelling framework to allow for additional structural features, as well as a greater class of distribution model types to better explain and capture the liquidity resilience features of a range of assets intra- daily. In particular, we consider two classes of regression models which allow for more general resilience model dynamics to be captured and more ﬂexible distributional features to be explored, ultimately improving the ﬁt and forecast performance of the models. Firstly, we have Generalised Linear Models, or GLMs, which typically assume a conditionally speciﬁed exponential family of distributions for observation assumptions for the response, in our case the exceedance times over a liquidity threshold. The second class is that of Generalised Additive Models for Location, Shape 1[Chlistalla et al., 2011] notes that the average order size is one-eighth of that of ﬁfteen years ago, in terms of number of shares, and one-third in dollar value. 2 and Scale, or GAMLSS, which relax this assumption and can consider a wider, general distribution family with the limit order book regressors entering not just into the location/mean relationship through a link function, but also into the shape and scale parameters directly. This informs the skewness and kurtosis of the liquidity proﬁles and the resilience of the liquidity in settings of liquidity leptokurticity and platokurticity. It is critical to develop these new modelling approaches, as they provide a directly interpretable modelling framework to inform exchanges and market making participants of the inﬂuence diﬀerent structural features of the LOB for a given asset will have on aﬀecting instantaneously within a trading day the local liquidity resilience. They thus provide insights into how best to manage and design market making activities to improve resilience in markets. Our results reveal that consider- ing the more ﬂexible Generalised Gamma distribution assumption within a GAMLSS framework, with multiple link functions to relate the LOB covariates to the diﬀerent distribution parameters, improves the explanatory performance of the model. On the other hand, the simpler Lognormal speciﬁcation also achieves respectable explanatory power and its estimation is more robust. We also statistically assess the signiﬁcance of the explanatory variables in greater detail, and across datasets for companies from 2 diﬀerent countries. We ﬁnd that, in agreement with empirically observed market features, a larger deviation of the liquidity from a given resilience threshold level would be associated with a longer deviation from that level of liquidity (liquidity drought). On the other hand, a larger frequency of such deviations from a liquidity threshold level would be associated with swifter returns to that level (shorter duration liquidity droughts). Using the proposed liquidity resilience modelling framework we can also determine the regimes under which we are likely to see diﬀerent structural features in the resilience behaviour. Our results indicate that resilience considerations should also be a factor when deciding the quot- ing requirements for exchange-designated liquidity providers, such as the aforementioned Designated Sponsors. That is, along with the requirements for maximum spread and minimum volumes, they should be subject to additional requirements for liquidity replenishment, ensuring that throughout the trading day, the LOB returns swiftly back to normal levels. As we have shown that liquidity resilience is dependent on the state of the LOB, exchanges can use the modelling approaches we have proposed, in order to determine the appropriate level of liquidity replenishment requirements, given prevailing market conditions. In addition, liquidity providers may use the model to determine the best response to a liquidity drought. The remainder of this paper is organised as follows: In Section 2 we discuss incentives for liquidity provision in the limit order book and other market structures. Section 3 introduces existing concepts of liquidity resilience, as well as the TED metric analysed in this paper. Section 4 outlines the regression model structures of increasing complexity employed in our analysis of liquidity resilience. Section 5 describes the data used in this study and section 6 presents the results in terms of importance of individual covariates for explaining resilience, and the explanatory power of the models with diﬀerent regression structures and diﬀerent distributional assumptions for the response. Section 8 concludes with proposals about altering current incentive schemes for liquidity provision. 2 Ensuring uninterrupted liquidity provision via exchange incentives In many modern ﬁnancial markets and across diﬀerent asset classes, a large part of liquidity provision originates from high-frequency traders. Indicatively, for the equities market, a typical estimate of at least about 50% of total volume is contributed by such market participants, see details in the report by the SEC [2010]. However, these ﬁrms have no legal obligations to provide continuous 3 access to liquidity, and may (and indeed do 2) reduce their activity in times of distress. For this reason, and in order to also ensure access to liquidity for younger, smaller cap, or more volatile stocks, exchanges provide incentives to ﬁrms to facilitate liquidity provision. These market making obligations have been found to improve liquidity for these assets, and by extension, also improve year-on-year returns [Venkataraman and Waisburd, 2007, Menkveld and Wang, 2013]. Benos and Wetherilt [2012] summarise the impact of introducing designated market makers into a stock market. Both the incentive structure and the obligations diﬀer across exchanges, and in particular, they may be applicable only for certain market structures. For example, in London Stock Exchange’s hybrid SETS market, Designated Market Makers must maintain an executable quote for at least 90% of the trading day, as well as participate in the closing auctions, and they are also subject to maximum spread and quote size requirements, which vary across stocks. In return, they incur no trading fees, and are allowed to ask for the suspension of trading of an asset when prices are volatile [Benos and Wetherilt, 2012]. As an example of speciﬁc exchange considerations for classifying assets and incentivizing liquidity provision we present details for the German electronic trading system Xetra, originally developed for the Frankfurt stock exchange. Xetra oﬀers a number of diﬀerent trading models adapted to the needs of its various trading groups, as well as the diﬀerent assets classes. The models diﬀer according to3: • Market type (e.g. number of trading parties); • The transparency level of available information pre- and post-trade; • The criteria of the order prioritisation; • Price determination rules; • The form of order execution. For equity trading, the following trading models are supported 4: • Continuous trading in connection with auctions (e.g. opening and closing auction, and possi- bly, one or more intra-day auctions); • Mini-auction in connection with auctions; • One or more auctions at pre-deﬁned points in time. We will focus on the ﬁrst model, which is the market model that reﬂects the activity considered here, i.e. in the context of the LOB. For many of the most well-known assets (such as those in the main indices), there is suﬃcient daily trading interest, such that one should be able to execute their orders without much delay and without causing a signiﬁcant price shift (although Xetra also oﬀers a price improvement service, termed Xetra BEST 5). However, there are also less frequently traded 2Kirilenko et al. [2014] note that during the 2010 ‘Flash crash’, the activity of high frequency traders accounted for a much lower share of overall activity, compared to the preceeding days. 3Xetra trading models, accessed 25/05/2015, available at http://www.xetra.com/xetra-en/trading/ trading-models 4Xetra Market Model Equities Release, accessed 25/05/2015, available at http://www. deutsche-boerse-cash-market.com/blob/1193332/8b79d504d5aaf80be8853817a6152ecd/data/ Xetra-Market-Model-Equities-Release-15.0.pdf 5Xetra continuous trading with best executor, available at http://www.xetra.com/xetra-en/trading/ handelsservices/continuous-trading-with-best-executor 4 assets, for which Xetra tries to ensure uninterrupted liquidity provision, by oﬀering incentives to trading members to provide quotes throughout the trading day. Xetra deﬁnes liquid equities as those in which the Xetra Liquidity Measure (XLM) 6 does not exceed 100 basis points and daily order book turnover is higher that or equal EUR 2.5m on a daily average in the preceeding four month period 7. Assets for which this is not true require liquidity provision from trading members, termed ‘Designated Sponsors’ for continuous trading to be oﬀered, otherwise the assets are traded under a continuous auction model, with a specialist. Designated Sponsors have to adhere to strict quoting obligations, which are veriﬁed daily. In return for meeting them, they have the transaction fees they generate fully reimbursed. These quoting requirements depend on the liquidity of the asset in the preceeding 3 month period. Table 1 shows both the basis of determination of an asset’s liquidity class, as well as the quoting requirements for Designated Sponsors for each of these classes. Liquidity class determination Liquidity class LC1 LC2 LC3 XLM ≤ 100 basis points ≤ 500 basis points ≤ 500 basis points General quoting requirements LC1 LC2 LC3 Minimum quote size e20,000 e15,000 e10,000 Maximum spread ≥EUR 8.00 2.5 % 4 % 5% <EUR 8.00 min {e0.20; 10.00%} min{e0.32; 10.00%} min{e0.40; 10.00%} <EUR 1.00 e0.10 e0.10 e0.10 Minimum requirements in continuous trading: Quotation duration 90% Table 1: Quoting requirements for Designated Sponsors on the 3 liquidity classes of Xetra (repro- duced from the Xetra Designated Sponsor guide), accessed 28/05/2015. 2.1 Limitations of current incentive schemes Designated Sponsors can select the time within the trading day for which they wish to be active, as long as it exceeds 90% of the day on average. We argue that a more useful quoting requirement would also reﬂect the intra-day trading patterns, i.e. considering also the variation in trading activity throughout the trading day. If the 10% of the day for which the Designated Sponsor is not active corresponds to a signiﬁcant proportion of daily activity (e.g. close to the beginning and end of the trading day), then 90% activity in calendar time does not correspond to 90% in participation over the day. Indeed, an empirical analysis of intra-day liquidity behaviour shows that liquidity demand throughout the trading day is far from uniformly distributed, and thus the quoting requirements above may not have the desired eﬀect. Figure 1 shows the proportion of the trading day for which the spread for Sky Deutschland on the Chi-X exchange was in the top quintile for the day. Panayi 6The Xetra Liquidity Measure is a Cost-of-Round-Trip measure, quantifying the cost to buy and immediately sell an amount 25000 EUR of an asset 7Designated sponsor guide, accessed 25/05/2015, available athttp://www.deutsche-boerse-cash-market.com/ blob/1193330/215d37772fbec9fbc39391cbc7c5821c/data/Designated-Sponsor-Guide.pdf 5 et al. [2014] explained that the presence of larger spreads at the start of the trading day can be explained by the uncertainty of market makers about what the fair price should be for the asset, while the second concentration can be explained by the release of certain economic announcements. 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Figure 1: Every line corresponds to a trading day, and the shaded regions represents periods for which the spread (left) and XLM (right) is in the top quintile for the day for stock Sky Deutschland. This variation in intra-day liquidity demand is prevalent in the equities class across diﬀerent markets and diﬀerent industries. However, as we have seen in this section, it is not currently considered when determining the liquidity class of an asset, and for an extended period of time near the start of the trading day or around important economic announcements, we may have extended periods of low liquidity. We therefore argue that both the determination of the liquidity class and the quoting requirements for Designated Market Makers could be adjusted, in order to reﬂect both the absolute level of liquidit as well as the speed of order replenishment after a shock (e.g. a large market order). Speciﬁcally, given the remit of Designated Sponsors, one would expect that they should not only provide 2-way markets in periods in which there is no trading interest, but also swiftly replenish liquidity in more illiquid periods, such as the ones indicated above. To determine whether this is the case, we propose the use of resilience in market liquidity, as measured through the Threshold Exceedance Duration (TED) [Panayi et al., 2014], which we introduce in the next section. We acknowledge that enforcing swift replenishment of limit orders may lead to an increase in adverse selection costs for liquidity providing operators. We therefore also present a comprehensive modelling approach to identify the most informative determinants of resilience, and thus aid market participants in understanding how their behaviour can aﬀect resilience of liquidity in the limit order book. 6 3 Concepts of market liquidity resilience 3.1 Liquidity resilience introduction The seminal paper of Kyle [1985] acknowledged the diﬃculty in capturing the liquidity of a ﬁnancial market in a single metric, and identiﬁed tightness, depth and resiliency as three main properties that characterize the liquidity of a limit order book. Tightness and depth have been mainstays of the ﬁnancial literature (and indeed, are easily captured through common liquidity measures such as the spread and depth, respectively) and there has been substantial literature in studying the intra- day variation8 and commonality9 in these measures. However, resilience has received decidedly less attention. Panayi et al. [2014] provided a review of the state of the art in liquidity resilience and noted that the extant deﬁnitions seemed to be divided into two categories: In the ﬁrst, deﬁnitions provided by Kyle [1985] and Obizhaeva and Wang [2012] were related to price evolution, and speciﬁcally to the return of prices to a steady state. The second category of deﬁnitions, proposed by Garbade [1982] and Harris [2002] was concerned with liquidity replenishment. τ1 τ2T1 T2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Time (ms) Spread Figure 2: An example of the duration of the exceedance over a spread threshold. The spread threshold is c is 5 cents, Ti denotes the i-th time instant that the spread exceeds the threshold, and τi is the duration of that exceedance. 8Chan et al. [1995] found a declining intra-day spread for NASDAQ securities (an L-shaped pattern), while Wood et al. [1985] and Abhyankar et al. [1997] found a U-shape pattern (with larger spreads at the beginning and at the end of the day), for the NYSE and LSE respectively. Brockman and Chung [1999] found an inverted U-shaped pattern for the depth, which mirrors the U-shaped spread pattern (in that the peak of the depth and the trough of the spread both correspond to higher levels of liquidity). 9There is a rich literature studying the cross-sectional commonality in liquidity in the equity markets through the principal components of individual asset liquidity, starting with the work of Hasbrouck and Seppi [2001] and extended by Korajczyk and Sadka [2008] and Karolyi et al. [2012]. More recent work by Panayi and Peters [2015], however, have identiﬁed weaknesses in the PCA and PCA regression approaches for quantifying commonality and suggests caution when heavy-tailed features are present in liquidity. 7 The liquidity resilience notion introduced in [Panayi et al., 2014] is a member of the latter category, and was the ﬁrst to explicitly deﬁne resilience in terms of any of the possible liquidity measures and in terms of a liquidity threshold at which resilience is measured against. Hence, the concept of resilience of the liquidity measure was converted to a notion of relative resilience for a given operating liquidity threshold that a user may specify. This was important, since as discussed in Lipton et al. [2013], there are several diﬀerent market participants in modern electronic exchanges and their liquidity demands and requirements diﬀer depending on their mode of operation. In particular, this will mean that they would likely care about relative liquidity resilience characteristics at diﬀerent liquidity thresholds, which may also depend on the type of liquidity measure being considered. All such characteristics are then easily accommodated by the framework developed in Panayi et al. [2014], where the central concept is that liquidity is considered ‘replenished’ by the market or market maker when a (user-speciﬁed) liquidity measure returns to a (again, user- speciﬁed) threshold. In a ﬁnancial market where liquidity is resilient, one would expect that the time required for this liquidity replenishment would be low. This replenishment time was captured by Panayi et al. [2014] through the idea of the threshold exceedance duration (TED): Deﬁnition 1. The threshold exceedance duration (TED) is the length of time between the point at which a liquidity measure deviates from a threshold liquidity level (in the direction of less liquidity), and the point at which it returns to at least that level again. Formally, we have τi = inf{τ : LTi+τ≤c, Ti +τ >Ti}. (1) whereLt denotes the level of liquidity at time t andTi is the i-th time in the trading day where liquidity deviates from the threshold level c. This notation is explained in detail in Section 4.4. This deﬁnition was designed to intentionally allow the ﬂexibility for it to be utilised for any measure of liquidity of choice, be it price based, volume based or some combination. It also allowed for the use of diﬀerent threshold liquidity levels, and the setting of a very low liquidity threshold (e.g. a high level of the spread), which meant that one could model the duration of low liquidity regimes, which would be of interest in a regulation setting. In the high-frequency liquidity provision setting we are considering in this paper, an exchange would be interested in modelling the time for return to a ‘normal’ liquidity level, which one could consider to be the median intra-day liquidity level. 3.2 Regression structures for the modelling of liquidity resilience In this paper, we employ a number of regression structures in order to model the TED liquid- ity resilience metric. Such regression structures provide an interpretable conditional dependence speciﬁcation between liquidity resilience, for a desired liquidity measure, given structural observed attributes or features of a given asset’s limit order book, or other important market based intra-day trading volume/price/activity indicators. In addition, structural features such as known reporting times and announcement features can also be incorporated into the model explicitly to see their inﬂuence on core aspects of the resilience in the liquidity of the asset. Although regression models based on simple linear structures linking the mean of a response to a linear functional of the covariates have been in widespread use for over 200 years, it is only relatively recently that such structures have begun to be signiﬁcantly generalized. Innovations in the class of parameteric regression relationships available have included the incorporation of non-linear structures, random eﬀects, functional covariates and relationships between not just the mean (location of the response variable) and the linear model, but also direct relationships between covariates and variance/covariance, skewness, kurtosis, shape, scale and other structure features of a number of distributions for the response variable. 8 The beginning of this revolution in regression modelling was heralded by the highly inﬂuential family of Generalized Linear Models (GLMs), see for instance Nelder and Baker [1972], which was intended to unify the extant regression approaches of the time. Up to this point, only parametric mean regression models were considered, i.e. only the mean of the distribution was related to the explanatory variables. Shortly after, the variance of the distribution was also modelled as a function of explanatory variables, in the case of normal models [Harvey, 1976]. Parametric variance regression models for diﬀerent assumptions of the response (e.g. for the exponential family) followed, see further discussion regarding the adaptation to diﬀerent contexts in Rigby et al. [2013]. GAMLSS, introduced by Rigby and Stasinopoulos [2005], enabled the modelling of a response variable from a general parametric distribution. The explanatory variables of the model are then related to each distribution parameter through a link function, which can have both linear and non- linear components. One can explicitly see if the distribution of resilience in liquidity under a given market regime, on a given day, is likely to aﬀect the mean, variance, skewness or kurtosis of the liquidity resilience. More importantly, which LOB characteristics are most likely to be inﬂuential in aﬀecting these attributes of the resilience. By identifying these one can then devise market making strategies to improve resilience in a given market regime. It is clear, therefore, that such a formulation is very general, encompassing previous approaches such as GLMs. Indeed, the supporting R package used in this paper [Stasinopoulos and Rigby, 2007] enables the modelling of more than 80 parametric distributions. We can see, therefore, that incorporating GAMLSS into our approach would result in a highly desirable and ﬂexible framework for modelling TED duration data, and the next section will detail precisely how one can deﬁne diﬀerent link function to relate the distribution parameters of the TED response to the LOB explanatory variables. 4 Hierarchy of regression models for liquidity resilience in the LOB The framework we employ here aims to explain the variation in the TED random variables as a function of independent explanatory covariates obtained from the state of the LOB at the point of exceedance. We start ﬁrst with a very brief description of log-linear regression structures, in order to introduce concepts before moving on to Generalised Linear Models (GLM) and Generalised Additive Models for Location Shape and Scale (GAMLSS). 4.1 Log-linear regression structures For the TED random variables, since we are modelling positive random variables, we can consider a log-linear formulation, incorporating model covariates as follows ln(τi) =xT iβ +εi, (2) whereεi∼N (0,σ ) is a random error term. Under the assumption that τi|xi⊥ ⊥τj|xj we can relate the expected log response to the covariates E [ln(τi)|xi] =xT iβ. One can see that a unit change in, say, x(k) i to x(k) i + 1 will have a multiplicative eﬀect of eβk on the response τi, i.e. the Threshold Exceedance Duration. The sign of the coeﬃcient for a given covariate indicates the direction of the partial eﬀect of this variable. 9 4.2 GLM While convenient, the log-linear regression structure is also restrictive in the model’s expressive power and ﬂexibility, and we may therefore opt to consider instead a GLM. The construction of such a parametric regression model requires the speciﬁcation of three key components: 1. A distribution for the response random variables. In this context, this is the conditional distribution of the TED, given the covariates constructed from the LOB structure. 2. The conditional mean structure of the TED, which links the linear regression model com- prised of the independent observed explanatory covariates to the response (typically through a transformation known as the link function). 3. A speciﬁcation of the variance function, perhaps also as a function of the mean. GLMs enable us to ﬁt models when the response variable belongs to the exponential family of distributions, i.e. f(τ|θ,φ ) = exp (τθ−b(θ) a(φ) +c(τ,φ ) ) (3) whereθ is the location parameter and φ the scale parameter and where a(φ),b (θ),c (τ,φ ) are known functions deﬁning particular subfamilies. A GLM relates the expected responseµ = E [τ] to a linear predictorxTβ through a link function g(·), i.e. g(µ) =x′ tβ. When this link function is the identify function, it is equivalent to a standard linear model. If g(µ) =θ then the function g(·) is called the canonical link and we have θ =x′ tβ. Let us consider two members of the exponential family, which are widely used for analysing duration data, for the distributions of our response. The Gamma distribution f(τ|α,β ) = βατα−1 Γ(α) exp (−βτ ),τ ≥ 0,α≥ 0,β ≥ 0, (4) which we can see is in the exponential family with θ = β α,φ = 1 α,a(φ) =− 1 α andb(θ) = log(θ). We use the reparameterisation f(τ|µ,σ ) = 1 (σ2µ)1/σ2 τ 1 σ2−1 exp (−τ/(σ2µ)) Γ(1/σ2) ,τ ≥ 0,µ≥ 0,σ≥ 0, (5) so that E[τ] = µ. Then σ2 = 1 α and µ = α β and we see that the linear predictor xTβ would be related to both parameters. However, if the shape parameter α is ﬁxed, only the scale parameter β varies with the linear predictor. We also consider a second member of the exponential family, namely the Weibull distribution, given by f(τ|µ,σ ) = σ β (τ β )σ−1 exp { − (τ β )σ} ,τ ≥ 0,σ≥ 0,β ≥ 0, (6) where β =µ/Γ( 1 σ + 1). We can see that this is also a member of the exponential family (for ﬁxed σ), with a(φ) = φ = 1, θ = −1 µσ , and b(θ) = σ lnµ. As in the case of the gamma distribution, if the shape parameter is ﬁxed, only the scale parameter varies with the linear predictor. In order to ensure that µ is positive, in both cases we use the log link, i.e. g(µ) = log(µ). For the exponential family of distributions one can obtain the conditional expectation of the response as 10 E [τ|x] =b′(θ) =µ (7) and the variance as Var [τ|x] =a(φ)b′′(θ) =a(φ)V (µ) (8) see the derivation in McCullagh and Nelder [1989]. It is clear then that the formulation of the exponential model above allows one to model cases when the response variables are of the same distributional form and they are independent, but not identically distributed, in that they may have diﬀerent mean and variance. In this case, the variance varies as a function of the mean. De Jong et al. [2008] suggests that there are many functions V (µ) that cannot arise from an exponential family distribution. In addition, one may also want to consider a distribution which is more ﬂexible in terms of skewness and kurtosis. In this case, we propose the ﬂexible generalised gamma distribution class of models given by fτ(τ;b,a,k ) = b Γ(k) τbk−1 abk exp ( − (τ a )b) ,k >0,a> 0,b> 0 (9) which was ﬁrst introduced by Stacy [1962] and considered further in a reparameterised form by Lawless [1980]. This distribution has the additional advantage that it has a closed form expression for the quantile function, which we will see in Section 7. This means we can also explicitly study the relationship between quantiles of the TED and certain LOB covariates, i.e. also interpreting the resulting regression as a quantile regression [Noufaily and Jones, 2013]. As the generalised gamma distribution is not a member of the exponential family of distributions, it cannot be modelled using a GLM. We will thus show in the next subsection how one can model this using the GAMLSS framework. 4.3 GAMLSS GAMLSS requires a parametric distribution assumption for the response variable, but this can be of the general distribution family, rather than only in the exponential distribution family, as in the case of the GLM. It diﬀers from the GLM additionally, in that where the former assume that only the expected response is related to the predictor through a link function, GAMLSS has separate link functions relating each of the distribution parameters to the explanatory variables. As such, it enables one to capture features such as overdispersion or positive and negative skew in the response data. We will base the formulation presented on that of Rigby and Stasinopoulos [2005]. Letτ′ = (τ1,...,τ n) be the vector of the response and let us assume a density f(τi|θi) where θi = (θ1,i,θ 2,i,θ 3,i,θ 4,i) = (µi,σi,κi,νi), where µi,σi,κi,νi are the distribution parameters, with the two ﬁrst relating to location and scale and others typically relating to shape. Let also Xk be a ﬁxed known design matrix containing the covariates at the point of exceedance T for each observed TED random variable. In this setting, we can deﬁne the following link functions to relate the k-th distribution parameter θk to the vectors of explanatory variables Xk and{Zjk}Jk j=1 gk(θk) =Xkβk + Jk∑ j=1 Zjkγjk (10) where{Zjk}Jk j=1 are optional components for the incorporation of random eﬀects. GAMLSS are referred to as semi-parametric regression type models, as they assume a parametric distribution for the response, and they allow for non-parametric smoothing functions in the response. 11 To see this, let Zjk =In, the n×n identity matrix, and let γjk =hjk =hjk(xjk). Then the semi- parametric form can be be obtained according to gk(θk) =Xkβk + Jk∑ j=1 hjk(xjk). (11) Hence, under the GAMLSS framework, the parameters of the distribution can be modelled using linear functions as well as ﬂexible smoothing functions (e.g. cubic splines) of the explanatory variables, in addition to random eﬀects. A parametric linear model can be recovered when linear functions of explanatory variables are considered, i.e. in the case of the identity link function gk(θk) =Xkβk. (12) Using this speciﬁcation, we can consider very ﬂexible multiple-parameter distributions, such as the Generalised Gamma distribution (hereafter g.g.d.). We assume that the TED random variables are conditionally independent, given the LOB covariates, i.e. τ i.i.d ∼ F (τ;k,a,b ), with the density given in Equation 9. The g.g.d. family includes as sub-families several popular parametric models: the exponential model (b =k = 1), the Weibull distribution (with k = 1), the Gamma distribution (with b = 1) and the Lognormal model as a limiting case (as k→∞ ). We now wish to relate this statistical model assumption to a set of explanatory variables (co- variates) from lagged values of the LOB. In practice, to achieve this, one could work on the log scale with ln(τ), i.e. with the log-generalized gamma distribution, as this parameterisation is known to improve identiﬁability and estimation of parameters. Discussions on this point are provided in signiﬁcant detail in Lawless [1980]. Instead, as we employ the gamlss R package of Stasinopoulos and Rigby [2007] for estimation, we have the following reparameterisation f′ τ(τ;µ,σ,ν ) = |ν|θθ ( τ µ )νθ exp ( −θ ( τ µ )ν) Γ(θ)τ (13) where θ = 1 σ2ν2 . This corresponds to the parameterisation in Equation 9 under the transformation f′ τ(τ;µ,σ,ν )≡fτ(τ;ν,µθ− 1 ν,θ ). (14) The regression structure we adopt for the g.g.d. model involves a log link for the time-varying coeﬃcient µ(xt): ln (µ(xt)) =β0 + p∑ s=1 x(s) t βs. (15) with p covariatesxt = { x(s) t }p s=1 measured instantaneously at the point of exceedance t =Ti, and the link functions for parameters σ and ν can be found in Table 6.2. Each of the covariates is a transform from the LOB for which the liquidity measure is observed, and all covariates are described in Section 4.4.1. We note that we also considered models with interactions between the covariates, but interaction terms were not found to be signiﬁcant in the majority of our models. Under a model with this regression structure, we observe that the conditional mean of the duration is also related directly to this linear structure where for thei-th exceedance of the threshold, we have E [τi|xTi] = exp ( β0 + p∑ s=1 x(s) Tiβs )(1 k ) 1 b Γ ( k + 1 b ) Γ (k) (16) see details in Lo et al. [2002]. 12 4.4 Notation and deﬁnitions of LOB variables and regression model components We deﬁne a level of the LOB as a price level at which there is at least 1 resting order: The 1-st level of the bid side is then the 1st level below the price midpoint at which there is a resting buy order. In addition, we utilise the following notation for a single asset, on a single trading day. • a denotes the ask, b denotes the bid. • Pb,i t ∈ N+ denotes the random variable for the limit price of the ith level bid at time t in tick units • Pa,i t ∈ N+ denotes the random variable for the limit price of the ith level ask at time t in tick units • V b,i t ∈ Nn denotes a column random vector of orders at the ith level bid at time t, with n being the number of such orders • Lt denotes a random variable at time t for the generic proxy for the liquidity measure. • c for denotes the exceedance threshold level, deﬁned relative to the liquidity measure Lt. c is deterministic and constant over time. • Ti denotes thei-th random time instant in a trading day that the liquidity measureLt exceeds the threshold c. Formally, we deﬁne Ti = inf{t :Lt >c, t>T i−1, t>T 0}, where T0 denotes the start of the observation window (1 minute after the start of the trading day). • τi will denote the duration of time in ms, relative to the exceedance eventTi, that the liquidity measure Lt remains above the threshold c. These are the response random variables which correspond to the TED. 4.4.1 Model LOB Covariates For each TED random variableτi we consider the corresponding contemporaneous covariates in our regression design matrix, i.e. at the times of exceedance above the speciﬁed liquidity threshold, t = Ti. In the following, a ‘level’ of the LOB is deﬁned as one in which there is at least 1 resting limit order. Thus the ﬁrst 5 levels of the bid are the 5 levels closest to the quote mid-point, where there is available volume for trading. The covariates chosen pertain to the state of the limit-order book of one given stock. • The total number of asks in the ﬁrst 5 levels of the LOB at time t, obtained according to x(1) t =∑5 i=1 ⏐⏐Va,i t ⏐⏐ (where|·| is the number of orders at a particular level), and is denoted ask hereafter • The total number of bids in the ﬁrst 5 levels of the LOB at time t, obtained according to x(2) t =∑5 i=1 ⏐⏐⏐Vb,i t ⏐⏐⏐, denoted bid • The total ask volume in the ﬁrst 5 levels of the LOB at time t, obtained according to x(3) t =∑5 i=1TV a,i t , denoted askVolume • The total bid volume in the ﬁrst 5 levels of the LOB at time t, obtained according to x(4) t =∑5 i=1TV b,i t , denoted bidVolume 13 • The number of bids x(5) t in the LOB that had received price or size revisions (and were thus cancelled and resubmitted with the same order ID), denoted by bidModified . • The number of asks x(6) t in the LOB that had received price or size revisions, denoted by askModified . • The average age (in ms) x(7) t of bids in the ﬁrst 5 levels at time t, denoted by bidAge. • The average age x(8) t of asks in the ﬁrst 5 levels at time t, denoted by askAge. • The instantaneous value of the spread at the point at which thei-th exceedance occurs, which is given by x(9) t =Pa,1 t −Pb,1 t and denoted as spreads. • For the nine previously deﬁned covariates, we also include exponentially weighted lagged versions. For example, in the case of the x(s) t covariate, the respective lagged covariate value is then given by: z(s) t = d∑ n=1 wnx(s) t−n∆, (17) where for a timet, we considerw = 0.75 is the weighting factor,d = 5 is the number of lagged values we consider and ∆ = 1s is the interval between the lagged values. These covariates are hereafter denoted with the ‘l’ preﬁx. • The numberx(10) t of previous TED observations in the interval [t−δ,t ], with δ = 1s, denoted byprevexceed. • The time since the last exceedance, x(11) t , denoted by prevexceed. • The average of the last 5 TEDs, x(12) t , denoted by prevTEDavg . • The activity in the associated CAC40 index (in number of order additions, cancellations and executions) in the previous second, x(13) t , denoted by indact. • A dummy variable indicating if the exceedance occurred as a result of a market order to buy, x(14) t , denoted by mobuy. • A dummy variable indicating if the exceedance occurred as a result of a market order to sell, x(15) t , denoted by mosell. Altogether we then have 24 variates, 15 instantaneous and 9 lagged. 5 Data description We use an 82 day trading sample (January 2nd to April 27, 2012) of all order submissions, executions and cancellations in the limit order book for 20 German and French stocks traded on Chi-X 10. Information for these assets is provided in Table 5 and they were to chosen include both small and large cap stocks in a number of diﬀerent industries. We note that while the trading hours for Chi-X 10Chi-X was a pan-European multilateral trading facility (MTF) which merged with BATS in 2012. For the period under consideration, it accounted for between a quarter and a third of total trading activity in the French and German stocks considered, for more details see http://www.liquidmetrix.com/LiquidMetrix/Battlemap. 14 are 08:00 to 16:30, we do not consider activity before 08:01 and after 16:29, in order to avoid market opening and closing eﬀects. There is a degree of ﬂexibility regarding the manner in which one selects the threshold levels over which to consider exceedances. [Panayi et al., 2014] suggest that these may be speciﬁed based on an interest in particular liquidity resilience scenarios to be studied, in other cases they can be speciﬁed based on historical observations of the empirical distribution of the selected proxy for a liquidity measure. The implications of each choice are discussed in [Panayi et al., 2014]. For this paper we consider exceedances over the median threshold level, which could be of interest in the market making setting described in this paper, as well as exceedances over the daily 95% threshold level. 6 Results and Discussion In the following model selection procedure we assess both the appropriateness of the various dis- tributional assumptions one might make for the TED response, as well as the importance of the diﬀerent covariates in explaining the variation in the TED, in the interest of obtaining a parsimo- nious model. Panayi et al. [2014] explained that the assumption of stationarity in liquidity resilience over an extended period is not supported by the data, and for this reason we also ﬁt the model individually for each day and each asset, where daily local stationarity is reasonably assumed. We will ﬁrst identify the covariates that are most frequently found to be signiﬁcant in daily regressions for diﬀerent assets and for most of the period under consideration, in order to obtain a parsimonious covariate subset. We will then proceed by comparing the explanatory power of the regression model for lognormal, Weibull, gamma and Generalised gamma distributional assumptions for the response random variable. 6.1 Model selection - covariate signiﬁcance For the empirical evaluation of the importance of the various LOB covariates in the regression, we selected a lognormal model speciﬁcation. This is because the simple linear formulation of this model enables us to use existing model selection techniques, in order to identify the model structure that produces the highest explanatory power for each daily regression for every asset. We evaluate the explanatory power of this model in terms of the proportion of the variation in the TED resilience measure that can be explained by the selected model covariates, as captured by the adjusted coeﬃcient of determination (adjusted R2). We ﬁrst ﬁt a multiple regression model, in which all covariates explained in Section 4.4.1 are considered in each daily model for the entire 4 months of our dataset, for each asset under consider- ation. We also considered interactions between covariates, but these were not found to be signiﬁcant in the vast majority of cases. Figure 3 shows the adjusted R2 values obtained from ﬁtting the full model, using as a threshold either the median or the 95th percentile spread, obtained every day. We ﬁnd that for the vast majority of the stocks, the median adjusted R2 value is over 10%. For some stocks we ﬁnd even more remarkable median adjusted R2 values of over 20%, rising to as much as 50% for some daily models. We then used the branch-and-bound algorithm implemented in the the leaps package in R [Lumley, 2004], in order to identify the best scoring model (in terms of the adjusted R2 value). In this context, a model subspace is the set of all possible models containing a particular number of covariates v from the LOB. For example, the full model contains all covariates and is the only model in its subspace, while the smallest model subspace is comprised of models that contain the intercept and any one of the possible covariates. Intermediate model subspaces are comprised of 15 ● ● ●● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ●● ● ● ● ●● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●●● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 ACAp ALVd BAYNd BBp BMWd BNp CSp DAId DBKd DECp DTEd GETp PUMd RMSp RNOp SKYDd SPRd TUI1d UBIp VOWd Symbol Adjusted r−squared value Figure 3: Boxplots of the adjustedR2 value obtained from ﬁtting the full regression model separately for each day in our dataset for both the threshold corresponding to the 5th decile of the spread (the median - red) and the 95th percentile threshold (blue). models with all combinations of v = 2...n − 1 covariates, where n =p +m is the total number of covariates, contemporaneousp plus lagged m variates. There are thus n! (n−v)! models in each model subspace. To illustrate our ﬁndings we ﬁrst present results for a given day of data for Credit Agricole in Figure 4, where for all model subspaces, we rank the models in the subspace based on their adjusted R2 score. We thus obtain the best combination of covariates, for each subspace and for each day of data. We can then identify the covariates that are consistently present as we move between model subspaces. This is interesting because it gives us a relative measure of the contribution of that covariate across diﬀerent assumptions of parsimony for the model. Particularly for higher dimensional model subspaces, some of the covariates in each subset model are not signiﬁcant, and we distinguish between the covariates that are signiﬁcant or not, at the 5% level of signiﬁcance. To get an indication of the time stability of these model structures (and identify covariates that are consistently selected in the model), we illustrate the relative frequency with which parameters appear in the best models of every subset. That is, for each model subspace, we count the number of times each covariate forms part of the model with the highest adjusted-R2 value over the four month period. Figure 5 indicates that the covariates identiﬁed earlier as being important in explaining the variation in the TED for a single day ( prevTEDavg and spreads) are also consistent features in models across time. However, prevexceed does not form part of the best model very frequently, except in higher model subspaces, possibly because it is less informative in the presence of the 16 aforementioned covariates. Besides the frequency of the presence of each covariate in the best ﬁtting model of a given subspace, we also evaluate individual covariate signiﬁcance over time via a formal partial t-test at the 5% level in Figure 6. At higher model subspaces, we ﬁnd that several covariates are found to be statistically signiﬁcant (i.e. reject a null hypothesis for a partial t-test) less frequently. This is what one may expect, when covariates become less signiﬁcant in the presence of other correlated covariates, i.e. collinearity in the factors of the LOB covariates takes eﬀect. To validate this hypothesis regarding the model structures we develop, we have performed further analysis on the correlation between the covariates and the eﬀect on our estimated coeﬃcients, which can be provided on request. In this analysis, we recall that under our regression framework, the sign of the coeﬃcient for a given covariate indicates the direction of the partial eﬀect of this variable, on the conditional probability that the resilience, as measured by the exceedance duration for a given threshold, will exceed a time t. Therefore we can interpret positive coeﬃcient values as inﬂuencing the liquidity resilience of the LOB by slowing the return to a desirable level, whilst negative coeﬃcients tend to result in a rapid return to the considered liquidity level, indicating higher resilience marginally, with respect to that covariate. Panayi et al. [2014] provides an economic/theoretic interpretation of the signiﬁcant covariates for the case of the lognormal model, and we provide in Section 6.5 a discussion regarding the sign and variation in coeﬃcients for the diﬀerent model structures we considered. % signiﬁcant % positive askAge 48.2 22.4 askModiﬁed 62.0 50.2 askVolume 52.3 27.6 bid 58.2 34.4 bidAge 51.2 23.2 bidModiﬁed 59.5 46.6 bidVolume 54.6 27.7 indact 52.6 35.6 lask 61.0 12.1 laskAge 49.0 22.3 laskModiﬁed 65.6 7.9 laskVolume 53.0 29.7 lbid 63.5 12.4 lbidAge 45.5 20.7 lbidModiﬁed 63.7 9.3 lbidVolume 53.1 30.0 lspreads 71.6 58.9 mobuy 84.3 36.5 mosell 83.5 35.7 prevTEDavg 96.3 96.2 prevexceed 69.9 7.3 spreads 75.2 70.5 timelast 57.6 8.5 Table 2: The percentage of daily models (for all assets) for which each covariate is found to be signiﬁcant at the 5% level, and the percentage of daily models for which the sign of the associated coeﬃcient is positive. 17 In Table 6.1 we summarise the signiﬁcance and sign of the assets over time and over the diﬀerent assets in our dataset. This is interesting as we can identify the regressors for which loadings are positive (negative) and thus produce marginal increases (decreases) in the expected TED under the model, and thus an associated decrease (increase) in the resilience of market liquidity. In the following, we will now consider a ﬁxed subset of covariates in the regression models, which we identiﬁed in our previous model selection procedure as being most signiﬁcant in the daily regressions, as well a consistent sign. These are: • prevTEDavg • spreads • prevexceed • mobuy, mosell • ask, bid • lask, lbid 6.2 Model selection - distributional assumptions We now consider the eﬀect of diﬀerent distributional assumptions on the explanatory power of the model, using the ﬁxed subset of covariates selected above. We will compare the explanatory power of the lognormal, Weibull, gamma and Generalised gamma regression models. We will ﬁrst relate the covariates to the mean of the response, as in the GLM structure, before considering separate link functions for further distribution parameters, as in the GAMLSS structure. Link function Distribution µ σ ν Lognormal identity log - Gamma log log - Weibull log log - Generalised Gamma log log identity Table 3: The link functions in the GAMLSS framework for each parameter for the four distributions under consideration. Figure 7 shows the range of adjusted-R2 values obtained from daily ﬁts of each model over the 4- month period for the regression models with the diﬀerent distributional assumptions. We note that in general, making lognormal and Weibull distributional assumptions leads to regression models where the explanatory power is comparable, whereas the explanatory power of gamma regression models is lower for the vast majority of assets. This indicates that the tail behaviour of the liquidity resilience measure tends to be better ﬁt with moderate to heavy tailed distributions which admit more ﬂexible skew and kurtosis features. We present in Figure 8 for two assets, the estimated deviance of the ﬁtted models every day, for all 4 distributional assumptions that we make. We see that in general, the Generalised Gamma produces model ﬁts with the lowest deviance values, which is as one would expect, as it encompasses all the other distributions as special limiting cases. We also observed that there are a few days where the Generalised Gamma regression model failed to converge, and in these cases the Lognormal 18 dominates. Over our dataset, we ﬁnd that the Generalised Gamma model is the best performing model for approximately 75% of the data, while for most of the remaining cases (which would mostly include daily datasets where the Generalised Gamma model failed to converge), the best model is the Lognormal one. Lowest deviance Lognormal 24.6% Gamma 0.0% Weibull 0.8% Generalised Gamma 74.6% Table 4: The percentage of daily datasets for which each model ﬁt produced the lowest deviance. 6.3 Incorporating more ﬂexibility through a GAMLSS framework spec- iﬁcation The advantage of the GAMLSS framework is that is one is able to relate regression covariates to every distribution parameter through diﬀerent link functions. Within the gamlss package, the distributions are reparameterised (as explained in Section 4) so that they have common parameters µ,σ , and possibly ν andκ. For the Lognormal model the default link function for µ is the identity link g(µ) =µ =X1β1, while for most other parameters the log link is used, e.g. for σ h(σ) = log(σ) =X2β2, As we do not know apriori whether covariates are more important in aﬀecting one distribution parameter than another, we use a common set of covariates for each link function and therefore in the expressions for the link functions above X1 = X2 = X. We present in Figure 9 the R2 explanatory power of the Lognormal regression model when considering only a single link function for µ, and when considering an additional link function for σ also. We note that there is a slight increase in the median R2, and this is observed across the assets in our dataset. 6.4 Eﬀects of unit changes in LOB dynamics on the TED In this section we consider how to study the inﬂuence on the TED arising from a unit change in the statistically most important covariates given by: prevTEDavg; spreads; prevexceed; mobuy, mosell ; ask, bid ; lask, lbid . This is interesting to study as it will depend on the distributional choice and model structure. We study the perturbation eﬀect of a unit change of one covariate in the GAMLSS model, given all the other covariates on the mean and variance functions of the model. This will allow us to interpret the inﬂuence of the sign and magnitude of the coeﬃcient loadings in the model for each covariate on the average TED (replenishment time) and the variance in the TED for an asset. 19 6.4.1 Lognormal GAMLSS mean and variance functions in the GAMLSS framework In the case of the Lognormal model with a single link function on g (µ(x)) = βTx we know that the mean and variance functions are given as follows: E [τ|x] = exp ( µ(x) +σ2/2 ) Var [τ|x] = exp ( σ2/2 )[ exp ( σ2/2 ) − 1 ] exp (2µ(x)). (18) We can therefore consider the inﬂuence of a unit change in a covariate under this model by con- sidering the partial diﬀerence in the mean and variance functions given a change in say the j-th covariate, which is given by ∂ ∂xj E [τ|x] =βj ∂ ∂xj Var [τ|x] = 2βj exp ( σ2/2 )[ exp ( σ2/2 ) − 1 ] exp (2µ(x)). (19) From this analysis one sees that a unit change in the j-th covariate xj with a negative coeﬃcient loading will produce an increase in the mean liquidity resilience by reducing the average TED. Conversely, a positive loading will result in an decrease in the mean liquidity resilience. In the case of a Lognormal model with two link functions, assuming both parameters are related to the same set of covariates in vectorx, then one has g (µ(x)) =βTx andh (σ(x)) = log (σ(x)) = αTx. An approximation of the log link function ln E [τ|x]≈ (∑ j βjxj + 1 + ∑ k αkxk +O (∑ k α2 kx2 k )) , (20) results in the following approximate relationship for the partial derivative of a covariate xj ∂ ∂xj E [τ|x]≈ (βj +αj) exp ( 1 + ∑ j βjxj + ∑ k αkxk ) . (21) Hence, if βj +αj > 0 then a unit change in covariate xj will result in an increase in the average TED. Conversely if βj +αj < 0 then an increase in covariate xj will decrease the average TED and in the third case that βj +αj = 0, changes in the covariate have no eﬀect on liquidity resilience, as measured by the TED. 6.4.2 Gamma mean and variance functions in the GAMLSS framework In the case of the Gamma model with a link function on g (µ(x)) = βTx, the mean and variance function are given as follows: E [τ|x] =µ(x) = exp (∑ j βjxj ) Var [τ|x] =µ (x)σ (x) = exp ( 2 ∑ j βjxj + 2 ∑ j αjxj ) . We can therefore consider the inﬂuence of a unit change in a covariate under this model by con- sidering the partial diﬀerence in the mean and variance functions given a change in say the j-th 20 covariate given by ∂ ∂xj E [τ|x] =βj exp (∑ j βjxj ) ∂ ∂xj Var [τ|x] = 2 (βj +αj) exp ( 2 ∑ j βjxj + 2 ∑ j αjxj ) . We see from this analysis that a unit change in the variable xj when βj > 0 results in an increase in the average TED, as well as an increase in the variance in the variance of the TED βj +αj > 0. 6.4.3 Weibull and Generalised Gamma mean and variance functions in the GAMLSS framework The Weibull distribution parameterised has mean and variance functions E [τ|x] =µ(x) = exp (∑ j βjxj ) , V [τ|x] =µ2(x) { Γ ( 2 σ(x) + 1 )[ Γ ( 1 σ(x) + 1 )]−2 − 1 } . The generalised gamma distribution has mean and variance functions E [τ|x] =µ(x)Γ ( θ + 1 ν ) θ1/vΓ(θ) , V [τ|x] =µ2(x)Γ(θ)Γ ( θ + 2 ν ) − [ Γ ( θ + 1 ν )]2 θ 2 ν [Γ(θ)]2 . We can obtain the partial diﬀerence in the mean and variance functions as in the lognormal and Gamma cases above. However, the presence of the gamma functions makes the identiﬁcation of the partial contributions of unit changes in covariates to the mean and variance functions more involved. 6.5 Interpretation Since we have obtained model ﬁts for every model subspace, and for every day in our dataset, we can investigate the inter-day variation of the coeﬃcients, as well as their magnitude and sign over time. In Figure 10, we summarise these results for the best ﬁtting model on each day. The plots demonstrate for each model distribution assumption the following features: 1) the variation in each coeﬃcient in the link functions for µ and σ and 2) the coeﬃcient sign, and thus its interpretation with regards to how it inﬂuences these parameters, generally related to the resilience mean and variance. We note that the signs of the coeﬃcients generally agree for the models under the diﬀerent distributional assumptions. In particular, the prevTEDavg covariate, which is an average of the last 5 log TED observations, and generally has a positive coeﬃcient, is thus associated with a slower return to the threshold liquidity level. Thus, our model indicates that the expected TED over a 21 particular threshold will be larger, when the duration of similar exceedances in the near past has been longer. We also ﬁnd that the instantaneous spread covariate (i.e. the value of the spread at the moment when it ﬁrst exceeds the threshold) appears frequently in the best model and has a positive coeﬃcient (and would also increase the expected TED). This results matches our intuition, as the wider the spread just after an event at time Ti+, the longer we would expect the spread exceedance to last, on average. Of particular interest are the mobuy and mosell covariates, i.e. dummy variables indicating whether the exceedance resulted from a buy or sell market order respectively (if both are zero, then the exceedance was a result of a cancellation). For the majority of assets, such as Deutsche Telekom, for which results are presented in Figure 10, the coeﬃcients are generally found to be negative, indicating that exceedances from market orders are associated with an decrease in the expected TED, compared to cancellations. For a small number of assets, such as Credit Agricole we have noted that the opposite eﬀect is found. 7 Liquidity drought extremes We present here an application of the model as a regulatory tool for the monitoring of liquidity. Similar to the previous setting, we would expect that regulatory bodies are interested in ensuring uninterrupted liquidity, as it is an integral part of a fair and orderly market. However, they would probably focus on the extreme liquidity levels that occur, and the durations of these extreme events. For this application, instead of the conditional mean response of the observation variable, we now consider conditional quantiles of the response. That is, if a TED event occurs in a (stationary) LOB regime, given covariates x, we can make a prediction about the (1 −α)-th quantile, eg. the 90th quantile of the response: This is the duration of time such that there is a 90% probability under the model that liquidity will return to the threshold level in this period. To understand the use of the model we developed in the manner of a quantile relationship, we explain brieﬂy how to reinterpret the GAMLSS regression model, speciﬁcally in the case of the generalised gamma distribution family we adopt in this paper, as a quantile regression model structure, following the developments discussed in Noufaily and Jones [2013]. In general when performing a quantile regression study, where one links the quantile behaviour of an observed response variable, in our case the TED random variables for liquidity resilience, to a set of covariates, it is achieved by either adopting a non-parametric or a parametric framework. The most common approach is to consider the non-parametric quantile regression approach, where one estimates regression coeﬃcients without making assumptions on the distribution of the response, or equivalently the residuals. If Yi > 0 is a set of observations and xi = (1,xi1,...,x im) is a vector of covariates that describe Yi, the quantile function for the log transformed data Y∗ i = lnYi∈ℜ is QY ∗(u|xi) =α0,u + m∑ k=1 αk,uxik (22) where u∈ (0, 1) is the quantile level, αu = (α0,u,...,α k,u) are the linear model coeﬃcients for quantile level u which are estimated by solving min α0,u,...,αm,u ∑ i≤I ρu(ϵi) = ∑ i≤I ϵi[u−I(ϵi < 0)] (23) where ϵi =y∗ i−α0,u− m∑ k=1 αk,uxik. Then the quantile function for the original data is QY (u|xi) = exp(QY ∗(u|xi)). 22 It was realised by Koenker and Machado [1999] and Yu and Moyeed [2001] that the parameter estimates ofαu obtained by minimizing the loss function in (23) will be equivalent to the maximum likelihood estimates of αu, when Y∗ i follows the Asymetric Laplace (AL) proxy distribution with pdf: f(y∗ i|µi,σ 2 i,p ) = p(1−p) σi exp ( −(y∗ i−µ∗ i ) σi [p−I(y∗ i≤µi)] ) (24) where the location parameter or mode µ∗ i equals to QY ∗(u|xi) in (22), the scale parameter σi > 0 and the skewness parameter p∈ (0, 1) equals to the quantile level u. Since the pdf (24) contains the loss function (23), it is clear that parameter estimates which maximize (24) will minimize (23). In this formulation the AL distribution represents the conditional distribution of the observed dependent variables (responses) given the covariates. More precisely, the location parameter µi of the AL distribution links the coeﬃcient vector αu and associated independent variable covariates in the linear regression model to the location of the AL distribution. It is also worth noting that under this representation it is straightforward to extend the quantile regression model to allow for heteroscedasticity in the response which may vary as a function of the quantile level u under study. To achieve this, one can simply add a regression structure linked to the scale parameter σi in the same manner as was done for the location parameter. Equivalently, we assumeY∗ i conditionally follows an AL distribution denoted byY∗ i ∼AL(µ∗ i,σ 2 i,u ). Then Y∗ i =µ∗ i +ϵ∗ iσi (25) where ϵ∗ i∼ AL(0, 1,u ), µ∗ i = α0,u + m∑ k=1 αk,uxik, σ2 i = exp(β0,u + ν∑ k=1 βk,usik) and sik are covariates in the variance function. One could indeed consider the resulting ALD model as a GAMLSS model structure which is interpreted as a quantile regression model also. However, there is another sub-class of models for which one can develop a GAMLSS model that will also be associated with a quantile regression structure, not necessarily in the ALD family. In this paper we consider again the generalised gamma distribution family of GAMLSS structures and we observe that one can obtain the quantile function of this family of models in closed form, which is again a form of quantile regession since it directly relates the quantile function of the TED response to the covariates. In particular if we consider that the TED responses are modelled according to the GAMLSS regression structure under one of the available parameterizations discussed previously, such as the Generalised Gamma distribution fτ(τ;b(x),a (x),k (x)) = b Γ(k) τbk−1 abk exp ( − (τ a )b) ,k >0,a> 0,b> 0 (26) where we note that the parameters b,a,k can be made to be functions of the covariates x under the GAMLSS structure. From this regression relationship, one can obtain the conditional quantile function for a given quantile level u, as determined by Noufaily and Jones [2013]. Obtaining this quantile function for the conditional response given the covariates, linked to the response through the parameters, is achieved by representing the log generalized gamma distribution’s quantile function in terms of a base quantile function, in this case given by a gamma distribution with speciﬁcally selected shape and scale parameters. The required transformation of the analytic closed-form quantile function of a Gamma random variable, denoted by G−1, with shape u and scale k(x), then gives the conditional expression Q (u;x) =a(x) [( 1 k(x) ) G−1 (u;u,k (x)) ] 1 b(x) , (27) 23 wherea(x), and we recall that this parameterisation corresponds to that of the gamlss package with b =ν, a =µθ− 1 ν and k =θ, with θ = 1 σ2ν2 and where one or more of µ,σ,ν may be functions of x since one or more of the parameters k,b,a can be made functions of the covariates x. To start with, we obtain the conditional quantile level of the TED, assuming that covariates take median intra-day values. The TED is deﬁned as before, using the spread as the liquidity measure and the median of the empirical distribution as the threshold. We then allow covariateprevTEDavg to vary within a range of typical intra-day values and obtain the conditional quantile levels for the four distributions we have considered in Figure 11. We note here that these quantile functions have been obtained with model parameters from a GAMLSS structure, where we only considered the link function pertaining to the ﬁrst parameter. We can see that this structure separates the eﬀects of covariates and quantile levels on the quantile of the TED, as covariates only enter into parameter a above. Figures 12 and 13 show the quantile surface obtained when we allow two covariates to vary. We note from Figure 13 that when both covariates prevTEDavg and spreads take extreme values, this leads to a vast increase in the median TED level under our model for all distributional assumptions. Such an analysis is useful in understanding how extreme levels of particular covariates aﬀect quantile levels of the TED. We can therefore understand how the diﬀerent quantile surfaces for the TED behave for these extreme values of the spread and above. This enables regulators to identify which are the most important covariates associated with an increase in extreme periods of illiquidity (that is, where the liquidity measure remains above the threshold for extended period of time). In addition, to the extent that a covariate taking extreme values is considered a scenario in which the LOB is stressed, a regulator can make inferences about the duration of relative illiquidity under such stressed conditions. In non-stressed conditions, that is, where covariates take what would be considered to be ‘normal’ values, regulators may be interested in the range of probable values of the TED. Obtaining high quantile levels of the TED under the model could then help them identify situations which fall outside this range, which may be due to a change in the LOB regime or due to a particular event that will require their intervention. 8 Proposals and conclusion Given the intra-day variation in liquidity demand, we propose that quoting requirements of Desig- nated Market Makers / Designated Sponsors be amended so as to include a provision for liquidity replenishment after a shock. We have shown that the Threshold Exceedance Duration (TED)Panayi et al. [2014] is a good metric for the speed of this liquidity replenishment, and indeed it has been deﬁned so as to be able to incorporate any liquidity measure (e.g. spread, XLM) an exchange may be interested in, and any liquidity threshold that would indicate that there is suﬃcient liquidity in the asset. We do not suggest an explicit target for the TED for each asset, but we suggest that this should vary according to the asset’s liquidity, as do current quoting requirements regarding maximum spreads and minimum posted volumes. We have presented a comprehensive study of diﬀerent regression structures that could be used to model the variation in the TED. An appropriate modelling structure would be invaluable for both the operators of the exchange and the market makers who are subject to the quoting requirements. The former, because they could use it to determine an appropriate target level of the TED, given the prevailing conditions. The latter, because when they act to replenish liquidity, it is possible that they have several options about the way in which they do it, and the model could prescribe the method that would most improve resilience in market liquidity. In our modelling we employed various regression structures, starting from simple log-linear 24 models to Generalised Linear Models (GLMs) and GAMLSS models. Under these approaches, we compared the explanatory power of Lognormal, Gamma, Weibull and Generalised Gamma models. We also evaluated the additional explanatory power of allowing covariates to aﬀect each of the parameters of the distribution, as in the GAMLSS structure. We determined that while the Generalised Gamma model had, in most cases, the highest ex- planatory power of the distributions considered, its advantage over the Lognormal distribution was minimal at best. In addition, considering also a link function for a second parameter in the model increased explanatory power, but again the increase was perhaps not suﬃcient to justify the more involved GAMLSS modelling approach. Summarising, a simple log-linear structure is, in our opin- ion, the recommended approach to modelling the TED, as its estimation is very robust and its explanatory power similar to much more ﬂexible models, such as the Generalised Gamma model. Name Symbol Country Sector CREDIT AGRICOLE ACAp FRANCE Banking Services ALLIANZ ALVd GERMANY Insurance BAYER BAYNd GERMANY Biotechnology / Pharmaceuticals BIC BBp FRANCE Commercial Services / Supplies BMW BMWd GERMANY Automobiles / Auto Parts DANONE BNp FRANCE Food / Tobacco AXA CSp FRANCE Insurance DAIMLER DAId GERMANY Automobiles / Auto Parts DEUTSCHE BANK DBKd GERMANY Banking Services JCDECAUX DECp FRANCE Media / Publishing DEUTSCHE TELEKOM DTEd GERMANY Telecommunications Services GROUPE EUROTUNNEL GETp FRANCE Rails / Roads Transportation PUMA PUMd GERMANY Textiles / Apparel HERMES INTL. RMSp FRANCE Textiles / Apparel RENAULT RNOp FRANCE Automobiles / Auto Parts SKY DEUTSCHLAND SKYDd GERMANY Media / Publishing AXEL SPRINGER SPRd GERMANY Media / Publishing TUI TUI1d GERMANY Hotels / Entertainment Services UBISOFT ENTM. UBIp FRANCE Leisure Products VOLKSWAGEN VOWd GERMANY Automobiles / Auto Parts Table 5: Information about the 20 European stocks used in the study. Declaration of interest The authors report no declarations of interest. 25 References Abhay Abhyankar, Dipak Ghosh, Eric Levin, and RJ Limmack. Bid-ask spreads, trading volume and volatility: Intra-day evidence from the London Stock Exchange. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting, 24(3):343–362, 1997. Aur´ elien Alfonsi, Antje Fruth, and Alexander Schied. Optimal execution strategies in limit order books with general shape functions. Quantitative Finance, 10(2):143–157, 2010. Evangelos Benos and Anne Wetherilt. The role of designated market makers in the new trading landscape. Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin , page Q4, 2012. Paul Brockman and Dennis Y Chung. An analysis of depth behavior in an electronic, order-driven environment. Journal of Banking & Finance , 23(12):1861–1886, 1999. Kalok C Chan, William G Christie, and Paul H Schultz. Market structure and the intraday pattern of bid-ask spreads for NASDAQ securities. Journal of Business , pages 35–60, 1995. Michael Chlistalla, Bernhard Speyer, Sabine Kaiser, and Thomas Mayer. High-frequency trading. Deutsche Bank Research, pages 1–19, 2011. Piet De Jong, Gillian Z Heller, et al. Generalized linear models for insurance data , volume 136. Cambridge University Press Cambridge, 2008. Kenneth D Garbade. Securities markets. McGraw-Hill New York, 1982. Larry Harris. Trading and exchanges: Market microstructure for practitioners . Oxford University Press, USA, 2002. Andrew C Harvey. Estimating regression models with multiplicative heteroscedasticity. Economet- rica: Journal of the Econometric Society , pages 461–465, 1976. Joel Hasbrouck and Duane J. Seppi. Common factors in prices, order ﬂows, and liquidity. Journal of ﬁnancial Economics , 59(3):383–411, 2001. G Andrew Karolyi, Kuan-Hui Lee, and Mathijs A Van Dijk. Understanding commonality in liquidity around the world. Journal of Financial Economics , 105(1):82–112, 2012. Andrei A Kirilenko, Albert S Kyle, Mehrdad Samadi, and Tugkan Tuzun. The ﬂash crash: The impact of high frequency trading on an electronic market. 2014. Roger Koenker and Jose AF Machado. Goodness of ﬁt and related inference processes for quantile regression. Journal of the american statistical association , 94(448):1296–1310, 1999. Robert A Korajczyk and Ronnie Sadka. Pricing the commonality across alternative measures of liquidity. Journal of Financial Economics , 87(1):45–72, 2008. Albert S Kyle. Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 1315–1335, 1985. Jerry F Lawless. Inference in the generalized gamma and log gamma distributions. Technometrics, 22(3):409–419, 1980. Alexander Lipton, Umberto Pesavento, and Michael G Sotiropoulos. Trade arrival dynamics and quote imbalance in a limit order book. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.0514 , 2013. 26 Andrew W Lo, A Craig MacKinlay, and June Zhang. Econometric models of limit-order executions. Journal of Financial Economics , 65(1):31–71, 2002. Thomas Lumley. The leaps package. The R project for statistical computation , 2004. Peter McCullagh and John A Nelder. Generalized linear models, volume 37. CRC press, 1989. Albert J Menkveld and Ting Wang. How do designated market makers create value for small-caps? Journal of Financial Markets , 16(3):571–603, 2013. John A Nelder and RJ Baker. Generalized linear models. Encyclopedia of Statistical Sciences, 1972. Angela Noufaily and MC Jones. Parametric quantile regression based on the generalized gamma distribution. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C (Applied Statistics), 62(5):723–740, 2013. A.A. Obizhaeva and J. Wang. Optimal trading strategy and supply/demand dynamics. Journal of Financial Markets, 2012. Efstathios Panayi and Gareth W Peters. Liquidity commonality does not imply liquidity resilience commonality: A functional characterisation for ultra-high frequency cross-sectional lob data. to appear, Quantitative Finance Special Issue on Big Data Analytics , 2015. Efstathios Panayi, Gareth W Peters, Jon Danielsson, and Jean-Pierre Zigrand. Market liquidity resilience. London School of Economics Working Paper Series , 2014. RA Rigby, DM Stasinopoulos, and V Voudouris. Discussion: A comparison of gamlss with quantile regression. Statistical Modelling, 13(4):335–348, 2013. Robert A Rigby and D Mikis Stasinopoulos. Generalized additive models for location, scale and shape. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C (Applied Statistics) , 54(3):507–554, 2005. SEC. Concept release on equity market structure. Federal Register, 75(13):3594–3614, 2010. Eo W Stacy. A generalization of the gamma distribution. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics , pages 1187–1192, 1962. D Mikis Stasinopoulos and Robert A Rigby. Generalized additive models for location scale and shape (gamlss) in r. Journal of Statistical Software , 23(7):1–46, 2007. Kumar Venkataraman and Andrew C Waisburd. The value of the designated market maker.Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , 42(03):735–758, 2007. Robert A Wood, Thomas H McInish, and J Keith Ord. An investigation of transactions data for NYSE stocks. The Journal of Finance , 40(3):723–739, 1985. Keming Yu and Rana A Moyeed. Bayesian quantile regression. Statistics & Probability Letters , 54 (4):437–447, 2001. 27 adjr2 (Intercept) ask askAge askModified askVolume bid bidAge bidModified bidVolume indact lask laskAge laskModified laskVolume lbid lbidAge lbidModified lbidVolume lspreads mobuy mosell prevTEDavg prevexceed spreads timelast 0.23 0.23 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 M1 M2 M3 M4 M5 M6 M7 M8 M9 M23 M22 M21 M10 M20 M19 M11 M18 M17 M12 M16 M14 M13 M15 Absent Significant adjr2 (Intercept) ask askAge askModified askVolume bid bidAge bidModified bidVolume indact lask laskAge laskModified laskVolume lbid lbidAge lbidModified lbidVolume lspreads mobuy mosell prevTEDavg prevexceed spreads timelast 0.083 0.12 0.13 0.14 0.14 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 M1 M2 M3 M4 M5 M6 M23 M7 M22 M21 M20 M19 M18 M8 M17 M9 M16 M10 M11 M12 M15 M14 M13 Absent Significant Figure 4: The adjusted R2 values for models of using the best subsets of covariates (of size 1 to 24, in this case) for a single trading day (the 17th of January 2012) for stock Credit Agricole in the lognormal speciﬁcation and the median spread (top) or the 95th percentile (bottom) as the threshold. Any one row corresponds to a submodel with the highlighted squares indicating whether a variate has been included in the model or not. A dark square indicates statistical signiﬁcance at the 5% level, with light squares not statistically signiﬁcant at the 5% level. For instance, row M3 corresponds to a speciﬁcation with the following variates: intercept, ask, prevTEDavg and spreads. The models are ranked by the best adjusted R2 value, and we see that in this case, the best scoring model is obtained using a subset of 15 covariates for the top plot. We diﬀerentiate between covariates that were found to be signiﬁcant or not, and of the 15 covariates in the best model, only 8 are found to be signiﬁcant at the 5% level. 28 (Intercept) ask askAge askModified askVolume bid bidAge bidModified bidVolume indact lask laskAge laskModified laskVolume lbid lbidAge lbidModified lbidVolume lspreads mobuy mosell prevTEDavg prevexceed spreads timelast M23 M21 M19 M17 M15 M13 M11 M9 M7 M5 M3 M1 (Intercept) ask askAge askModified askVolume bid bidAge bidModified bidVolume indact lask laskAge laskModified laskVolume lbid lbidAge lbidModified lbidVolume lspreads mobuy mosell prevTEDavg prevexceed spreads timelast M23 M21 M19 M17 M15 M13 M11 M9 M7 M5 M3 M1 Figure 5: Heatmap of the relative frequency with which parameters appear in the best daily models of every subspace (frequency in terms of the number of daily models over the 82 day period) for the Credit Agricole dataset using the daily median (left) or the 95th percentile (right) of the spread as the threshold value. So for instance, the element in row M11 and column lask indicates the relative frequency (in terms of the fraction of days over the 82 day period) by which the variate lask has appeared in the best model with 10 variates amongst all models with 10 variates. The bottom row is not informative since by construction all variates appeared amongst the best model having all variates. (Intercept) ask askAge askModified askVolume bid bidAge bidModified bidVolume indact lask laskAge laskModified laskVolume lbid lbidAge lbidModified lbidVolume lspreads mobuy mosell prevTEDavg prevexceed spreads timelast M23 M21 M19 M17 M15 M13 M11 M9 M7 M5 M3 M1 (Intercept) ask askAge askModified askVolume bid bidAge bidModified bidVolume indact lask laskAge laskModified laskVolume lbid lbidAge lbidModified lbidVolume lspreads mobuy mosell prevTEDavg prevexceed spreads timelast M23 M21 M19 M17 M15 M13 M11 M9 M7 M5 M3 M1 Figure 6: Heatmap of the relative frequency with which the parameters are found to be signiﬁcant at the 5% level (frequency in terms of the number of daily models over the 82 day period) for the Credit Agricole dataset, using the median and 95th percentile thresholds. 29 ● ● 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 Lognormal Gamma Weibull Symbol R−squared value ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 Lognormal Gamma Weibull Symbol R−squared value ● 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 Lognormal Gamma Weibull Symbol R−squared value ●●● ● ●● ● 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 Lognormal Gamma Weibull Symbol R−squared value Figure 7: Boxplots of the adjusted R2 value obtained from ﬁtting the regression models with the various distributional assumptions separately for each day in our dataset for the threshold corresponding to the 5th decile of the spread 30 ●●● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●●● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 50000 75000 100000 125000 150000 0 20 40 60 80 DBKd Deviance variable ● ● ● ● lognormal gamma weibull gengamma ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 40000 60000 80000 0 20 40 60 80 BAYNd Deviance variable ● ● ● ● lognormal gamma weibull gengamma Figure 8: The deviance for every distributional assumption, with a model ﬁt ﬁt every day over an 81-day trading period. 31 ● 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 mu only mu and sigma ACAp R−squared value ● ● ● ● ● ● 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 mu only mu and sigma BAYNd R−squared value 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 mu only mu and sigma UBIp R−squared value ●●● ● ●● 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 mu only mu and sigma TUI1d R−squared value Figure 9: Boxplots of the adjusted R2 value obtained from ﬁtting the lognormal regression model, comparing the explanatory power when relating only a single distribution parameterµ to covariates, and when relating bothµ andσ in a GAMLSS framework, for four diﬀerent assets. (Top left): Credit Agricole SA. (Top right): Bayer AG. (Lower left): UBISOFT Entertainment. (Lower right): TUI AG. 32 ● ● ● ● ● ● −1 0 1 2 prevTEDavg mobuy mosell spreads prevexceed ask bid lask lbid Mu intercept: (min,max,q25,q50,q75)=(1.8,4.5,3,3.3,3.7) Coefficient Value ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ●● ● ● ●●● ● ●● ● ●● −1 0 1 2 prevTEDavg mobuy mosell spreads prevexceed ask bid lask lbid Mu intercept: (min,max,q25,q50,q75)=(1.9,4.5,3,3.3,3.7) Sigma intercept: (min,max,q25,q50,q75)=(1.3,1.4,1.3,1.4,1.4)Coefficient value link mu sigma ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 prevTEDavg mobuy mosell spreads prevexceed ask bid lask lbid Mu intercept: (min,max,q25,q50,q75)=(6.7,8.2,7.3,7.6,7.8) Coefficient Value ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ●●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 0 1 2 prevTEDavg mobuy mosell spreads prevexceed ask bid lask lbid Mu intercept: (min,max,q25,q50,q75)=(6.7,8.2,7.4,7.6,7.8) Sigma intercept: (min,max,q25,q50,q75)=(0.7,1.6,0.8,0.8,0.9)Coefficient value link mu sigma ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● −1 0 1 2 prevTEDavg mobuy mosell spreads prevexceed ask bid lask lbid Mu intercept: (min,max,q25,q50,q75)=(6.5,8.7,7.5,8,8.2) Coefficient Value ●● ●● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 0 1 prevTEDavg mobuy mosell spreads prevexceed ask bid lask lbid Mu intercept: (min,max,q25,q50,q75)=(6.4,8.6,7.5,7.9,8.1) Sigma intercept: (min,max,q25,q50,q75)=(−1.4,−1.1,−1.3,−1.2,−1.2) Coefficient value link mu sigma ● ● ●● ●● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●●● −1 0 1 2 prevTEDavg mobuy mosell spreads prevexceed ask bid lask lbid Mu intercept: (min,max,q25,q50,q75)=(−2.1,7.2,2.8,3.5,4.3) Coefficient Value ●● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● −1 0 1 2 prevTEDavg mobuy mosell spreads prevexceed ask bid lask lbid Mu intercept: (min,max,q25,q50,q75)=(−2.3,7.7,2.5,3.4,4.5) Sigma intercept: (min,max,q25,q50,q75)=(−1.1,1.4,1.2,1.3,1.4)Coefficient value link mu sigma Figure 10: Boxplots of the model coeﬃcients obtained from ﬁtting the regression models with the various distributional assumptions separately for each day in our dataset for the threshold corresponding to the median spread for stock Deutsche Telecom (stock symbol DTEd). (Top): Lognormal. (Middle): Gamma. (Bottom): Weibull. Left: Considering link function for µ only. Right: Considering link function for µ and σ. 33 0 50 100 150 200 250 −2 0 2 4 6 prevTEDavg Threshold Exceedance Duration (ms) factor(quantile) 0.25 0.5 0.75 0 50 100 150 200 250 −2 0 2 4 6 prevTEDavg Threshold Exceedance Duration (ms) factor(quantile) 0.25 0.5 0.75 0 50 100 150 200 250 −2 0 2 4 6 prevTEDavg Threshold Exceedance Duration (ms) factor(quantile) 0.25 0.5 0.75 0 50 100 150 200 250 −2 0 2 4 6 prevTEDavg Threshold Exceedance Duration (ms) factor(quantile) 0.25 0.5 0.75 Figure 11: Quantile plots: Upper left: Lognormal. Upper right: Gamma. Lower left: Weibull. Lower right: Generalised gamma. 34 −2 0 2 4 6 0 50 100 150 200 20 40 60 80 100 prevTEDavg prevexceed TED 0 20 40 60 80 100 −2 0 2 4 6 0 50 100 150 200 50 100 150 prevTEDavg prevexceed TED 0 50 100 150 −2 0 2 4 6 0 50 100 150 200 50 100 150 prevTEDavg prevexceed TED 0 50 100 150 200 −2 0 2 4 6 0 50 100 150 200 10 20 30 40 50 60 prevTEDavg prevexceed TED 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Figure 12: Quantile plots for lognormal,gamma,weibull and generalised gamma when varying 2 covariates. 35 −2 0 2 4 6 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 prevTEDavg spreads TED 0e+00 2e+04 4e+04 6e+04 8e+04 1e+05 −2 0 2 4 6 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 prevTEDavg spreads TED 0e+00 2e+09 4e+09 6e+09 8e+09 1e+10 −2 0 2 4 6 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 prevTEDavg spreads TED 0 500000 1000000 1500000 −2 0 2 4 6 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 prevTEDavg spreads TED 0.0e+00 5.0e+11 1.0e+12 1.5e+12 2.0e+12 Figure 13: Quantile plots for lognormal,gamma,weibull and generalised gamma when varying 2 covariates. 36