Liquidity Effects of Trading Frequency∗ Roman Gayduk and Sergey Nadtochiy† ‡ § University of Michigan Abstract In this article, we present a discrete time modeling framework, in which the shape and dynamics of a Limit Order Book (LOB) arise endogenously from an equilibrium between multiple market participants (agents). We use the proposed modeling framework to analyze the effects of trading frequency on market liquidity in a very general setting. In particular, we demonstrate the dual effect of high trading frequency. On the one hand, the higher frequency increases market efﬁciency, if the agents choose to provide liquidity in equilibrium. On the other hand, it also makes markets more fragile, in the sense that the agents choose to provide liquidity in equilibrium only if they are market-neutral (i.e., their beliefs satisfy certain martingale property). Even a very small deviation from market-neutrality may cause the agents to stop providing liquidity, if the trading frequency is sufﬁciently high, which represents an endogenous liquidity crisis (aka ﬂash crash) in the market. This framework enables us to provide more insight into how such a liquidity crisis unfolds, connecting it to the so-called adverse selection effect. Key words: liquidity, trading frequency, Limit Order Book, continuum-player games, conditional tails of Itˆo processes. 1 Introduction This paper is concerned with liquidity effects of trading frequency on an auction-style exchange, in which the participating agents can post limit or market orders. On the one hand, higher trading frequency provides more opportunities for the market participants to trade, hence, improving the liquidity of the market and increasing its efﬁciency. On the other hand, higher trading frequency also provides more opportunities for some participants to manipulate the price and disrupt the market liquidity. Such a manipulation creates a new type of risk, which reveals itself in unusually high price deviations, which cannot be explained by changes in the fundamental value of the asset. The most famous example of this phenomenon is the “ﬂash crash” of 2010. This example motivates the need for a comprehensive study of the tradeoff between the liquidity providing role of strategic players and the liquidity risk they generate, and its relation to trading frequency. The collective liquidity of the market is captured by the Limit Order Book (LOB), which contains all the limit buy and sell orders. The goal of the present paper is two-fold. First, we develop a new framework for modeling market microstruc- ture, in which the shape of the LOB, and its dynamics, ariseendogenously from the interactions between the agents. Among the many advantages of such an approach is the possibility of modeling the market reaction to changes in the rules of the exchange: e.g., limited trading frequency, transaction tax, etc. The second, and most important, goal of the present work is to investigate the liquidity effects of trading frequency, using the proposed modeling framework. In particular, the main results of this paper (cf. the discussion in Section 3, as well as Theorems 4.1, 4.2 and Corollary 4.1, in Section 4) describe the dual effect of high trading frequency. On the one hand, if the agents choose to provide liquidity in equilibrium, higher trading frequency decreases the bid-ask spread and makes the expected proﬁts of all market participants converge to the same (fundamental) value, thus, improving the market ∗This version: February 13, 2017. First version August 28, 2015. †Partial support from the NSF grant DMS-1411824 is acknowledged by both authors. ‡We thank the anonymous referees and the Associate Editor for constructive comments that helped us improve the paper signiﬁcantly. §Address the correspondence to Sergey Nadtochiy, Mathematics Department, University of Michigan, 530 Church Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; e-mail: sergeyn@umich.edu. 1 arXiv:1508.07914v4 [q-fin.TR] 9 May 2017 efﬁciency. On the other hand, higher trading frequency also makes the LOB more sensitive to the deviations of the agents’ attitudes from market-neutrality. It is, of course, clear that a strong bullish or bearish signal induces market participants to trade at a higher or lower price. However, the novelty of our observation is in the role that the trading frequency plays in amplifying this effect. Namely, we show that, if the trading frequency is high, even if agents have plenty of inventory, a very small deviation from market-neutrality may cause them to stop providing liquidity, by either withdrawing from the market completely, or by posting limit orders far away from the fundamental price. Such actions cause disproportional deviations in the LOB, which cannot be explained by any fundamental reasons: they are much higher than the trading signal (i.e., the expected change in the fundamental price), and they occur without any shortage of supply or demand for the asset. We refer to such a deviation as an endogenous liquidity crisis, because it is due to the trading mechanism (i.e., the rules by which the market participants interact), rather than any fundamental reasons (note the similarity with the ﬂash crash). Our framework provides insights into how such a liquidity crisis unfolds, connecting it to the so-called adverse selection effect. In particular, Section 3 constructs an equilibrium in which an endogenous liquidity crisis does not occur because of an abnormally large market order, wiping out the liquidity on one side of the LOB, but because the optimal strategies of the agents require them to stop providing liquidity on one side of the LOB. On the mathematical side, our analysis uses the properties of conditional tails of the increments of a general Itˆo process. The main result in that regard, in Lemma 5.2, provides a uniform exponential bound on the conditional tails of the increments of a general It ˆo process. We believe that this result is useful in its own right, and, to the best of our knowledge, it is not available in the existing literature. In recent years, we observed an explosion in the amount of literature devoted to the study of market microstruc- ture. In addition to various empirical studies, a large part of the existing theoretical work focuses on the problem of optimal execution: see, among others, Obizhaeva & Wang (2013), Almgren (2003), Schiedet al. (2010), Gatheral & Schied (2011), Cont et al. (2010), Bayraktar & Ludkovski (2011), Avellaneda & Stoikov (2008), Cvitani ´c & Kirilenko (2010), Predoiu et al. (2011), Gu´eant & Lehalle (2015), Cartea & Jaimungal (2013), Guilbaud & Pham (2013), Stoikov & Waeber (2012), and references therein. In these articles, the dynamics and shape of the LOB are modeled exogenously, or, equivalently, the arrival processes of the limit and market orders are speciﬁed exoge- nously. In particular, none of these articles attempts to explain the shape and dynamics of the LOB, arising directly from the interaction between the market participants. A different approach to the analysis of market microstructure has its roots in the economic literature. For example, Parlour (1998), Foucault (1999), Goettler et al. (2005), Carmona & Webster (n.d.), Lachapelle et al. (2013), Rosu (2009), Du & Zhu (2014), Bressan & Facchi (2013), Bressan & Facchi (2014), Bressan & Wei (2016) consider equilibrium models of market microstructure, and they are more closely related to the present work. However, the models proposed in the aforementioned papers do not aim to represent the mechanics of an auction-style exchange with sufﬁcient precision, and, in particular, they are not well suited for analyzing the liquidity effects of trading frequency, which is the main focus of the present paper. A somewhat related strand of literature focuses on the endogenous formation of LOB in markets with a designated market maker: see e.g., Glosten & Milgrom (1985), Kyle (1985), Easley & O’Hara (1992), Carmona & Webster (2012), Adrian et al. (2016). In these papers, the LOB is not an outcome of a multi-agent equilibrium: instead, it is controlled by a single agent, the market maker. In the present paper, we model the entire LOB as an output of an equilibrium between a large number of agents, each of whom is allowed to both consume and provide liquidity (in particular, we have no designated market maker). Our setting is related to the literature on double auctions (cf. Vayanos (1999), Du & Zhu (2014)), with the crucial difference that the participants of each auction are al- lowed to choose two “asymmetric” types of strategies: market or limit orders. In addition, the present framework assumes that, ex ante, all agents have access to the same information, and, in this sense, it is similar to Parlour (1998), Goettler et al. (2005), Rosu (2009). In particular, the adverse selection effect, herein, does not arise from any a priori information asymmetry between agents, instead, it is caused by the mechanics of the exchange. We formulate the problem as a continuum-player game – this abstraction allows us to obtain computationally tractable results (cf. Aumann (1964), Schmeidler (1973), Carmona (2013) for the concept of a continuum-player game, and Lasry & Lions (2007), Cardaliaguet (2010), Carmona & Delarue (2013), Lacker (2014) for the subclass of mean ﬁeld games). The paper is organized as follows. Subsection 2.1 describes the probabilistic setting, along with the execution rules of the exchange and the resulting state processes of the agents. Subsection 2.2 deﬁnes the equilibrium and introduces the notion of degeneracy of the market (which represents an endogenous liquidity crisis). In Section 3, 2 we construct an equilibrium in a simple model, illustrating how an endogenous liquidity crisis unfolds, and how it is connected to the adverse selection effect. Theorems 4.1, 4.2, and Corollary 4.1, in Section 4, are the main results of the paper: they formalize and generalize the conclusions of Section 3. In Section 5, we prove the key technical results on the (conditional) tails of marginal distributions of It ˆo processes. Sections 6, 7 contain the proofs of the main results. We conclude in Section 8. 2 Modeling framework for a ﬁnite-frequency auction-style exchange 2.1 Mechanics of the exchange We consider an exchange in which trading can only occur at discrete times n = 0, 1,...,N . We assume that the market participants are split into two groups: theexternal investors, who are “impatient”, in the sense that they only submit market orders, and the strategic players, who can submit both market and limit orders, and who are willing to optimize their actions over a given (short) time horizon, in order to get a better execution price.1 In our study, we focus on the strategic players, who are referred to as agents, and we model the behavior of the external investors exogenously, via anexogenous demand. The interpretation of the external investors is clear: these are the investors who either have a longer-term view on the market, or who simply need to buy or sell the asset for reasons other than short-term proﬁts. The strategic players (i.e., agents), on the contrary, are short-term traders, who attempt to maximize their objective at a shorter time horizonN. During every time period [n,n + 1), all the orders coming to the exchange are split intolimit and market orders. The limit orders are collected in the so-calledLimit Order Book (LOB), and the market orders form the demand curve. At time n + 1, the market orders in the demand curve are executed against the limit orders in the LOB. Then, this process is repeated in the next time interval. In particular, during a time period [n,n + 1) (for simplicity, we say “at timen”), an agent is allowed to submit a market order, post a limit buy or sell order, or wait (i.e., do nothing). If a limit order is not executed in a given time period, it costs nothing to cancel or re-position it for the next time period. Notice that our framework does not model the time-priority of limit orders. However, introducing a time-priority would not change the agents’ maximum objective value, as the “tick size” is assumed to be zero (i.e., the set of possible price levels is R), and, hence, an agent can always achieve a priority by posting her order “inﬁnitesimally” above or below a given competing order. Further details on modeling the formation of an LOB and the execution rules are presented below. The demand curves are modeled exogenously by a random ﬁeld D = (Dn(p))p∈R,n=1,...,N on a ﬁltered probability space ( Ω, F = (Fn)N n=0, P ) , such thatF0 is a trivial sigma-algebra, completed w.r.t. P. The random variableD+ n (p) = max(Dn(p), 0) denotes the number of shares of the asset that the external investors and the agents submitting market orders are willing to purchase at or below the price p, accumulated over the time period [n−1,n ), andD− n (p) =− min(Dn(p), 0) denotes the number of shares of the asset that the external investors and the agents submitting market orders are willing to sell at or above the pricep, in the same time period. We assume thatDn(·) is a.s. nonincreasing and measurable w.r.t.Fn⊗B (R). We denote by A a Borel space of beliefs, and, for eachα∈ A, there exists a subjective probability measure Pα on (Ω,FN), which is absolutely continuous with resect to P. We assume that, for anyn = 0,...,N and anyα∈ A, there exists a regular version of the conditional probability Pα givenFn, denoted Pα n.2 We denote the associated conditional expectations by Eα n. We also need to assume that, for anyα∈ A, there exists a modiﬁcation of the family{Pα n}N n=0, which satisﬁes the tower property with respect to P, in the following sense: for anyn≤m and any r.v.ξ, such that Eαξ+ <∞, we have Eα nEα mξ = Eα nξ, P-a.s. There exists such a modiﬁcation, for example, if Pα∼ P. In any market model, for every α, we ﬁx such a mod- iﬁcation of conditional probabilities (up to a set of P-measure zero) and assume that all conditional expectations {Eα n} are taken under this family of measures. TheLimit Order Book (LOB)is given by a pair of adapted processes ν = (ν+ n,ν− n )N n=0, such that everyν+ n andν− n is a ﬁnite sigma-additive random measure on R (w.r.t.Fn⊗B (R)). 1We do not distinguish the “aggressive” limit orders, which are posted at the price level of an opposite limit order, and treat them as market orders. This causes no loss of generality, as the market participants in our setting have a perfect observation of the LOB. 2This assumption holds, for example, if FN is generated by a random element with values in a standard Borel space. 3 Herein,ν+ n corresponds to the cumulative limit sell orders, andν− n corresponds to the cumulative limit buy orders, posted at timen.The bid and ask prices at any timen = 0,...,N are given by the random variables pb n = sup supp(ν− n ), p a n = inf supp(ν+ n ), respectively. Notice that these extended random variables are always well deﬁned but may take inﬁnite values. We deﬁne the state space of an agent as S = R× A, where the ﬁrst component denotes the inventory of an agent, and the second component denotes her beliefs. Every agent in state (s,α ) models the future outcomes using the subjective probability measure Pα. There are inﬁnitely many agents, and their distribution over the state space is given by the empirical distribution processµ = (µn)N n=0, such that every µ is a ﬁnite sigma-additive random measure on S (w.r.t.Fn⊗B (S)). In particular, the total mass of agents in the set S⊂ S at time n is given by µn(S). The inventory level s represents the number of shares per agent , held in state (s,α ). In particular, the total number of shares held by all agents in the set S⊂ S is given by ∫ Ssµn(ds,dα ). The interpretation of this deﬁnition in a ﬁnite-player game is discussed in Remark 2.1 below. We refer the reader to Carmona (2013) for the general concept of a continuum-player game. Remark 2.1. The continuum-player game deﬁned in this section can be related to a ﬁnite-player game as follows. Denote by µ0 the empirical distribution of the agents’ states at a given time. Recall that µ0 is a measure on S = R× A, and assume that it is a ﬁnite linear combination of Dirac measures: µ0 = 1 M ∑M i=1δ(si,αi). In this case, we interpret si as the number of shares per agent held by the agents in the ith group. Let us explain how this notion is related to the actual inventory levels (i.e., the actual numbers of shares held by the agents) in the associated ﬁnite-player game. To this end, consider a collection of M agents, whose states are given by their (actual) inventories and beliefs, (s,α ), with the current states being{(˜si = si/M,αi)}. Deﬁne the “unit mass” of agents to be M. In this ﬁnite-player collection, the mass of agents (measured relative to the unit mass, M) at any state (Ms,α ) is preciselyµ0({(s,α )}), and their total inventory is Msµ0({(s,α )}). The number of shares per agent is, then, deﬁned as the total inventory held by these agents divided by their mass, and it is equal to Ms. Choosing s = ˜si, we conclude that, in the ﬁnite-player collection, the number of shares per agent held by the agents at state (˜si,αi) is given byM ˜si =si, which coincides with our interpretation ofsi in the continuum-player game. It is also easy to show that an equilibrium in the proposed continuum-player game (deﬁned in the next subsection) produces an approximate equilibrium in the associated ﬁnite-player game, when the inventory levels {˜si} are small (cf. Subsection 2.3 in the extended version of this paper, Gayduk & Nadtochiy (2015)) As the parameter α does not change over time, the state process of an agent, denoted (Sn), is an adapted R- valued process, representing her inventory.3 The control of every agent is given by a triplet of adapted processes (p,q,r ) = (pn,qn,rn)N−1 n=0 on (Ω, F), with values in R2×{ 0, 1}. The ﬁrst coordinate, pn, indicates the location of a limit order placed at time n, and qn indicates the size of the order (measured in shares per agent, and with negative values corresponding to buy orders).4 The last coordinate rn shows whether the agent submits a market order (ifrn = 1) or a limit order (ifrn = 0). Assume that an agent posts a limit sell order at a price levelpn. If the demand to buy the asset at this price level,D+ n+1(pn), exceeds the amount of all limit sell orders posted belowpn at timen, then (and only then) the limit sell order of the agent is executed. Market orders of the agents are always executed at the bid or ask prices available at the time when the order is submitted. We interpret an internal market order (i.e., the one submitted by an agent) as the decision of an agent to join the external investors, in the given time period. Summing up the above, we obtain the following dynamics for the state process of an agent, starting with initial inventorys∈ R at timem = 0,...,N − 1: S(p,q,r) m (m,s,ν ) =s, ∆S(p,q,r) n+1 (m,s,ν ) =S(p,q,r) n+1 (m,s,ν )−S(p,q,r) n (m,s,ν ) =−qn1{rn=1} (2.1) − 1{rn=0} ( q+ n 1{D+ n+1(pn)>ν+ n ((−∞,pn))}−q− n 1{D− n+1(pn)>ν− n ((pn,∞))} ) , n =m,...,N − 1. 3Note that, although Pα does not change over time, the conditional distribution of the future demand, as perceived by the agent, changes dynamically, according to the new information received. 4Note each agent is only allowed to place her limit order at a single price level, at any given time. However, this entails no loss of optimality. Indeed, using the Dynamic Programming Principle derived in Appendix A, one can show, by induction, that, in equilibrium, an agent does not beneﬁt from posting multiple limit orders at the same time. As shown in Schmeidler (1973), this is typical for a continuum-player game. 4 The above dynamics represent an optimistic view on the execution by the agents. In particular, they imply that all limit orders at the same price level are executed in full, once the demand reaches them: i.e., each agent believes that her limit order will be executed ﬁrst among all orders at a given price level. In addition, all agents’ market orders are executed at the bid and ask prices: i.e., each agent believes that her market order will be executed ﬁrst, when the demand curve is cleared against the LOB, at the end of a given time period. These assumptions can be partially justiﬁed by the fact that the agents’ orders are inﬁnitesimal: qn is measured in shares per agent, and an individual agent has zero mass. However, if a non-zero mass of agents submit limit orders at the same price level, or execute market orders, at the same time, then, the above state dynamics may violate the market clearing condition: the total size of executed market orders (both in shares and in dollars) may not coincide with the total size of executed limit orders (at least, as viewed by the agents). Nevertheless, this issue is resolved if, at any time, the mass of agents posting limit orders at the same price level or posting market orders is zero. In other words, (ν,p,q,r ) satisfy, P-a.s.: νn is continuous, as a measure on R (i.e., it has no atoms), and rn = 0 . Such an equilibrium is constructed in Section 8 of the extended version of this paper, Gayduk & Nadtochiy (2015). The general deﬁnition of a continuum-player game and its connection to a ﬁnite-player game can be found, e.g., in Carmona (2013) and in the references therein (see also Subsection 2.3 in the extended version of this paper, Gayduk & Nadtochiy (2015)). The modeling framework proposed herein has a close connection to the models of double auctions, in the economic literature (cf. Du & Zhu (2014), Vayanos (1999)). The main difference is in the non-standard design of the auction. Namely, in the proposed setting, the auction participants may choose different styles of trading, i.e., market or limit orders, which generates an ex-post information asymmetry between participants: the limit orders have to be submitted before the demand curve is observed, while the market orders are submitted using complete information about the LOB. This difference is not coincidental – it is, in fact, crucial for a realistic representation of the risks associated with each order type, and it is at the core of the results established herein. A more detailed discussion of the information structure is provided in the next subsection. 2.2 Equilibrium The objective function of an agent, starting at the initial state (s,α )∈ S, at any timem = 0,...,N , and using the control (p,q,r ), is given by theFm-measurable random variable (2.2) J(p,q,r)(m,s,α,ν ) = Eα m [( S(p,q,r) N (m,s,ν ) )+ pb N− ( S(p,q,r) N (m,s,ν ) )− pa N − N−1∑ n=m ( pn1{rn=0} +pa n1{rn=1,qn<0} +pb n1{rn=1,qn>0} ) ∆S(p,q,r) n+1 (m,s,ν ) ] , where we assume that 0·∞ = 0. In the above expression, we assume that, at the ﬁnal time n =N, each agent is forced to liquidate her position at the bid or ask prices available at that time. Alternatively, one can think of it as marking to market the residual inventory, right after the last external market order is executed. Deﬁnition 2.1. For a given LOBν, integerm = 0,...,N −1, and state(s,α )∈ S, the triplet of adapted processes (p,q,r ) is an admissible control if the positive part of the expression inside the expectation in (2.2) has a ﬁnite expectation under Pα. For a given LOBν, an initial condition (m,s,α ), and a triplet of F×B (S)-adapted random ﬁelds (p,q,r ), we identify the latter (whenever it causes no confusion) with stochastic processes (p,q,r ) via: pn =pn ( S(p,q,r) n (m,s,ν ),α ) , qn =qn ( S(p,q,r) n (m,s,ν ),α ) , rn =rn ( S(p,q,r) n (m,s,ν ),α ) , and the state dynamics (2.1), forn =m,...,N . This system determines (p,q,r ) andS(p,q,r) recursively. Deﬁnition 2.2. For a given LOB ν, we call the triplet of progressively measurable random ﬁelds (p,q,r ) an optimal control if, for anym = 0,...,N and any (s,α )∈ S, we have: • (p,q,r ) is admissible, 5 • J(p,q,r)(m,s,α,ν )≥J(p′,q′,r′)(m,s,α,ν ), P-a.s., for any admissible control (p′,q′,r′). In the above, we make the standard simplifying assumptions of continuum-player games: each agent is too small to affect the empirical distribution of cumulative controls (reﬂected in ν) when she changes her control (cf. Carmona (2013)). Note also that our deﬁnition of the optimal control implies that it is time consistent: re-evaluation of the optimality at any future step, using the same terminal criteria, must lead to the same optimal strategy. Next, we discuss the notion of equilibrium in the proposed game. First, we notice that, ifpb N orpa N becomes inﬁnite, the agents with positive or negative inventory may face the objective value of “−∞”, for any control they use. In such a case, their optimal controls may be chosen in an arbitrary way, resulting in unrealistic equilibria. To avoid this, we impose the additional regularity condition onν. Deﬁnition 2.3. A given LOBν is admissible if, for anym = 0,...,N − 1 and anyα∈ A, we have, P-a.s.: Eα m|pa N|∨| pb N|<∞. Let us consider the (stochastic) value function of an agent for a ﬁxed (m,s,α,ν ): (2.3) Vν m(s,α ) = esssupp,q,rJ(p,q,r) (m,s,α,ν ), where the essential supremum is taken underP, over all admissible controls(p,q,r ), andJ(p,q,r) is given by (2.2). Appendix A shows that, for any admissible ν,Vν m(·,α ) has a continuous modiﬁcation under P, which we refer to as the value function of an agent with beliefsα. Using the Dynamic Programming Principle, Appendix A provides an explicit system of recursive equations that characterize optimal strategies and the value function. In particular, the results of Appendix A (cf. Corollary 9.1) yield the following proposition. Proposition 2.1. Assume that, for an admissible LOB ν, there exists an optimal control (ˆp, ˆq, ˆr). Then, for any (s,α )∈ S, the following holds P-a.s., for alln = 0,...,N − 1: Vν n (s,α ) =s+λa n(α)−s−λb n(α), with some adapted processesλa(α) andλb(α), such thatλa N(α) =pb N andλb N(α) =pa N . The values of λa(α) andλb(α) can be interpreted as the expected execution prices of the agents with beliefs α, who are long and short the asset, respectively. Deﬁnition 2.4. Consider an empirical distribution process µ = (µn)N n=0 and a market model, as described in Subsection 2.1. We say that a given LOB process ν and a control (p,q,r ) form an equilibrium, if there exists a Borel set ˜A⊂ A, called the support of the equilibrium, such that: 1. µn ( R× ( A\ ˜A )) = 0, P-a.s., for alln, 2. ν is admissible, and (p,q,r ) is an optimal control forν, on the state space ˜S = R× ˜A, 3. and, for any n = 0,...,N − 1, we have, P-a.s., (2.4) ν+ n ((−∞,x ]) = ∫ ˜S 1{pn(s,α)≤x,rn(s,α)=0}q+ n (s,α )µn(ds,dα ), ∀x∈ R, (2.5) ν− n ((−∞,x ]) = ∫ ˜S 1{pn(s,α)≤x,rn(s,α)=0}q− n (s,α )µn(ds,dα ), ∀x∈ R. Remark 2.2. It follows from Proposition 2.1 that, in equilibrium, it is optimal for an agent with zero initial inven- tory to do nothing. Hence, in equilibrium, roundtrip strategies are impossible. To allow for roundtrip strategies in equilibrium, one can, e.g., introduce an upper bound on|q| or on the total inventory of an agent (as it is done, e.g., in Brunnermeier & Pedersen (2005)). However, we do not believe that such a modiﬁcation would change the qualitative behavior of market liquidity as a function of trading frequency, which is the main focus of the present paper. 6 Notice that, because the optimal controls are required to be time consistent under P, the above deﬁnition, in fact, deﬁnes a sub-game perfect equilibrium . It is also worth mentioning that Deﬁnition 2.4 deﬁnes a partial equilibrium, as the empirical distribution process µ is given exogenously. A more traditional version of Nash equilibrium would requireµ to be determined by the initial distribution and the values of the state processes: (2.6) µn =µ0◦ ( (s,α )↦→ ( S(p,q,r) n (0,s,ν ),α ))−1 , which must hold P-a.s., for all n = 0,...,N , with S(p,q,r) n (0,s,ν ) deﬁned via (2.1), in addition to the other conditions in Deﬁnition 2.4. Nevertheless, we choose not to enforce the condition (2.6) in the deﬁnition of equi- librium, in order to allow new agents to enter the game, which, in effect, amounts to modeling µ exogenously. If one assumes that no new agent arrives to the market, then, the ﬁxed-point condition (2.6) has to be enforced. Note also that our interpretation of the demand curve Dn(·) implies that it consists of both the external (i.e., due external investors) and internal (i.e., due to the agents) market orders. Therefore, it may be reasonable to consider an additional consistency condition for an equilibrium. A part of this condition is to ensure that a non-zero mass of agents submit market buy orders only if the fundamental price rises above the ask price (i.e., only if a market buy order is actually executed), and, similarly, a non-zero mass of agents submit market sell orders only if the funda- mental price falls below the bid price. We assume that the agents’ market orders enter into the demand curve with the highest level of priority: e.g., their market buy orders enter the demand curve at the price level inﬁnitesimally close to, but below, the fundamental price, in order to guarantee that they are the ﬁrst ones to be executed. Thus, another part of the aforementioned consistency condition is to ensure that the absolute value of the demand curve to the left or to the right of the fundamental price is sufﬁciently large to account for all internal market orders. Mathematically, such consistency condition can be formulated as follows: (2.7) db n :=µn ({(s,α ) : qn(s,α )< 0, rn(s,α ) = 1})> 0 ⇒ p0 n+1 >p a n, lim p↑p0 n+1 D+ n+1(p)≥db n, (2.8) da n :=µn ({(s,α ) : qn(s,α )> 0, rn(s,α ) = 1})> 0 ⇒ p0 n+1 <p b n, lim p↓p0 n+1 D− n+1(p)≥da n. The above conditions become redundant if the agents never submit market orders in equilibrium. Section 8 of the extended version of this paper, Gayduk & Nadtochiy (2015), shows how to construct an equilibrium which satisﬁes condition (2.6), and in which the agents never submit market orders (hence, (2.7) and (2.8) are also satisﬁed). However, it is important to emphasize that the main results of the present work (cf. Section 4) provide necessary conditions for all equilibria: for those satisfying the conditions (2.6), (2.7), (2.8) and for the ones that do not. Remark 2.3. Let us comment on the information structure of the game. In the present setting, all agents observe the same information, given by the ﬁltration F. We consider an open-loop Nash equilibrium, in which the agent’s strategy is viewed as an adapted stochastic process (rather than a function of the states and controls of other players), and the deﬁnition of optimality is chosen accordingly. In addition, as µ is adapted to F, each agent has complete information about the present and past states of other agents, and their beliefs. However, as the agents use different (subjective) measures{Pα}, their views on the future values ofµ may be different. Of course, it would be more realistic to assume that the agents do not have complete information about each other’s current states, but this would make the problem signiﬁcantly more complicated. In the present setting, the agents also have complete information about the current location of the fundamental price. In our follow-up paper, Gayduk & Nadtochiy (2016), we relax this assumption, which allows us to develop a more realistic model for the “local” behavior of an individual agent. However, such a relaxation does not seem necessary for the questions analyzed herein. As all agents use the same information, the present article belongs to the strand of literature that attempts to explain microstructure phenomena without information asymmetry (cf. Goettler et al. (2005), Rosu (2009), Parlour (1998), Foucault (1999)). Nevertheless, it is important to mention that information asymmetry arises ex- post, between the market participants submitting market and limit orders. This asymmetry is not due to superior information a priori available to any of the agents. Instead, it stems from the very nature of limit orders, which are “passive” by design (cf. the discussion on the last paragraph of Subsection 2.1). Similar observation is made in Goettler et al. (2005). 7 Next, we need to add another condition to the notion of equilibrium. Notice that equations (2.4)–(2.5) should serve as the ﬁxed-point constraints that enable one to obtain the optimal controls (p,q,r ), along with the LOB ν. However, these equations only hold forn = 0,...,N − 1: indeed, the agents do not need to choose their controls at timen =N, as the game is over and their residual inventory is marked to the bid and ask prices. However, the terminal bid and ask prices are determined by the LOBνN , which, in turn, can be chosen arbitrarily. To avoid such ambiguity, we impose an additional constraint on the equilibria studied herein. First, we introduce the notion of a fundamental price. Deﬁnition 2.5. Assume that P-a.s., for anyn = 1,...,N , there exists a uniquep0 n satisfyingDn ( p0 n ) = 0. Then, the adapted process (p0 n)N n=1 is called the fundamental price process. Whenever the notion of a fundamental price is invoked, we assume that it is well deﬁned. The intuition behind p0 is clear: it is a price level at which the immediate demand is balanced. However, it is important to stress that we do not assume that the asset can be traded at the fundamental price level. Rather,p0 is a feature of the abstract current demand curve, whereas all actual trading happens on the exchange, against the current LOB. This aspect of our setting differs from many other approaches in the literature. Deﬁnition 2.6. Assume that the fundamental price is well deﬁned and denote ξN = p0 N−p0 N−1. Then, an equilibrium with LOBν is linear at terminal crossing (LTC) if (2.9) νN =νN−1◦ (x↦→x +ξN)−1, P-a.s. The above deﬁnition assumes that the terminal LOB νN is obtained from νN−1 by a simple shift, with the size of the shift equal to the increment in the fundamental price. This deﬁnition connects the LOB at the terminal time with the demand process, ruling out many unnatural equilibria. In particular, the question of existence of an equilibrium becomes non-trivial. However, the mere existence of an equilibrium is not the main focus of the present work: the existence results, established herein, are limited to Section 3, which constructs an LTC equilibrium in a speciﬁc Gaussian random walk model (a slightly more general existence result is given in Section 8 of the extended version of this paper, Gayduk & Nadtochiy (2015)). What is central to the present investigation is the observation that the agents may reach an equilibrium in which one side of the LOB becomes empty (as demonstrated by the example of Section 3). We call such LOB, and the associated equilibrium, degenerate. Deﬁnition 2.7. We say that an equilibrium with LOBν is non-degenerate ifν+ n (R)> 0 andν− n (R)> 0, for all n = 0,...,N − 1, P-a.s.. Intuitively, the degeneracy of the LOB refers to a situation where, with positive probability, one side of the LOB disappears from the market: i.e.,ν+ n (R) orν− n (R) becomes zero. Clearly, this happens when the agents who are supposed to provide liquidity choose to post market orders (i.e. consume liquidity) or wait (neither provide nor consume liquidity). Such a degeneracy can be interpreted as the endogenous liquidity crisis – the one that arises purely from the interaction between the agents, and cannot be justiﬁed by any fundamental economic reasons (e.g., the external demand for the asset may still be high, on both sides). Taking an optimistic point of view, we assume that the agents choose a non-degenerate equilibrium, whenever one is available. However, if a non-degenerate equilibrium does not exist, an endogenous liquidity crisis may occur with positive probability. One of the main goals of this paper is to provide insights into the occurrence of an endogenous liquidity crisis and its relation to trading frequency. 3 Example: a Gaussian random walk model In this section, we consider a speciﬁc market model for the external demand D, to construct a non-degenerate LTC equilibrium. More importantly, using this model, we illustrate the liquidity effects of trading frequency. The present example, albeit very simplistic, enables us to identify the important changes in the optimal strategies of the agents (and, hence, to the LOB) as the trading frequency increases. In particular, we demonstrate how the adverse selection effect may be ampliﬁed disproportionally by the high trading frequency and may cause a liquidity crisis. Note that the adverse selection phenomenon, in the present setting, is not a consequence of any ex-ante information 8 asymmetry but is due to the mechanics of the exchange (i.e., the nature of limit orders), which is similar to the phenomena documented in Goettler et al. (2005), Foucault (1999). In the rest of the paper, we show that the conclusions of this section are not due to the particular choice of a model made in the present section and, in fact, persist in a much more general setting. On a complete stochastic basis (Ω, ˜F = ( ˜Ft)t∈[0,T], P), we consider a continuous time process ˜p0: (3.1) ˜p0 t =p0 0 +αt +σWt, p 0 0∈ R, t ∈ [0,T ], whereα∈ R andσ >0 are constants, andW is a Brownian motion. We also consider an arbitrary progressively measurable random ﬁeld ( ˜Dt(p)), s.t., P-a.s., the function ˜Dt(·)− ˜Ds(·) is strictly decreasing and vanishing at zero, for any 0≤s<t ≤T . Finally, we introduce the empirical distribution process(˜µt), with values in the space of ﬁnite sigma-additive measures onS. We partition the time interval[0,T ] intoN subintervals of size∆t =T/N . A discrete time model is obtained by discretizing the continuous time one5 Fn = ˜Fn∆t, p 0 n = ˜p0 n∆t, D n(p) = ( ˜Dn∆t− ˜D(n−1)∆t)(p−p0 n), µ n = ˜µn∆t. In this section, for simplicity, we assume that the set of agents’ beliefs is a singleton: A ={α} and Pα = P. We also assume that (at least, from the agents’ point of view) there are always some long and short agents present in the market: µn ((0,∞)× A),µn ((−∞, 0)× A) > 0, P-a.s., for all n. Clearly, N represents the trading frequency, and the continuous time model represents the “limiting model,” which the agents use as a benchmark, in order to make consistent predictions in the markets with different trading frequencies. We assume that the benchmark model is ﬁxed, and N is allowed to vary. In the remainder of this section, we propose a method for constructing a non-degenerate LTC equilibrium in the above discrete time model. We show that the method succeeds for any (N,σ ) if α = 0 . However, for α⁄= 0 , we demonstrate numerically that the method fails as N becomes large enough. We show why, precisely, the proposed construction fails, providing an economic interpretation of this phenomenon. Moreover, we analyze the market close to the moment when a non-degenerate equilibrium fails to exist and demonstrate that the agents’ behavior at this time follows the pattern typical for an endogenous liquidity crisis. In view of Proposition 2.1, in order to construct a non-degenerate LTC equilibrium, we need to ﬁnd a control (ˆp, ˆq, ˆr), and the expected execution prices(ˆλa, ˆλb), s.t. the value function of an agent with inventorys is given by Vn(s) = s+ˆλa n−s−ˆλb n, and it is attained by the strategy (ˆp, ˆq, ˆr). In addition, we need to ﬁnd a non-degenerate LOBν, s.t. (2.4), (2.5) and (2.9) hold. Our ansatz is as follows νn = ( ha nδpan,hb nδpbn ) , p a n = ˆpa n +p0 n, p b n = ˆpb n +p0 n, −∞< ˆpb n, ˆpa n <∞, ˆpn(s) =pa n1{s>0} +pb n1{s<0}, ˆqn(s) =s, ˆrn(s) = 0, λ a n = ˆλa n +p0 n, λ b n = ˆλb n +p0 n, where δ is the Dirac measure, (ˆpa, ˆpb, ˆλa, ˆλb) are deterministic processes, and ha n = ∫∞ 0 sµn(ds) > 0, hb n =∫ 0 −∞|s|µn(ds) > 0. With such an ansatz, the conditions (2.4), (2.5) are satisﬁed automatically. Thus, we only need to choose ﬁnite deterministic processes(ˆpa, ˆpb, ˆλa, ˆλb) s.t.: ˆpa N = ˆpa N−1, ˆpb N = ˆpb N−1 (so that the equilibrium is LTC) and the associated (ˆp, ˆq, 0) form an optimal control, producing the value function Vn(s) = s+λa n− s−λb n. Appendix A contains necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for characterizing such families (pa,pb,λa,λb). In particular, we deduce from Corollaries 9.1 and 9.2 that (ˆpa N−1, ˆpb N−1, ˆλa N−1, ˆλb N−1) form a suitable family in a single-period case, [N− 1,N ], if they solve the following system: (3.2)    ˆpa N−1∈ arg maxp∈R E ( (p− ˆpb N−1−ξ)1{ξ>p} ) , ˆpb N−1 < 0, ˆpb N−1∈ arg maxp∈R E ( (ˆpa N−1−p +ξ)1{ξ<p} ) , ˆpa N−1 > 0, ˆλa N−1 = ˆpb N−1 +α∆t + E ( (ˆpa N−1− ˆpb N−1−ξ)1{ξ>ˆpa N−1} ) , ˆλb N−1 = ˆpa N−1 +α∆t− E ( (ˆpa N−1− ˆpb N−1 +ξ)1{ξ<ˆpb N−1} ) , ˆpb N−1≤ ˆλa N−1, ˆλb N−1≤ ˆpa N−1, ˆpa N−1≥ ˆpb N−1 +|α|∆t, 5In order to ensure the existence of regular conditional probabilities for the discrete time model, we can, for example, assume that ˜FT is generated by a random element with values in a standard Borel space. 9 whereξ = ∆p0 N ∼N (α∆t,σ 2∆t). Let us comment on the economic meaning of the equations in (3.2). The expectations in the ﬁrst two lines represent the relative expected proﬁt from executing a limit order at time N, at the chosen price level p +p0 N−1, versus marking the inventory to market at time N, at the best price available on the other side of the book: i.e., pb N = ˆpb N−1 +ξ +p0 N−1 or pa N = ˆpa N−1 +ξ +p0 N−1. Notice that a limit order is executed if and only if the fundamental price at time N is above or below the chosen limit order: i.e., if p0 N−1 +ξ > p+p0 N−1 orp0 N−1 +ξ < p+p0 N−1.6 Clearly, it is only optimal for an agent to post a limit order if the relative expected proﬁt is nonnegative, which is the case if and only if ˆpb N−1 < 0 < ˆpa N−1. The third and fourth lines in (3.2) represent the expected execution prices of the agents at time N− 1, assuming they use the controls given by (ˆpa N−1, ˆpb N−1). Each of the right hand sides is a sum of two components: the relative expected proﬁt from posting a limit order and the expected value of marking to market at time N, measured relative to p0 N−1. Let us analyze the inequalities in the last line of (3.2). If the bid price at time N− 1 exceeds the expected execution price of a long agent, i.e., ˆpb N−1 +p0 N−1 > ˆλa N−1 +p0 N−1, then every agent with positive inventory prefers to submit a market order, rather than a limit order, at timeN− 1, which causes the ask side of the LOB to degenerate. Similarly, we establish ˆλb N−1≤ ˆpa N−1. Finally, if α >0 and ˆpa N−1 < ˆpb N−1 +α∆t, an agent may buy the asset using a market order at timeN− 1, at the price ˆpa N−1 +p0 N−1, and sell it at timeN, at the expected price ˆpb N−1 +p0 N−1 +α∆t> ˆpa N−1 +p0 N−1 (a reverse strategy works forα< 0). This strategy can be scaled to generate inﬁnite expected proﬁt and, hence, is excluded by the last inequality in the last line of (3.2). We construct a solution to (3.2) by solving a ﬁxed-point problem given by the ﬁrst two lines of (3.2) and verifying that the desired inequalities hold. 7 We implement this computation in MatLab, and the results can be seen as the right-most points on the graphs in Figure 1. From the numerical solution, we see that, whenever ∆t is small enough, the conditions ˆpb N−1≤ ˆλa N−1 and ˆλb N−1≤ ˆpa N−1 are satisﬁed (cf. the right part of Figure 1). 8 In addition, forα≥ 0, we have 0< E ( ˆpa N−1− ˆpb N−1−ξ|ξ >ˆpa N−1 ) = ˆpa N−1− ˆpb N−1− E ( ξ|ξ >ˆpa N−1 ) ≤ ˆpa N−1− ˆpb N−1−α∆t, which yields the last inequality in (3.2). The case ofα< 0 is treated similarly. Notice that ˆλa N = ˆpb N = ˆpb N−1 and ˆpa N−1 = ˆpa N = ˆλb N . Thus, the single-period equilibrium we have constructed satisﬁes: (3.3) ˆpb n≤ ˆλa n, ˆλb n≤ ˆpa n, ˆλa n+1 < 0, ˆλb n+1 > 0, forn = N− 1. If one of the ﬁrst two inequalities in (3.3) fails, the agents choose to submit market orders, as opposed to limit orders, which leads to degeneracy of the LOB – one side of it disappears. If one of the last two inequalities fails, the execution of a limit order, at any price level, yields a negative relative expected proﬁt for the agents on one side of the book (given by the expectation in the ﬁrst or second line of (3.2)). As a result, it becomes optimal for all such agents to stop posting any limit orders, and the LOB degenerates. The latter is interpreted as the adverse selection effect. For example, if the third inequality in (3.3) fails, then, every long agent believes that, no matter the price at which her limit order is posted, if it is executed in the next time period, her expected execution price at the next time step will be higher than the price at which the limit order is executed. Hence, it suboptimal to post a limit order at all. In a single period [N− 1,N ], by choosing small enough ∆t, we can ensure that the inequalities in (3.3) are satisﬁed. However, it turns out that, as we progress recursively, constructing an equilibrium, we may encounter a time step at which one of the inequalities in (3.3) fails, implying that a non-degenerate LTC equilibrium cannot be constructed for the given time period (at least, using the proposed method). To see this, consider the recursive equations for (ˆpa, ˆλa) (which are chosen to satisfy the conditions of Corollary 9.1, in Appendix A, given our ansatz): (3.4)    ˆpa n∈ arg maxp∈R E (( p− ˆλa n+1−ξ ) 1{ξ>p} ) , ˆλa n = ˆλa n+1 +α∆t + E (( ˆpa n− ˆλa n+1−ξ ) 1{ξ>ˆpan)} ) < 0, 6The execution of limit orders simpliﬁes in the chosen ansatz, because the agents on each side of the book (i.e., long or short) post orders at the same prices. 7In fact, it is not difﬁcult to prove rigorously that, for any (α,σ ), there exists a unique solution to such a system, provided ∆t is small enough. We omit this result for the sake of brevity. 8This is easy to explain intuitively, as the optimal objective values in the ﬁrst two lines of (3.2) are of the formC √ ∆t +αO(∆t). 10 and similarly for (ˆpb, ˆλb). Using the properties of the Gaussian distribution, it is easy to see that, if ˆλa n+1 < 0, we have ˆpa n > 0. Similar conclusion holds for (ˆλb, ˆpb). Thus, if ˆλa k < 0 < ˆλb k, for k = n + 1,...,N , our method allows us to construct a non-degenerate LTC equilibrium on the time interval [n,N ], with ˆpb < 0 < ˆpa. Such a construction always succeeds if the agents are market-neutral: i.e., α = 0. Indeed, in this case, assuming ˆλa n+1 < 0< ˆλb n+1, we have ˆpb n < 0< ˆpa n and ˆλa n+1 + ( E (( ˆpa n− ˆλa n+1−ξ ) 1{ξ>ˆpan)} ))+ = E ( ˆλa n+11{ξ>ˆpan)} ) + E ( (ˆpa n−ξ) 1{ξ>ˆpan)} ) < 0. Hence, ˆλa n < 0, and, similarly, we deduce thatˆλb n > 0. By induction, we obtain a non-degenerate LTC equilibrium on [0,N ], for any (N,σ ), as long as α = 0 . Corollary 4.1 shows that, as N → ∞, the processes (ˆλa, ˆλb) converge to zero, which means that the expected execution prices converge to the fundamental price. The latter is interpreted as market efﬁciency in the high-frequency trading regime: any market participant expects to buy or sell the asset at the fundamental price. The left hand side of Figure 2 shows that the bid and ask prices also converge to the fundamental price if α = 0. This can be interpreted as a positive liquidity effect of increasing the trading frequency. However, the situation is quite different ifα⁄= 0. Assume, for example, that α >0. Then, the second line of (3.4) implies that ˆλa increases by, at least, α∆t at each step of the (backward) recursion. Recall that the number of steps is N = T/∆t, hence, ˆλa 0≥ ˆλa N +αT . If|ˆλa N| is small (which is typically the case if N is large), then, we may obtain ˆλa n+1≥ 0, at some time n, which violates the third inequality in (3.3), or, equivalently, implies that the objective in the ﬁrst line of (3.4) is strictly negative for all p. The latter implies that it is suboptimal for the agents with positive inventory to post limit orders, and the proposed method fails to produce a non-degenerate LTC equilibrium in the interval [n,N ]. Figure 1 shows that this does, indeed, occur. Figures 1 and 2 also show that, for a given (ﬁnite) frequencyN, if|α| is small enough, a non-degenerate equilibrium may still be constructed. Nevertheless, for any|α|⁄ = 0 , however small it is, there exists a large enough N, s.t. the non-degenerate LTC equilibrium fails to exist (at least, within the class deﬁned by the proposed method). This is illustrated in Figure 2. It is important to provide an economic interpretation of why such degeneracy occurs. A careful examination of Figure 1 reveals that, around the time when ˆλa becomes nonnegative, the ask price ˆpa explodes. This means that the agents who want to sell the asset are only willing to sell it at a very high price. Notice also that this price is several magnitudes larger than the expected change in the fundamental price (represented by the black dashed line in the left hand side of Figure 1). Hence, such a behavior cannot be justiﬁed by the behavior of the fundamental. Indeed, this is precisely what is called anendogenous liquidity crisis. So, what causes such a liquidity crisis? Recall that there are two potential reasons for the market to degenerate: agents may choose to submit market orders (if ˆpb n > ˆλa n or ˆpa n < ˆλb n), or they may choose to wait and do nothing (if ˆλa n+1≥ 0 or ˆλb n+1≤ 0). The right hand side of Figure 1 shows that the degeneracy is caused by the second scenario. This means that the naive explanation of an endogenous liquidity crisis, based on the claim that, in a bullish market, those who need to buy the asset will submit market orders wiping out liquidity on the sell side of the book, is wrong. Instead, if the agents on the sell side of the book have the same beliefs, they will increase the ask price so that it is no longer proﬁtable for the agents who want to buy the asset to submit market buy orders. In fact, the ask price may increase disproportionally to the expected change in the fundamental price (i.e., the signal), and this is what causes an endogenous liquidity crisis. The size of the resulting change in the bid or ask price depends not only on the signal, but also on the trading frequency, which demonstrates thenegative liquidity effect of increasing the trading frequency: it fragilizes the market with respect to deviations of the agents from market-neutrality. The latter, in turn, is explained by the fact that higher trading frequency exacerbates the adverse selection effect. To see this, consider, e.g., an agent who is trying to sell one share of the asset. Increasing the trading frequency increases the expected execution value of this agent, bringing it closer to the fundamental price: this corresponds to ˆλa approaching zero (from below). Assume that the agent posts a limit sell order at a price levelp. If this order is executed in the next period, then, the agent receives p, but, for this to happen, the fundamental price value at the next time step, p0 n+1, has to be above p. On the other hand, the expected execution price of the agent at the next time step is p0 n+1 + ˆλa n+1. Thus, the expected relative proﬁt, given the execution of her limit order, is En(p−p0 n+1− ˆλa n+1|p0 n+1 > p). The latter expression cannot be positive, unless ˆλa n+1 < 0 and|ˆλa n+1| is sufﬁciently large. Therefore, if|ˆλa n+1| is small relative to En(p0 n+1−p|p0 n+1 > p), the agent is reluctant to post a limit order at the price level p. Hence, 11 p needs to be sufﬁciently large, to ensure that En(p0 n+1−p|p0 n+1 > p) is smaller than|ˆλa n+1| (in the Gaussian model of this section, the latter expectation vanishes as p→∞ ) – and the extent to which p needs to increase determines the effect of adverse selection. It turns out that, if the agents are market-neutral (i.e. α = 0), as the frequencyN increases, the quantity En(p0 n+1−p|p0 n+1 >p ), for any ﬁxed p, converges to zero at the same rate as|ˆλa n+1|, hence, the above adverse selection effect does not get ampliﬁed. On the contrary, if the agents are not market-neutral, ˆλa n+1 reaches zero at some high enough (but ﬁnite) frequency, while En(p0 n+1−p|p0 n+1 > p) remains strictly positive, for any ﬁnite p, which produces an “inﬁnite” adverse selection effect and causes the market to degenerate. Of course, so far, these conclusions are based on a very speciﬁc example and on a particular method of constructing an equilibrium. The next section shows that they remain valid in any model (with, possibly, heterogeneous beliefs) in which the fundamental price is given by an Itˆo process. It is worth mentioning that a similar adverse selection effect arises in Goettler et al. (2005), and it is referred to as the “winner’s curse” in Foucault (1999). However, the latter papers do not investigate the nature of this phenomenon and focus on other questions instead. In the literature on double auctions (cf. Du & Zhu (2014), Vayanos (1999)), a similar effect arises when the auction participants choose to decrease their trading activity in a given auction, because they expect many more opportunities to trade in the future. The latter is similar to the agents choosing to forgo limit orders and wait, in the present example. 4 Main results In this section, we generalize the previous conclusions, so that they hold in a general model and for any equilibrium. As before, we begin with the “limiting” continuous time model. Consider a terminal time horizon T > 0 and a complete stochastic basis (Ω, ˜F = ( ˜Ft)t∈[0,T], P), with a Brownian motion W on it. 9 We deﬁne the adapted process ˜p0 as a continuous modiﬁcation of (4.1) ˜p0 t =p0 0 + ∫ t 0 σsdWs, p 0 0∈ R, whereσ is a progressively measurable locally square integrable process. Assumption 4.1. There exists a constantC >1, such that, 1/C≤σt≤C, for allt∈ [0,T ], P-a.s.. Consider a Borel set of beliefs A and the associated family of measures {Pα}α∈A on (Ω, ˜FT ), absolutely continuous with respect to P. Then, for anyα∈ A, we have ˜p0 t =p0 0 +Aα t + ∫ t 0 σsdWα s , p 0 0∈ R, Pα-a.s., ∀t∈ [0,T ], whereWα is a Brownian motion underPα, andAα is a process of ﬁnite variation. We assume thatAα is absolutely continuous: i.e., for anyα∈ A, there exists a locally integrable processµα, such that Aα t = ∫ t 0 µα sds, Pα-a.s., ∀t∈ [0,T ]. Assumption 4.2. For anyα∈ A, the process µα is P-a.s. right-continuous, and there exists a constant C > 0, such that|µα t|≤ C, for allt∈ [0,T ], P-a.s.. Thus, we can rewrite the dynamics of ˜p0, under each Pα, as follows: Pα-a.s., the following holds for all t∈ [0,T ] (4.2) ˜p0 t =p0 0 + ∫ t 0 µα sds + ∫ t 0 σsdWα s , p 0 0∈ R. In addition, we modify the above stochastic integral on a set of Pα-measure zero, so that (4.2) holds for all (t,ω ). In what follows, we often need to analyze the future dynamics of˜p0 under Pα, conditional on ˜Ft, for various (t,α ) simultaneously. This is why we need the following joint regularity assumption. 9In order to ensure the existence of regular conditional probabilities for the discrete time model, we can, for example, assume that ˜FT is generated by a random element with values in a standard Borel space. 12 Assumption 4.3. There exists a modiﬁcation of regular conditional probabilities { ˜Pα t = Pα ( ·| ˜Ft )} t∈[0,T],α∈A, such that it satisﬁes the tower property with respect to P (as described in Section 2.1). Assumption 4.3 is satisﬁed, for example, if Pα∼ P, for allα∈ A, or if the set A is countable. Throughout the rest of the paper, ˜Pα t refers to a member of the family appearing in Assumption 4.3. All conditional expectations ˜Eα t are taken under such ˜Pα t . The main results of this section require additional continuity assumptions onσ andµα. The following assump- tion can be viewed as a stronger version of L2-continuity ofσ. Assumption 4.4. There exists a functionε(·)≥ 0, such thatε(∆t)→ 0, as ∆t→ 0, and, P-a.s., ˜Pα t ( Eα ( (σs∨τ−στ)2|Fτ ) ≤ε(∆t) ) = 1 holds for allt∈ [0,T − ∆t], alls∈ [t,t + ∆t], all stopping timest≤τ≤s, and allα∈ A. The above assumption is satisﬁed, for example, if σ is an It ˆo process with bounded drift and diffusion coefﬁ- cients. Next, we state a continuity assumption on the drift, which can be interpreted as a uniform right-continuity in probability of the martingale ˜Eα tµα s . Assumption 4.5. For anyα∈ A and any t∈ [0,T ), there exists a deterministic function ε(·)≥ 0, such that ε(∆t)→ 0, as ∆t→ 0, and, Pα-a.s., ˜Pα t′ (⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐ ∫ T t ( ˜Eα t′′µα s− ˜Eα t′µα s ) ds ⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐≥ε(∆t) ) ≤ε(∆t) holds for allt≤t′≤t′′≤t + ∆t≤T . Notice that Assumptions 4.3, 4.4, and 4.5 are not quite standard. Therefore, below, we describe a more speciﬁc (although, still, rather general) diffusion-based framework, in which the Assumptions 4.1–4.5 reduce to standard regularity conditions on the diffusion coefﬁcients, and are easily veriﬁed. To this end, consider a model in which µα t = ¯µα(t,Yt),σt = ¯σ(t,Yt), and, under P, the processY is a diffusion taking values in Rd dYt = Γ(t,Yt)dt + Σ(t,Yt)d ¯Bt, where Γ : [0,T ]× Rd→ Rd, Σ = (Σi,j) is a mapping on [0,T ]× Rd with values in the space ofd×m matrices, and ¯B is m-dimensional Brownian motion under P (on the original stochastic basis). We assume that Γ and Σ possess enough regularity to conclude that Y is a strongly Markov process. Notice that Assumptions 4.1 and 4.2 reduce to the upper and lower bounds on the functions ¯µα and ¯σ. Assumption 4.3 is satisﬁed if we assume that Pα∼ P, for allα∈ A. Let us further assume that the Radon-Nikodym derivative of each measure is in Girsanov form: dPα dP = exp ( −1 2 ∫ t 0 ‖γα(s,Ys)‖2ds + ∫ t 0 γα(s,Ys)d ¯Bs ) , with an Rd-valued function γα, for each α∈ A. Let us assume that all entries of Γ, γα and Σ are absolutely bounded by a constant (uniformly overα∈ A). Assuming, in addition, that ¯σ is globally Lipschitz, we easily verify Assumption 4.4. In order to verify Assumption 4.5, we assume that the quadratic form generated by A(t,y ) := Σ(t,y )ΣT (t,y ) is bounded away from zero, uniformly over all (t,y ), and that the entries of Γ, γα and Σ are continuously differentiable with absolutely bounded derivatives (uniformly overα∈ A). Then, the Feynman-Kac formula implies that, for anyt≤s, ˜Eα tµα s =us,α(t,Yt), 13 whereus,α is the unique solution to the associated partial differential equation (PDE) ∂tus,α + d∑ i=1 Γα,i∂yius,α + 1 2 d∑ i,j=1 Ai,j∂2 yiyjus,α = 0, (t,y )∈ (0,s )× Rd, u s,α(s,y ) = ¯µα(s,y ), and Γα = Γ + Σγα. Assume that, for each s∈ [0,T ], the function ¯µα(s,·) is continuously differentiable with absolutely bounded derivatives, uniformly over all (s,α ). Then, the standard Gaussian estimates for derivatives of the fundamental solution to the above PDE (cf. Theorem 9.4.2 in Friedman (1964)) imply that every ∂yius,α is absolutely bounded, uniformly over all (s,α ). Then, It ˆo’s formula and Itˆo’s isometry yield, for allt′≤ t′′ and s≥t′: ˜Eα t′ ( ˜Eα t′′µα s− ˜Eα t′µα s )2 = m∑ j=1 ∫ t′′∧s t′ ˜Eα t′ ( d∑ i=1 ∂yius,α(v,Yv)Σi,j(v,Yv) )2 dv≤C1(t′′∧s− t′), with some constant C1 > 0. The above estimate and Jensen’s inequality imply the statement of Assumption 4.5 and complete the description of the diffusion-based setting. As in Section 3, we also consider a progressively measurable random ﬁeld ˜D, s.t. P-a.s. the function ˜Dt(·)− ˜Ds(·) is strictly decreasing and vanishing at zero, for any 0≤ s < t≤ T . We assume that the demand curve, ˜Dt(·)− ˜Ds(·), cannot be “too ﬂat”. Assumption 4.6. There existsε >0, s.t., for any 0≤t−ε≤s < t≤T , there exists a ˜Fs⊗B (R)-measurable random functionκs(·), s.t., P-a.s.,κs(·) is strictly decreasing and ⏐⏐⏐ ˜Dt(p)− ˜Ds(p) ⏐⏐⏐≥|κs(p)|, for allp∈ R. Finally, we introduce the empirical distribution process (˜µt), with values in the space of ﬁnite sigma-additive measures on S. The next assumption states that every ˜µt is dominated by a deterministic measure. Assumption 4.7. For anyt∈ [0,T ], there exists a ﬁnite sigma-additive measure µ0 t on (S,B (S)), s.t., P-a.s., ˜µt is absolutely continuous w.r.t.µ0 t . We partition the time interval [0,T ] intoN subintervals of size ∆t =T/N . A discrete time model is obtained by discretizing the continuous time one Fn = ˜Fn∆t, p 0 n = ˜p0 n∆t, D n(p) = ( ˜Dn∆t− ˜D(n−1)∆t)(p−p0 n), µ n = ˜µn∆t. Before we present the main results, let us comment on the above assumptions. These assumptions are important from a technical point of view, however, some of them have economic interpretation that may provide (partial) intuitive explanations of the results that follow. In particular, Assumption 4.1 ensures that the fundamental price remains “noisy,” which implies that an agent can execute a limit order very quickly by posting it close to the present value ofp0, if there are no other orders posted there. In combination with Assumption 4.6, the latter implies that, when the frequency,N, is high, an agent has a lot of opportunities to execute her limit order at a price close to the fundamental price (at least, if no other orders are posted too close to the fundamental price). Intuitively, this means that the agent’s execution value should improve as the frequency increases. Assumption 4.5 ensures that, if an agent has a signal about the direction of the fundamental price, this signal is persistent – i.e., it is continuous in the appropriate sense. When the trading frequencyN is large, such persistency means that an agent has a large number of opportunities to exploit the signal, implying that she is in no rush to have her order executed immediately. The main results of this work, presented below, along with their proofs, conﬁrm that these heuristic conclusions are, indeed, correct. As mentioned in the preceding sections, our main goal is to analyze the liquidity effects of increasing the trading frequency. Therefore, we ﬁx a limiting continuous time model, and consider a sequence of discrete time models, obtained from the limiting one as described above, for N →∞ . This can be interpreted as observing the same population of agents, each of whom has a ﬁxed continuous time model for future demand, in various exchanges that allow for different trading frequencies. We begin with the following theorem, which shows that, if every market model in a given sequence admits a non-degenerate equilibrium, then, the terminal bid and ask prices converge to the fundamental price, as the trading frequency goes to inﬁnity. 14 Theorem 4.1. Let Assumptions 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.6, 4.7 hold. Consider a family of uniform partitions of a given time interval [0,T ], with diameters{∆t =T/N >0} and with the associated family of discrete time models, and denote the associated fundamental price process byp0,∆t. Assume that every such model admits a non-degenerate LTC equilibrium, and denote the associated bid and ask prices by pb,∆t andpa,∆t respectively. Then, there exists a deterministic function ε(·), s.t. ε(∆t)→ 0, as ∆t→ 0, and, for all small enough ∆t >0, the following holds P-a.s.: ⏐⏐⏐pa,∆t N −p0,∆t N ⏐⏐⏐ + ⏐⏐⏐pb,∆t N −p0,∆t N ⏐⏐⏐≤ε(∆t) The above theorem has a useful corollary, which can be interpreted as follows:if the market does not degenerate as the frequency increases, then, such an increase improves market efﬁciency. Here, we understand the “improving efﬁciency” in the sense that the expected execution price (i.e., the price per share that an agent expects to receive or pay by the end of the game) of every agent converges to the fundamental price. Corollary 4.1. Under the assumptions of Theorem 4.1, denote the support of every equilibrium by ˜A∆t and the associated expected execution prices byλa,∆t andλb,∆t. Then, there exists a deterministic functionε(·), such that ε(∆t)→ 0, as ∆t→ 0, and, P-a.s., sup n=0,...,N,α∈˜A∆t (⏐⏐λa,∆t n (α)−p0,∆t n ⏐⏐ + ⏐⏐λb,∆t n (α)−p0,∆t n ⏐⏐) ≤ε(∆t), for all small enough ∆t> 0. Proof: Denote Eα n = ˜Eα n∆t. It follows from Corollary 9.1, in Appendix A, and the deﬁnition of LTC equilibrium thatλa,∆t N (α) = pb,∆t N and λb,∆t N (α) = pa,∆t N . It also follows from Corollary 9.1 (or, more generally, from the deﬁnition of a value function) that λa,∆t(α) is a supermartingale, and λb,∆t(α) is a submartingale, under Pα. Thus, we have: λa,∆t n (α)≥ Eα npb,∆t N and λb,∆t n (α)≤ Eα npa,∆t N . On the other hand, notice that we must have: λa,∆t n (α)≤ Eα npa,∆t N andλb,∆t n (α)≥ Eα npb,∆t N . Assume, for example, that λa,∆t n (α) > Eα npa,∆t N on the event Ω′ of positive Pα-probability. Consider an agent at state (0,α ), who follows the optimal strategy of an agent at state (1,α ), starting from time n and onward, on the event Ω′ (otherwise, she does not do anything). It is easy to see that the objective value of this strategy is Eα ( 1Ω′ ( λa,∆t n (α)− Eα npa,∆t N )) > 0, which contradicts Corollary 9.1. The second inequality is shown similarly. Thus, we conclude that, for any n = 0,...,N − 1, bothλa,∆ n (α) andλb,∆ n (α) belong to the interval [ Eα npb,∆t N , Eα npa,∆t N ] , which, in turn, converges to zero, as ∆t→ 0, due to the deterministic bounds obtained in the proof of Proposition 4.1. The results of Theorem 4.1 and Corollary 4.1 can be viewed as a speciﬁc case of a more general observation: markets become more efﬁcient as the frictions become smaller. In the present setting, the limited trading frequency is viewed as friction, and the market efﬁciency is measured by the difference between the bid and ask prices, or between the expected execution prices. Many more instances of analogous results can be found in the literature, depending on the choice of a friction type. For example, the markets become efﬁcient in Glosten & Milgrom (1985) and Kyle (1985) as the number of insiders vanishes. Similarly, the markets become efﬁcient in Du & Zhu (2014) as the trading frequency increases and the size of private signals vanishes. It is also mentioned in Brunnermeier & Pedersen (2005) that the market would become efﬁcient if there was no restriction on the size of agents’ inventories therein. The above results demonstrate the positive role of high trading frequency. However, they are based on the assumption that the market does not degenerate as frequency increases. In the context of Section 3, we saw that the markets do not degenerate only if the agents are market-neutral (i.e. α = 0). If this condition is violated and the frequencyN is sufﬁciently high, the market does not admit any non-degenerate equilibrium (i.e., there exists no safe regime, in which the liquidity crisis would never occur). It turns out that this conclusion still holds in the general setting considered herein. 15 Theorem 4.2. Let Assumptions 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7 hold. Consider a family of uniform partitions of a given time interval [0,T ], with diameters{∆t =T/N >0}, containing arbitrarily small ∆t, and with the associated family of discrete time models. Assume that every such model admits a non-degenerate LTC equilibrium, with the same support ˜A. Then, for allα∈ ˜A, we have: ˜p0 is a martingale under Pα. The above theorem shows that the market degenerates even if the signal µα is very small (but non-zero), provided the trading frequencyN is large enough. Therefore, as discussed at the end of Section 3, such degeneracy cannot be attributed to any fundamental reasons, and we refer to it as theendogenous liquidity crisis. Let us provide an intuitive (heuristic) argument for why the statement of Theorem 4.2 holds. Assume, ﬁrst, that all long agents (i.e., those having positive inventory) are bullish about the asset (i.e., have a positive drift µα). Then, similar to Section 3, the higher trading frequency ampliﬁes the adverse selection effect, forcing the long agents to withdraw liquidity from the market (i.e., they prefer to do nothing and wait for a higher fundamental price level). Note that, in the present setting, the agents may have different beliefs, the LOB may have a complicated shape and dynamics, and the expected execution prices are no longer deterministic. All this makes it difﬁcult to provide a simple description of how the high frequency ampliﬁes the adverse selection. Nevertheless, the general analysis of this case is still based on the idea discussed at the end of Section 3: it has to do with how fast˜Eα n∆t(p0 n+1−p|p0 n+1 >p ) vanishes (as the frequency increases), relative to the rate at which the expected execution prices approach the fundamental price. Thus, to avoid market degeneracy, there must be a non-zero mass of long agents who are market-neutral or bearish. As the trading frequency grows, these agents will post their limit orders at lower levels. Next, assume that there exists a bullish agent (long, short, or with zero inventory). Then, at a sufﬁciently high trading frequency, the agent’s expected value of a long position in a single share of the asset will exceed the ask prices posted by the market-neutral and bearish long agents. In this case, the bullish agent prefers to buy more shares at the posted ask price, in order to sell them later. As the agents are small and their objectives are linear, the bullish agent can scale up her strategy to generate inﬁnite expected proﬁts. This contradicts the deﬁnition of optimality and implies that an equilibrium fails to exist. Thus, all agents have to be either market-neutral or bearish. Applying a symmetric argument, we conclude that all agents must be market-neutral.10 A rigorous formulation of the above arguments, which constitutes the proof of Theorem 4.2, is given in Section 7. It is worth mentioning that the possible degeneracy of the LOB is also documented in Glosten & Milgrom (1985), and is referred to as a “market shut down”. The setting used in the latter paper is very different: it analyzes a quote-driven exchange (i.e., the one with a designated market maker) and assumes the existence of insiders with superior information. Nevertheless, it is possible to draw a parallel with the LOB degeneracy in the present setting. Namely, the degeneracy in Glosten & Milgrom (1985) occurs when the number of insiders increases, which implies that the signal, generated by the insiders’ trading, becomes sufﬁciently large. The latter is similar to the deviation from martingality of the fundamental price in the present setting. However, an increase in the number of insiders in Glosten & Milgrom (1985) also implies an increase in frictions (since the insiders can be interpreted as friction in Glosten & Milgrom (1985)). Theorem 4.2, on the other hand, states that a market degeneracy will occur when the frictions are sufﬁciently small. Perhaps, this dual role of the number of insiders did not allow for a detailed analysis of market shut downs in Glosten & Milgrom (1985). Many other models of market microstructure (cf. Goettler et al. (2005), Rosu (2009), Parlour (1998), Foucault (1999), Du & Zhu (2014)) are not well suited for the analysis of market degeneracy, either because the agents in these models pursue “one-shot” strategies (i.e., they cannot choose to wait and post a limit order later) or because the fundamental price (or its analogue) is restricted to be a martingale. 5 Conditional tails of the marginal distributions of It ˆo processes As follows from the discussion in the preceding sections, in order to prove the main results of the paper, we need to investigate the properties of marginal distributions of the fundamental price˜p0 (more precisely, the distributions of its increments). In order to prove Theorem 4.1, we need to show that the difference between the fundamental price and the bid or ask prices converges to zero, as the frequencyN increases to inﬁnity. It turns out that, for this 10This argument, along with the fact that Deﬁnition 2.2 requires an optimal control to be optimal for allα, explains why the statement of Theorem 4.2 holds for all, as opposed toµn-a.e.,α ∈ ˜A. 16 purpose, it sufﬁces to show that the distribution of a normalized increment of ˜p0 converges to the standard normal distribution. The following lemma summarizes these results. It is rather simple, but technical, hence, its proof is postponed to Appendix B. In order to formulate the result (and to facilitate the derivations in subsequent sections), we introduce addiitonal notation. For notational convenience, we drop the superscript ∆t for some variables (we only emphasize this dependence when it is important). For any market model on the time interval[0,T ], associated with a uniform partition with diameter ∆t =T/N >0, and having a fundamental price processp0, we deﬁne (5.1) ξn =p0 n−p0 n−1 = ˜p0 tn− ˜p0 tn−1, Eα n = ˜Eα tn, Pα n = ˜Pα tn, t n =n∆t, n = 1,...,NT/ ∆t. We denote by η0 a standard normal random variable (on a, possibly, extended probability space), which is inde- pendent ofFN under every Pα. Lemma 5.1. Let Assumptions 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4 hold. Then, there exists a function ε(·)≥ 0, s.t. ε(∆t)→ 0, as ∆t→ 0, and the following holds P-a.s., for allp∈ R, allα∈ A, and alln = 1,...,N , (i) (|p|∨ 1) ⏐⏐⏐Pα n−1 ( ξn√ ∆t >p ) − Pα n−1 ( σtn−1η0 >p )⏐⏐⏐≤ε(∆t), (ii) ⏐⏐⏐Eα n−1 ( ξn√ ∆t 1{ξn/ √ ∆t>p} ) − Eα n−1 ( σtn−1η01{σtn−1η0>p} )⏐⏐⏐≤ε(∆t). In addition, the above estimates hold if we replace (ξn,η 0,p ) by (−ξn,−η0,−p). In order to prove Theorem 4.2 we need to compare the rates at which the conditional expectations Eα n(p0 n+1− p|p0 n+1 > p) vanish (as the frequency N goes to inﬁnity) to the rate at which the expected execution prices converge to the fundamental price. This requires a more delicate analysis – in particular, the mere proximity of the distribution of a (normalized) fundamental price increment to the Gaussian distribution is no longer sufﬁcient. In fact, what we need is a precise uniform estimate of the conditional tail of the distribution of a fundamental price increment. The desired property is formulated in the following lemma, which, we believe, is valuable in its own right. This result enables us to estimate the tails of the conditional marginal distribution of an It ˆo processX uniformly by an exponential. To the best of our knowledge, this result is new. The main difﬁculties in establishing the desired estimates are: (a) the fact that we estimate the conditional, as opposed to the regular, tail, and (b) the fact that the estimates need to be uniform over the values of the argument. Note that, even in the case of a diffusion processX, the classical Gaussian-type bounds for the tails of the marginal distributions of X are not sufﬁcient to establish the desired estimates. The reason is that, in general, the Gaussian estimates of the regular tails from above and from below have different orders of decay, for the large values of the argument, which makes them useless for estimating the conditional tail (which is a ratio of two regular tails). Lemma 5.2. Consider the following continuous semimartingale on a stochastic basis (ˆΩ, ( ˆFt)t∈[0,1], ˆP): Xt = ∫ t 0 ˆµudu + ∫ t 0 ˆσudBu, t ∈ [0, 1], whereB is a Brownian motion (with respect to the given stochastic basis), ˆµ and ˆσ are progressively measurable processes, such that the above integrals are well deﬁned. Assume that, for any stopping timeτ with values in [0, 1], c≤| ˆστ|≤ C holds a.s. with some constantsc,C > 0. Then, there existsε> 0, depending only on (c,C ), s.t., if ˆµ2 τ≤ε, ˆE ( (ˆσs∨τ− ˆστ)2| ˆFτ ) ≤ε a.s., for alls∈ [0, 1] and all stopping timeτ, with values in [0, 1], then, for anyc1 > 0, there existsC1 > 0, depending only on (c,C,ε,c 1), s.t. the following holds: ˆP(X1 >x +z|X1 >x )≤C1e−c1z, ∀x,z≥ 0. Proof: In the course of this proof, we will use the shorthand notation, ˆEτ and ˆPτ , to denote the conditional expectation and the conditional probability w.r.t ˆFτ . We also denote At = ∫ t 0 ˆµudu, G t = ∫ t 0 ˆσudBu. 17 For anyx≥ 0, let us introduceτx = 1∧ inf{t∈ [0, 1] : Xt =x}. Then ˆP(X1 >x +z)≤ ˆP( sup t∈[0,1] Xt >x +z) = ˆE ( 1{τx<1}ˆPτx ( sup s∈[τx,1] (Xs−x)>z )) Notice that, on{τx≤s}, we have: Xs−x =As∨τx−Aτx +Gs∨τx−Gτx. In addition, the process (Y )s∈[0,1], withYs =As∨τx−Aτx, is adapted to the ﬁltration( ˆFτx∨s), while the process(Z)s∈[0,1], withZs =Gs∨τx−Gτx, is a martingale with respect to it. Next, on{τx < 1}, we have: ˆPτx ( sup s∈[τx,1] (Xs−x)>z ) = ˆPτx ( sup s∈[0,1] (Ys +Zs)>z ) ≤ ˆPτx ( sup s∈[0,1] exp ( c1Zs− 1 2c2 1⟨Z⟩s ) > exp ( c1z−c1 √ε− 1 2c2 1C2 )) , where we used the fact that ⟨Z⟩s≤⟨ X⟩1≤ C2, for all s∈ [0, 1]. Using the Novikov’s condition, it is easy to check that Ms = exp ( c1Zs− 1 2c2 1⟨Z⟩s ) , s ∈ [0, 1], is a true martingale, and, hence, we can apply the Doob’s martingale inequality to obtain, on{τx < 1}: ˆPτx ( sup s∈[0,1] exp ( c1Zs− 1 2c2 1⟨Z⟩s ) > exp ( c1z−c1 √ε− 1 2c2 1C2 )) ≤ exp ( −c1z +c1 √ε + 1 2c2 1C2 ) . Collecting the above inequalities, we obtain (5.2) ˆP(X1 >x +z)≤ ˆP( sup t∈[0,1] Xt >x +z)≤C2(ε)e−c1zˆP(τx < 1) =C2(ε)e−c1zˆP( sup t∈[0,1] Xt >x ). The next step is to estimate the distribution tails of a running maximum via the tails of the distribution of X1. To do this, we proceed as before: (5.3) ˆP(X1 >x ) = ˆE ( 1{τx<1}ˆPτx (Y1 +Z1 > 0) ) , withY andZ deﬁned above. Notice that, on{τx < 1}, ˆPτx (Y1 +Z1 > 0) = ˆPτx ( ˆστx B1−Bτx√1−τx + 1√1−τx ∫ 1 τx ˆµudu + 1√1−τx ∫ 1 0 (ˆσu∨τx− ˆστx)dBx u > 0 ) , whereBx s =Bs∨τx is a continuous square-integrable martingale with respect to ( ˆFs∨τx). Denote Rs = ∫ s 0 (ˆσu∨τx− ˆστx)dBx u, s ∈ [0, 1], and notice that it is a square-integrable martingale with respect to ( ˆFs∨τx). Then, on{τx < 1} (possibly, without a set of measure zero), we have: ˆEτx ( 1√1−τx R1 )2 = 1 1−τx ˆEτxR2 1≤ 1 1−τx ∫ 1 τx ˆEτx(ˆσu∨τx− ˆστx)2du≤ε. In addition, ˆEτx ( 1√1−τx ∫ 1 τx ˆµudu )2 ≤ε. 18 Collecting the above and using Chebyshev’s inequality, we obtain, on{τx < 1}: ⏐⏐⏐⏐ˆPτx (Y1 +Z1 > 0)− ˆPτx ( ˆστx B1−Bτx√1−τx ≤−ε1/3 )⏐⏐⏐⏐≤ 2ε1/6. On the other hand, due to the strong Markov property of Brownian motion, on{τx < 1}, we have, a.s.: ˆPτx ( ˆστx B1−Bτx√1−τx ≤−ε1/3 ) = ˆP ( ξ≤− ε1/3 σ )⏐⏐⏐⏐ σ=ˆστx , whereξ is a standard normal. As ˆστx∈ [c,C ], we conclude that the right hand side of the above converges to1/2, asε→ 0, uniformly over almost all random outcomes in{τx < 1}. In particular, for all small enough ε >0, we have: 1{τx<1} ⏐⏐⏐ˆPτx (Y1 +Z1≤ 0)− ˆPτx (Y1 +Z1 > 0) ⏐⏐⏐≤ 1{τx<1}δ(ε)< 1, and, in view of (5.3), ˆP(X1 >x )≥ ˆE ( 1{τx<1}ˆPτx (Y1 +Z1≤ 0) ) −δ(ε)ˆP(τx < 1) Summing up the above inequality and (5.3), we obtain 2ˆP(X1 >x )≥ (1−δ(ε))ˆP(τx < 1) = (1−δ(ε))ˆP( sup t∈[0,1] Xt >x ), which, along with (5.2), yields the statement of the lemma. 6 Proof of Theorem 4.1 Within the scope of this proof, we adopt the notation introduced in (5.1) and use the following convention. Notational Convention 6.1. The LOB, the bid and ask prices, the expected execution prices, and the demand, are all measured relative top0. Namely, we useνn to denoteνn◦ (x↦→x +p0 n)−1,pa n to denotepa n−p0 n,pb n to denote pb n−p0 n,λa n to denoteλa n−p0 n,λb n to denoteλb n−p0 n, andDn(p) to denoteDn(p0 n +p). Herein, we are only concerned with what happens in the last trading period – at time(N−1), whereN =T/∆t. Hence, we omit the subscriptN−1 whenever it is clear from the context. In particular, we writepa andpb forpa N−1 andpb N−1,ν forνN−1, and ξ forξN . Note also that, in an LTC equilibrium, we have: pa = pa N = pa N−1, with similar equalities for pb andν. For convenience, we also drop the superscript ∆t in the LOB and the associated bid and ask prices. Finally, we denote by ˜A the support of a given equilibrium. As the roles of pa andpb in our model are symmetric, we will only prove the statement of the proposition forpb. We are going to show that, under the assumptions of the theorem, there exists a constantC0 > 0, depending only on the constantC in Assumptions 4.1 and 4.2, such that, for all small enough ∆t, we have, P-a.s.: (6.1) −C0≤pb/ √ ∆t< 0 First, we introduce ˆAα(p;x), which we refer to as the simpliﬁed objective: (6.2) ˆAα(p;x) = Eα N−1 ( (p−x−ξ)1{ξ>p} ) . Recall that the expected relative proﬁt from posting a limit sell order at price level p, in the last time period, 11 is given byAα(p;pb N), where (6.3) Aα(p;x) = Eα N−1 ( (p−x−ξ)1{D+ N(p−ξ)>ν+((−∞,p))} ) . 11Recall that everything is measured relative to the fundamental price, according to the Notational Convention 6.1 19 The simpliﬁed objective is similar to Aα, but it assumes that there are no orders posted at better prices than the one posted by the agent. In particular, ˆAα(p;x) =Aα(p;x) forp≤pa. Corollary 9.1, in Appendix A, states that, in equilibrium, P-a.s., if the agents in the state (s,α ) post limit sell orders, then they post them at a price level p that maximizes the true objectiveAα(p;pb). The following lemma shows that the value of the modiﬁed objective becomes close to the value of the true objective, for the agents posting limit sell orders close to the ask price. Lemma 6.1. P-a.s., eitherν+({pa})> 0 or we have: ⏐⏐⏐Aα(p;pb)− ˆAα(pa;pb) ⏐⏐⏐→ 0, asp↓pa, uniformly over allα∈ ˜A. Proof: Ifν+({pa}) = 0, thenν+ is continuous atpa, andν+((−∞,p ])→ 0, asp↓pa. Then, we have ⏐⏐⏐Aα(p;pb)− ˆAα(pa;pb) ⏐⏐⏐ = ⏐⏐⏐Eα N−1 ( (p−pb−ξ)1{D+ N(p−ξ)>ν+((−∞,p))} ) − Eα N−1 ( (pa−pb−ξ)1{ξ>pa} )⏐⏐⏐ ≤|p−pa| + ‖‖pa−pb−ξ ‖‖ L2(Pα N−1) Pα N−1 ( ξ >pa, D+ N(p−ξ)≤ν+((−∞,p )) ) Thus, it sufﬁces to show that: (i) ‖‖pa−pb−ξ ‖‖ L2(Pα N−1) is bounded by a ﬁnite random variable independent ofα, and (ii) Pα N−1 ( ξN >p a, D+ N(p−ξ)≤ν+((−∞,p )) ) → 0, P-a.s., asp↓pa, uniformly overα. For (i), we have: ‖‖pa−pb−ξ ‖‖ L2(Pα N−1)≤|pa−pb| +‖ξ‖L2(Pα N−1)≤|pa−pb| + 2C √ ∆t, where the constantC appears in Assumptions 4.1 and 4.2. For (ii), we note that {ξN >p a, D+ N(p−ξ)≤ν+((−∞,p ))} ={ξN >p a, ξ≤p−D−1 N ( ν+((−∞,p )) ) }, asDN(·) is strictly decreasing, withDN(0) = 0. Assumption 4.6 implies that κ−1(ν+((−∞,p )))≤D−1 N (ν+((−∞,p )))< 0, whereκ is known at timeN− 1. Therefore, Pα N−1 ( ξ >pa, D+ N(p−ξ)≤ν+((−∞,p )) ) ≤ Pα N−1 ( ξ∈ ( pa,p−κ−1(ν+((−∞,p ))) ]) . It remains to show that, P-a.s., the right hand side of the above converges to zero, uniformly over all α. Assume that it does not hold. Then, with positive probability P, there exists ε >0 and a sequence of (pk,αk), such that pk↓pa and Pαk N−1 ( ξ∈ (pa,pk−κ−1(ν+((−∞,pk)))] ) ≥ε. Notice that, P-a.s., the family of measures { ˆµk = Pαk N−1◦ξ−1} k is tight. The latter follows, for example, from the fact that, P-a.s., the conditional second moments ofξ are bounded uniformly over allα (which, in turn, is a standard exercise in stochastic calculus). Prokhorov’s theorem, then, implies that there is a subsequence of these measures that converges weakly to some measure ˆµ on R. Next, notice that, for any ﬁxedk in the chosen subsequence, there exists a large enoughk′, such that ⏐⏐ˆµ (( pa,pk−κ−1(ν+((−∞,pk))) ]) −µk′ (( pa,pk−κ−1(ν+((−∞,pk))) ])⏐⏐≤ε/2. Thus, for anyk in the subsequence, we have ˆµ (( pa,pk−κ−1(ν+((−∞,pk))) ]) ≥ε/2. The above is a contradiction, as the intersection of the corresponding intervals, (pa,pk−κ−1(ν+((−∞,pk)))], over allk is empty. 20 Now we are ready to prove the upper bound in (6.1). Lemma 6.2. In any non-degenerate LTC equilibrium,pb < 0<p a, P-a.s.. Proof: We only show that pb < 0 holds, the other inequality being very similar. Assume that pb≥ 0 on some positive P-probability set Ω′∈F N−1. We are going to show that this results in a contradiction. First, Corollary 9.1, in Appendix A, implies that, P-a.s., if the agents in state (s,α ) post a limit sell order, then we must have: sup p∈R Aα(p;pb)≥ 0. In addition, on Ω′, we have: ˆAα(pa;pb) < 0 for allα∈ ˜A, as ξ has full support in R under every Pα N−1 (which, in turn, follows from the fact thatσ is bounded uniformly away from zero). Then, Lemma 6.1 implies that there exists aFN−1-measurable ¯p≥ pa, such that, on Ω′, the following holds a.s.: if ν+({pa}) = 0 then ¯p>p a, and, in all cases, (6.4) Aα(p;pb)< 0, ∀p∈ [pa, ¯p], ∀α∈ ˜A Clearly, it is suboptimal for an agent to post a limit sell order below ¯p. However, an agent’s strategy only needs to be optimal up to a set of P-measure zero, and these sets can be different for different (s,α ). Therefore, a little more work is required to obtain the desired contradiction. Consider the setB⊂ Ω′× R× ˜A: B ={(ω,s,α )| ˆq(s,α )> 0, ˆp(s,α )≤ ¯p}. This set is measurable with respect toFN−1⊗B ( R× ˜A ) , due to the measurability properties of ˆq and ˆp. Notice that, due to the above discussion and the optimality of agents’ actions (cf. Corollary 9.1, in Appendix A), for any (s,α )∈ R× ˜A, we have: P({ω| (ω,s,α )∈B}) = 0, and hence EN−1 ∫ R×˜A 1B(ω,s,α )µN−1(ds,dα ) = ∫ R×˜A EN−1 (1B(ω,s,α )ρN−1(ω,s,α ))µ0 N−1(ds,dα ) = 0, whereρN−1 is the Radon-Nikodym density of µN−1 w.r.t. to the deterministic measure µ0 N−1 (cf. Assumption 4.7). The above implies that, PN−1-a.s., 1B(ω,s,α )ρN−1(ω,s,α ) = 0 , for µ0 N−1-a.e. (s,α ). Notice also that, for all (ω,s,α )∈ Ω′× R× ˜A, 1{ˆp(s,α)≤¯p}ˆq+(s,α )1Bc = 0. From the above observations and the condition (2.4) in the deﬁnition of equilibrium (cf. Deﬁnition 2.4), we conclude that, on Ω′, the following holds a.s.: ν+([pa, ¯p]) = 0, where ¯p≥ pa, and, if ν+({pa}) = 0 , then ¯p > pa. This contradicts the deﬁnition of pa (recall that pa is P-a.s. ﬁnite, due to non-degeneracy of the LOB). It only remains to prove the lower bound on pb in (6.1). Assume that it does not hold. That is, assume that there exists a family of equilibria, with arbitrary small ∆t, and positive P-probabilityFN−1-measurable sets Ω∆t, such thatpb <−C0 √ ∆t on Ω∆t. We are going to show that this leads to a contradiction withpa > 0. To this end, assume that the agents maximize the simpliﬁed objective function, ˆAα, instead of the true one, Aα. Then, if pb is negative enough, the optimal price levels become negative for allα. The precise formulation of this is given by the following lemma. Lemma 6.3. There exists a constant C0 > 0, s.t., for any small enough ∆t, there exist constants ϵ,δ > 0, s.t., P-a.s., we have ˆAα(−δ;x)≥ϵ + sup y≥0 ˆAα(y;x), for allα∈ ˜A and allx≤−C0 √ ∆t. 21 Proof: Denote ¯ξ =ξ/ √ ∆t and consider the random function ¯Aα(p;x) = Eα N−1 ( (p−x− ¯ξ)1{¯ξ>p} ) . Notice that ˆAα(p;x) = √ ∆t ¯Aα ( p/ √ ∆t;x/ √ ∆t ) , and, hence, we can reformulate the statement of the lemma as follows: there exists a constantC0 > 0, s.t., for any small enough ∆t, there exist constantsϵ,δ >0, s.t., P-a.s., we have ¯Aα(−δ;x)≥ϵ + sup y≥0 ¯Aα(y;x), for allα∈ ˜A and allx≤−C0. Notice that ¯Aα(−δ;x)− ¯Aα(y;x) =−xEα N−1 ( 1{−δ<¯ξ≤y} ) −Eα N−1 ( ξ1{−δ<¯ξ≤y} ) −δEα N−1 ( 1{¯ξ>−δ} ) −yEα N−1 ( 1{¯ξ>y} ) is non-increasing in x, and, hence, such is ¯Aα(−δ;x)− sup y≥0 ¯Aα(y;x). Hence, it sufﬁces to prove the above statement forx =−C0. Next, consider the deterministic functionAσ(p;x), deﬁned via (6.5) Aσ(p;x) = ˆE ( (p−x−ση0)1{ση0>p} ) , whereη0 is a standard normal random variable on some auxiliary probability space(ˆΩ, ˆP). It follows from Lemma 5.1 that there exists a functionε2(·)≥ 0, s.t.ε2(∆t)→ 0, as ∆t→ 0, and, P-a.s., we have ⏐⏐⏐ ¯Aα(p;−C0)−AσtN−1 (p;−C0) ⏐⏐⏐≤ε2(∆t), for allα∈ ˜A and allp∈ R. Then, as we can always choose ∆t small enough, so thatε2(∆t)<ϵ , the statements of the lemma would follow if we can show that there exist constantsϵ,δ,C 0 > 0, s.t., P-a.s., AσtN−1 (−δ;−C0)≥ 3ϵ + sup y≥0 AσtN−1 (y;−C0) AsσtN−1(ω)∈ [1/C,C ], P-a.s., it sufﬁces to ﬁnd ϵ,δ,C 0 > 0, s.t. Aσ(−δ;−C0)≥ 3ϵ + sup y≥0 Aσ(y;−C0), ∀σ∈ [1/C,C ]. Note that the above inequality does not involve ω or ξ, and it is simply a property of a deterministic function. Notice also that Aσ(p;x) = σA1 (p/σ;x/σ), with A1 given in (6.5). Then, if we denote by F (x) and f(x), respectively, the cdf and pdf of a standard normal, we obtain A1(p;x) = (p−x)(1−F (p))− ∫ ∞ p tf(t)dt. A straightforward calculation gives us the following useful properties ofA1 andAσ (i) For any σ > 0 and any x <0, the function p↦→ Aσ(p;x) has a unique maximizer pσ(x), in particular, it is increasing inp≤pσ(x) and decreasing inp≥pσ(x). (ii) The function x↦→pσ(x) =σp1(x/σ) =σ ((1−F )/f)−1 (−x/σ) is increasing inx< 0 and converges to−∞, asx→−∞ . Then, choosingC0 large enough, so thatp1(−C0/C)< 0, ensurespσ(−C0)< 0, for allσ∈ [1/C,C ]. Setting δ =−p1(−C0/C)/C guarantees thatpσ(−C0)≤−δ, for allσ∈ [1/C,C ]. Then, by property (i) above, we have, for allσ∈ [1/C,C ] Aσ(−δ;−C0)>A σ(0;−C0) = sup y≥0 Aσ(y;−C0). 22 Finally, asAσ(−δ;−C0)−Aσ(0;−C0) is a continuous function ofσ∈ [1/C,C ], we can ﬁndϵ, such that Aσ(−δ;−C0)≥ 3ϵ + sup y≥0 Aσ(y;−C0), ∀σ∈ [1/C,C ]. Recall that our assumption is that pb <−C0 √ ∆t holds on a set Ω∆t of positive P-measure. Recall also that pa > 0, P-a.s., due to Lemma 6.2. Then, Lemmas 6.1 and 6.3 imply that there exists FN−1-measurable ¯p≥ pa, s.t., on Ω∆t, we have a.s.: ifν+({pa}) = 0 then ¯p>p a, and, in all cases, Aα(p;pb)< sup p′∈R Aα(p′;pb), ∀p∈ [pa, ¯p], ∀α∈ ˜A. It is intuitively clear that posting limit sell orders at the above price levels p must be suboptimal for the agents. However, the above inequality, on its own, does not yield a contradiction, as the agents’ strategies are only optimal up to a set ofP-probability zero, and these sets may be different for different states(s,α ). To obtain a contradiction with the deﬁnition ofpa, we simply repeat the last part of the proof of Lemma 6.2 (following equation (6.4)). This ensures that (6.1) holds and completes the proof of the theorem. 7 Proof of Theorem 4.2 Within the scope of this proof, we adopt the notation introduced in (5.1) and use Notational Convention 6.1 (i.e. we measure the LOB, the expected execution prices, and the demand, relative to p0, but keep the same variables’ names). Assume that the statement of the theorem does not hold: i.e., there exists α0∈ ˜A, such that ˜p0 is not a martingale under Pα0. Then, there existss∈ [0,T ), s.t., with positive probability Pα0, we have ˜Eα0 s ˜p0 T⁄= ˜p0 s. Without loss of generality, we assume that there exists a constant δ > 0 and a set Ω′ ∈ Fs, having positive probability Pα0 (and hence P), s.t., for all random outcomes in Ω′, we have (7.1) ˜Eα0 s (˜p0 T− ˜p0 s)≥δ (the case of negative values is analogous). Next, we ﬁx an arbitrary ∆t from a given family and consider the associated non-degenerate LTC equilibrium. Lemma 7.1. There exists a deterministic functionε(·)≥ 0, s.t.ε(∆t)→ 0, as ∆t→ 0, and, for any small enough ∆t> 0, there existsn = 0,...,N − 3 and Ω′′∈F n, s.t. Pα0 n (Ω′′)> 0 and the following holds on Ω′′ Pα0 n+2 ( Eα0 n+3 ( p0 N−p0 n+3 ) ≤δ/2 ) ≤ε(∆t). Proof: The proof follows from Assumption 4.5. Consider t = t′ = s and t′′ = tn+2. Then, Assumption 4.5 implies ˜Pα0 s (⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐ ˜Eα0 tn+2 ∫ T s µα0 u du− ˜Eα0 s ∫ T s µα0 u du ⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐≥ε(∆t) ) ≤ε(∆t) on Ω′, a.s.. Notice also that ˜Eα0 s (˜p0 T− ˜p0 s) = ˜Eα0 s T∫ s µα0 u du. Then, assuming thatε(∆t) is small enough and recalling (7.1), we obtain ˜Pα0 s ( ˜Eα0 tn+2 ∫ T s µα0 u du≤ 3δ/4 ) ≤ε(∆t), 23 on Ω′. Therefore, there exists a set Ω′′∈F s⊂F tn, s.t. ˜Pα0 tn (Ω′′)> 0 and ˜Eα0 tn+2 ∫ T s µα0 u du≥ 3δ/4, on Ω′′. Next, we chooset =s,t′ =tn+2,t′′ =tn+3, and use Assumption 4.5, to obtain ˜Pα0 tn+2 (⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐ ˜Eα0 tn+3 ∫ T s µα0 u du− ˜Eα0 tn+2 ∫ T s µα0 u du ⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐≥ε(∆t) ) ≤ε(∆t), on Ω′′, a.s.. Assuming thatε(∆t) is small enough and using the last two inequalities, we obtain ˜Pα0 tn+2 ( ˜Eα0 tn+3 ∫ T s µα0 u du≤δ/2 ) ≤ε(∆t). Finally, due to Assumption 4.2, and as ∆t is small, we can replace ∫T s µα0 u du by ∫T tn+3 µα0 u du, andδ/2 byδ/4, in the above equation. This completes the proof of the lemma. Using the strategy at which the agent in state (1,α 0) waits until the last momentn =N, we conclude that the process (λa n(α0) +p0 n) must be a supermartingale under Pα0. More precisely, due to the deﬁnition of an optimal strategy, we have, P-a.s. λa n+2(α0)≥ Eα0 n+2λa N(α0) + Eα0 n+2 ( Eα0 n+3(p0 N−p0 n+3) +ξn+3 ) . Recall that λa N(α0) = pb N and, due to Theorem 4.1 (more precisely, it follows from the proof of the theorem), there exists a constantC0 > 0, s.t., for all small enough ∆t> 0, the following holds P-a.s. −C0 √ ∆t≤pb N < 0<p a N≤C0 √ ∆t. Thus, we have, P-a.s. (7.2) λa n+2(α0)≥−C0 √ ∆t + Eα0 n+2 ( Eα0 n+3(p0 N−p0 n+3) ) + Eα0 n+2ξn+3. Due to Assumption 4.2, we have, P-a.s. Eα0 n+2ξn+3≤C∆t, ⏐⏐Eα0 n+3(p0 N−p0 n+3) ⏐⏐≤CT, and, hence, λa n+2(α0)≥−C0 √ ∆t +CT +C∆t. In addition, making use of Lemma 7.1, we conclude that, for any small enough ∆t, there existn = 0,...,N − 2 and Ω′′∈F n, s.t. Pα0 n (Ω′′)> 0 and Pα n+2 ( Eα n+3 ( p0 N−p0 n+3 ) ≤δ/2 ) ≤ε(∆t), on Ω′′. Using (7.2) and assuming that ∆t is small enough, we obtain λa n+2(α0)≥δ/4, on Ω′′. Next, Corollary 9.1, in Appendix A, implies that, P-a.s., pb n+1≥ Eα0 n+1 ( λa n+2(α0) +ξn+2 ⏐⏐ξn+2 <p b n+1 ) . Thus, on Ω′′, we obtain (7.3) pb n+1− Eα0 n+1 ( ξn+2 ⏐⏐ξn+2 <p b n+1 ) ≥δ/4. The following lemma shows that, for any number p, the conditional expectation of the fundamental price increment, Eα0 n+1(ξn+2|ξn+2 <p ), approachesp as the size of the time interval vanishes. This result follows from Lemma 5.2. 24 Lemma 7.2. There exists a constantC3 > 0, s.t., for all small enough ∆t >0, and for any t∈ [0,T − ∆t], the following holds P-a.s. sup p≤0 ⏐⏐⏐p− ˜Eα0 t ( ˜p0 t+∆t− ˜p0 t ⏐⏐ ˜p0 t+∆t− ˜p0 t <p )⏐⏐⏐≤C3 √ ∆t. Proof: Fixt and ∆t> 0 and consider the evolution of ˜p0 s, fors∈ [t,t + ∆t], under Pα0 t ˜p0 s− ˜p0 t = ∫ s t µα0 u du + ∫ s t σudWα0 u , whereWα0 is a Brownian motion under Pα0. Rescaling by √ ∆t, we obtain (˜p0 s− ˜p0 t )/ √ ∆t =X(s−t)/∆t, X s = ∫ s 0 ˆµudu + ∫ s 0 ˆσud ˆWu, s ∈ [0, 1], with ˆµs = √ ∆tµα0 t+s∆t, ˆσs =σt+s∆t, ˆWs = 1√ ∆t ( Wα0 t+s∆t−Wα0 t ) , s ∈ [0, 1]. Notice that the above processes are adapted to the new ﬁltration ˆF, with ˆFs = ˜Ft+s∆t, and, P-a.s., under ˜Pα0 t , ˆW is a Brownian motion with respect to ˆF. Next, due to Assumptions 4.1 and 4.4, for any small enough ∆t > 0, P-a.s., the dynamics of (−Xs), under ˜Pα0 t , satisfy all the assumptions of Lemma 5.2. As a result, we obtain ˜Pα0 t (X1 <−x−z)≤C1e−z˜Pα0 t (X1 <−x), ∀x,z≥ 0. Finally, we notice that sup p≤0 ⏐⏐⏐p− ˜Eα0 t ( ˜p0 t+∆t− ˜p0 t ⏐⏐˜p0 t+∆t− ˜p0 t <p )⏐⏐⏐ = √ ∆t sup p≤0 ⏐⏐⏐p− ˜Eα0 t ( X1 ⏐⏐X1 <p )⏐⏐⏐ = √ ∆t sup p≤0 ⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐p− ∫∞ −pxd ˜Pα0 t (X1 <−x) ˜Pα0 t (X1 <p ) ⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐ = √ ∆t sup p≤0 ⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐ ∫∞ 0 ˜Pα0 t (X1 <p −z)dz ˜Pα0 t (X1 <p ) ⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐≤C1 √ ∆t, which completes the proof of the lemma. Using (7.3) and Lemma 7.2, we conclude that, for all small enough ∆t, we have: pb n+1 > 0 on Ω′′, P-a.s.. In addition, Corollary 9.1, in Appendix A, implies that, for anyα∈ ˜A, the following holds P-a.s. λa n+1(α)≥pb n+1. Next, with a slight abuse of notation (similar notation was introduced in the proof of Proposition 4.1), we consider the simpliﬁed objective of an agent who posts a limit sell order at the ask pricepa n ˆAα(pa n;λa n+1) = Eα n ( pa n−λa n+1−ξn+1|ξn+1 >p a n ) . The above estimates imply that, on Ω′′, we have, P-a.s. (7.4) ˆAα(pa n;λa n+1)≤ Eα n (pa n−ξn+1|ξn+1 >p a n)− Eα n ( pb n+11Ω′′|ξn+1 >p a n ) < 0, ∀α∈ ˜A. To obtain the last inequality in the above, we recall that Ω′′∈F n and, P-a.s., 1Ω′′Pn(Ω\ Ω′′) = 0,pb n+1 > 0 on Ω′′, and Pα n(ξn+1 >p a n)> 0, for allα∈ ˜A. Next, repeating the proof of Lemma 6.1 (and using the fact thatλa n+1 is absolutely bounded, as shown in Corollary 4.1), we conclude that, P-a.s., eitherν+ n ({pa n})> 0, or we have ⏐⏐⏐Aα(p;λa n+1)− ˆAα(pa n;λa n+1) ⏐⏐⏐→ 0, asp↓pa, uniformly over allα∈ ˜A, where we introduce the true objective, Aα(p;λa n+1) = Eα n (( p−λa n+1−ξn+1 ) 1{D+ n+1(p−ξn+1)>ν+ n ((−∞,p))} ) . 25 This convergence, along with (7.4), implies that there exists a Fn-measurable ¯p ≥ pa n, such that, on Ω′′, the following holds P-a.s.: ifν+ n ({pa n}) = 0 then ¯p>p a n, and, in all cases, Aα(p;λa n+1)< 0, ∀p∈ [pa n, ¯p], ∀α∈ ˜A. Finally, we repeat the last part of the proof of Lemma 6.2 (following equation (6.4)), to obtain a contradiction with the deﬁnition of pa n, and complete the proof of the theorem. The last argument also shows that, when ∆t is small enough, it becomes suboptimal for the agents to post limit sell orders, as the expected relative proﬁt from this action becomes negative, causing the market to degenerate. 8 Summary and future work In this paper, we present a new framework for modeling market microstructure, which does not require the exis- tence of a designate market maker, and in which the LOB arises endogenously, as a result of equilibrium between multiple strategic players (aka agents). This framework is based on a continuum-player game. It closely approx- imates the mechanics of an auction-style exchange, so that, in particular, it can be used to analyze the liquidity effects of changes in the rules of the exchange. We use the proposed framework to study the liquidity effects of high trading frequency. In particular, we demonstrate the dual nature of high trading frequency. On the one hand, in the absence of a bullish or bearish signal about the asset, the higher trading frequency improves the efﬁciency of the market. On the other hand, at a sufﬁciently high trading frequency, even a very small trading signal may amplify the adverse selection effect, creating a disproportionally large change in the LOB, which is interpreted as an endogenous liquidity crisis. The present article raises many questions for further research. Notice that our main results are of a qualitative nature: they demonstrate the general behavior of the LOB, as a function of trading frequency, but do not immedi- ately allow for computations. It would also be interesting to establish quantitative results. In particular, we would like to construct an equilibrium in a more realistic, and more concrete, model than the one used in Section 3. Such a model would allow for heterogeneous beliefs, and it would prescribe the speciﬁc sources of information (i.e., relevant market factors) used by the agents to form their beliefs. A model of this type could be calibrated to market data and used to study the effects of changes in relevant market parameters on the LOB. Finally, it would be inter- esting to develop a continuous time version of the proposed framework, in order to better capture the present state of the markets, where the trading frequency is not restricted. All these questions are the subject of our follow-up paper Gayduk & Nadtochiy (2016). 9 Appendix A This section contains several useful technical results on the representation of the value function of an agent in the proposed game. Notice that (2.1) and (2.2) imply that, if ν is admissible, then, for any (α,m,p,q,r ), we have, P-a.s. ⏐⏐⏐J(p,q,r) (m,s,α,ν )−J(p,q,r) (m,s′,α,ν ) ⏐⏐⏐≤|s−s′| Eα m|pa N|∨| pb N|, ∀s,s′∈ R This implies that every J(p,q,r) (m,·,α,ν ) andVν m(·,α ) has a continuous modiﬁcation under P. Thus, whenever ν is admissible, we deﬁne the value function of an agent as the aforementioned continuous modiﬁcation of the left hand side of (2.3). Lemma 9.1. Assume that an optimal control exists for an admissible LOBν. Assume also that, for anyα∈ A, the associated value function Vν n (·,α ), deﬁned in (2.3), is measurable with respect to Fn⊗B (R). Then, it satisﬁes the following Dynamic Programming Principle. • Forn =N and all (s,α )∈ S, we have, P-a.s. (9.1) Vν N(s,α ) =s+pb N−s−pa N 26 • For alln =N− 1,..., 0 and all (s,α )∈ S, we have Vν n (s,α ) = esssupp,q,r { 1{rn=0}Eα n ( Vν n+1 (s,α ) + ( qnpn +Vν n+1 (s−qn,α )−Vν n+1 (s,α ) ) · (9.2) · ( 1{qn≥0,D + n+1(pn)>ν+ n ((−∞,pn))} + 1{qn<0,D− n+1(pn)>ν− n ((pn,∞))} )) +1{rn=1} ( q+ npb n−q− npa n + Eα nVν n+1 (s−qn,α ) )} , where the essential supremum is taken under P, over all admissible controls (p,q,r ). Proof: The most important step is to show that, for alln = 0,...N − 1 and (s,α )∈ S, (9.3) Vν n (s,α ) = esssupp,q,rEα n ( Vν n+1 ( Sn,s,(p,q,r) n+1 ,α ) −gν n (pn,qn,rn,Dn+1) ) , where the essential supremum is taken under P, over all admissible controls (p,q,r ), and gν n (pn,qn,rn,Dn+1) = ( pn1{rn=0} +pa n1{rn=1,qn<0} +pb n1{rn=1,qn>0} ) ∆Sn,s,(p,q,r) n+1 does not depend on s. Assume that J(p,q,r) (n,·,α,ν ) is a continuous modiﬁcation of the objective function. Notice that, for allm≤k≤n, we have, P-a.s. Eα kJ(p,q,r) ( n,Sm,s,(p,q,r) n ,α,ν ) =J(p,q,r) ( k,Sm,s,(p,q,r) k ,α,ν ) + Eα k n−1∑ j=k gν j (pj,qj,rj,Dj+1) Notice also that, for any (p,q,r ) we have, P-a.s.: J(p,q,r) (m,s,α,ν )≤Vν m(s,α ), for alls∈ S. Let us show that the left hand side of (9.3) is less than its right hand side Vν m(s,α ) = essupp,q,rJ(p,q,r) ( m,Sm,s,(p,q,r) m ,α,ν ) = essupp,q,rEα m ( J(p,q,r) ( m + 1,Sm,s,(p,q,r) m+1 ,α,ν ) −gν m (pm,qm,rm,Dm+1) ) ≤ essupp,q,rEα m ( Vν m+1 ( Sm,s,(p,q,r) m+1 ,α ) −gν m (pm,qm,rm,Dm+1) ) Next, we show that the right hand side of (9.3) is less than its left hand side. For any (p,q,r ), we have, P-a.s. Eα m ( Vν m+1 ( Sm,s,(p,q,r) m+1 ,α ) −gν m (pm,qm,rm,Dm+1) ) = Eα m ( J(ˆp,ˆq,ˆr) ( m + 1,Sm,s,(p,q,r) m+1 ,α,ν ) −gν m (pm,qm,rm,Dm+1) ) =J(˜p,˜q,˜r) (m,s,α,ν )≤Vν m(s,α ), where (˜pn, ˜qn, ˜rn) coincide with (ˆpn, ˆqn, ˆrn), for n≥ m + 1, while they are equal to (pm,qm,rm), for n = m. The proof is completed easily by plugging the dynamics of the state process, (2.1), into (9.3). The following corollary provides a more explicit recursive formula for the value function and optimal control. In particular, it states that the value function of an agent at any time remains linear in s, in both positive and negative half lines (with possibly different slopes). Corollary 9.1. Assume that an admissible LOB ν has an optimal control (ˆp, ˆq, ˆr). Then, for any (s,α )∈ S, the following holds P-a.s., for alln = 0,...,N − 1 1. Vν n (s,α ) = s+λa n(α)−s−λb n(α), with some adapted processes λa(α) andλb(α), such thatλa N(α) = pb N andλb N(α) =pa N ; 2. pa n≥ Eα n ( λa n+1(α) ) andpb n≤ Eα n ( λb n+1(α) ) ; 27 3. if, for some p∈ R, Pα n ( D+ n+1(p)>ν + n ((−∞,p )) ) > 0, then p≤ Eα n ( λb n+1(α)|D+ n+1(p)>ν + n ((−∞,p )) ) ; 4. if, for some p∈ R, Pα n ( D− n+1(p)>ν− n ((p,∞)) ) > 0, then p≥ Eα n ( λa n+1(α)|D− n+1(p)>ν− n ((p,∞)) ) ; 5. for all s> 0, • λa n(α) = max { pb n, Eα nλa n+1(α) + ( supp∈R Eα n (( p−λa n+1(α) ) 1{D+ n+1(p)>ν+ n ((−∞,p))} ))+} , • if ˆqn(s,α )⁄= 0 and ˆrn(s,α ) = 0, then λa n(α) = Eα nλa n+1(α) + sup p∈R Eα n (( p−λa n+1(α) ) 1{D+ n+1(p)>ν+ n ((−∞,p))} ) , andp = ˆpn(s,α ) attains the above supremum, • if ˆqn(s,α ) = 0 and ˆrn(s,α ) = 0, thenλa n(α) = Eα nλa n+1(α), • if ˆrn(s,α ) = 1, thenλa n(α) =pb n; 6. for all s< 0, • λb n(α) = min { pa n, Eα nλb n+1(α)− ( supp∈R Eα n (( λb n+1(α)−p ) 1{D− n (p)>ν− n−1((p,∞))} ))+} , • if ˆqn(s,α )⁄= 0 and ˆrn(s,α ) = 0, then λb n(α) = Eα nλb n+1(α)− sup p∈R Eα n (( λb n+1(α)−p ) 1{D− n (p)>ν− n−1((p,∞))} ) , andp = ˆpn(s,α ) attains the above supremum, • if ˆqn(s,α ) = 0 and ˆrn(s,α ) = 0, thenλb n(α) = Eα nλb n+1(α), • if ˆrn(s,α ) = 1, thenλb n(α) =pa n. Proof: Let us plug the piecewise-linear form of the value function into (9.2) Vν n (s,α ) = esssupp,q,r { 1{rn=0} ( s+Eα nλa n+1(α)−s−Eα nλb n+1(α) +Eα n (( qnpn + (s−qn)+λa n+1(α)− (s−qn)−λb n+1(α)−s+λa n+1(α) +s−λb n+1(α) ) · ( 1{qn≥0,D + n+1(pn)>ν+ n ((−∞,pn))} + 1{qn<0,D− n+1(pn)>ν− n ((pn,∞))} ))) +1{r=1} ( q+ npb n−q− npa n + (s−qn)+Eα nλa n+1(α)− (s−qn)−Eα nλb n+1(α) )} First, notice that it sufﬁces to consider the essential supremum over all random variables(pn,qn,rn).12 Moreover, the essential supremum can be replaced by the supremum over all deterministic(pn,qn,rn)∈ R2×{ 0, 1}. To see the latter, it sufﬁces to assume that the supremum is not attained by the optimal strategy (with positive probability), and construct a superior strategy via the standard measurable selection argument (cf. Corollary 18.27 and Theorem 18.26 in Aliprantis & Border (2006)), which results in a contradiction. It is easy to see that, for any ﬁxed(pn,s,r n), the above function is piece-wise linear in qn, with the slope changing at qn = 0 andqn = s. Hence, for a ﬁnite 12The admissibility constraint does not cause any difﬁculties here, as, in the case where (pn,qn,rn) do not attain the supremum, they can be improved, so that (pn,qn) increase by no more than a ﬁxed constant. 28 maximum to exists, the slope of this function must be nonnegative, at qn→−∞ , and non-positive, at qn→∞ . This must hold for any (pn,rn,s ), to ensure that the value function of an agent is ﬁnite: otherwise, an agent can scale up her position to increase the value function arbitrarily. Considering rn = 1 , we obtain condition 2 of the corollary. The case rn = 0 yields conditions 3 and 4. Notice also that the maximum of the aforementioned function is always attained atqn = 0 orqn =s. Considering all possible cases: rn = 0, 1,qn = 0,s ,s = 0,s> 0 ands< 0 – we obtain the recursive formulas forλa n andλb n (i.e., conditions 5 and 6 of the corollary). In addition, as the optimalqn takes values 0 ands, it is easy to see that the piece-wise linear structure of the value function in s is propagated backwards, and, hence, condition 1 of the corollary holds. It is also useful to have a converse statement. Corollary 9.2. Consider an admissible LOB ν and admissible control (ˆp, ˆq, ˆr), such that ˆqn(s,α ) ∈ {0,s}. Assume that, for any α∈ A and any n = 0,...,N , there exists a progressively measurable random function Vν · (·,α ), such that, for any s∈ R, P-a.s., (ˆp, ˆq, ˆr,V ν) satisfy the conditions 1–6 of Corollary 9.1. Then, (ˆp, ˆq, ˆr) is an optimal control for the LOBν. Proof: It sufﬁces to revert the arguments in the proof of Corollary 9.1, and recall thatˆq can always be chosen to be equal to 0 ors, without compromising the optimality. 10 Appendix B Proof of Lemma 5.1. The following lemma shows that the normalized price increments are close to Gaussian in the conditional L2 norm. Lemma 10.1. Let Assumptions 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4 hold. Then, there exists a deterministic function ϵ(·)≥ 0, such thatϵ(∆t)→ 0, as ∆t→ 0, and, P-a.s., for allα∈ A and alln = 1,...,N , we have Eα n−1 (( ξn/ √ ∆t−σtn−1(Wα tn−Wα tn−1)/ √ ∆t )2) ≤ϵ(∆t). Proof: Notice: ξn/ √ ∆t−σtn−1(Wα tn−Wα tn−1)/ √ ∆t = 1√ ∆t tn∫ tn−1 µα s ds + 1√ ∆t tn∫ tn−1 (σs−σtn−1)dWα s . Then, using Assumptions 4.2, 4.4, and Itˆo’s isometry, we obtain the statement of the lemma. The next lemma connects the proximity in terms of L2 norm and the proximity of expectations of certain functions of random variables. This result would follow trivially from the classical theory, but, in the present case, we require additional uniformity – hence, a separate lemma is needed (whose proof is, nevertheless, quite simple). Lemma 10.2. For any constantC >1, there exists a deterministic function γ(·)≥ 0, s.t. γ(ε)→ 0, as ε→ 0, and, for any ε >0,σ∈ [1/C,C ], and any random variables η∼N (0,σ 2) andξ (the latter is not necessarily Gaussian), satisfying E(ξ−η)2≤ε, the following holds for allp∈ R (i) (|p|∨ 1)|P(ξ >p)− P(η >p)|≤ γ(ε), (ii) ⏐⏐E(ξ1{ξ>p})− E(η1{η>p}) ⏐⏐≤γ(ε). Proof: (ii) Note that ⏐⏐E(ξ1{ξ>p})− E(η1{η>p}) ⏐⏐≤ ⏐⏐E ( (ξ−η)1{ξ>p} )⏐⏐ + ⏐⏐E ( η(1{ξ>p}− 1{η>p}) )⏐⏐ ≤√ε +‖η‖2 √ P(ξ >p,η≤p) + P(ξ≤p,η >p), and P(ξ >p,η≤p)≤ P(p≥η≥p− 3√ε) + P(|ξ−η|> 3√ε)≤M 3√ε + E(ξ−η)2 ( 3√ε)2 ≤ (M + 1) 3√ε, where we used the fact that η has a density bounded by a ﬁxed constant M. We can similarly show that P[ξ≤ p,η >p]≤ (M + 1) 3√ε. The resulting estimates yield the statement of the lemma. 29 Takingε(∆t) = γ(ϵ(∆t)) and applying the above lemmas, we get the statement of Lemma 5.1, with (Wα tn− Wα tn−1)/ √ ∆t in place ofη0. Finally, we note that the laws of the two random variables coincide under Pα n−1, and the statement depends only on these laws. The last statement of Lemma 5.1 follows from the fact that Lemma 10.2 is stable under analogous substitution. References Adrian, T., Capponi, A., V ogt, E., & Zhang, H. 2016. Intraday Market Making with Overnight Inventory Costs. https://ssrn.com/abstract=2844881, preprint. Aliprantis, C., & Border, K. 2006.Inﬁnite dimensional analysis: a hitchhiker’s guide. Springer Science & Business Media. Almgren, R. 2003. Optimal execution with nonlinear impact functions and trading-enhanced risk. Applied Math- ematical Finance, 10, 1–18. Aumann, R. 1964. Markets with a Continuum of Traders. Econometrica, 32, 39–50. Avellaneda, M., & Stoikov, S. 2008. High-frequency trading in a limit order book. Quantitative Finance, 8(3), 217–224. Bayraktar, E., & Ludkovski, M. 2011. Optimal trade execution in illiquid markets. Mathematical Finance, 21(4), 681–701. Bressan, A., & Facchi, G. 2013. A bidding game in a continuum limit order book. SIAM J. Control Optim., 51, 3459–3485. Bressan, A., & Facchi, G. 2014. Discrete bidding strategies for a random incoming order. SIAM J. Financial Math., 5, 50–70. Bressan, A., & Wei, D. 2016. Dynamic stability of the Nash equilibrium for a bidding game. Analysis and Applications, 14(4), 1–24. Brunnermeier, M. K., & Pedersen, L. H. 2005. Predatory Trading. The Journal of Finance, 60(4), 1825–1863. Cardaliaguet, P. 2010. Notes on mean ﬁeld games (from P.-L. Lions’ lectures at Coll `ege de France). https://www.ceremade.dauphine.fr/∼cardalia/MFG20130420.pdf, technical report. Carmona, G. 2013. Existence and stability of Nash equilibrium. World Scientiﬁc Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd. Carmona, R., & Delarue, F. 2013. Probabilistic analysis of mean-ﬁeld games. SICON, 51(4), 27052734. Carmona, R., & Webster, K. A belief-driven order book model. http://www.princeton.edu/∼rcarmona/download/fe/CW2.pdf, working paper. Carmona, R., & Webster, K. 2012. High Frequency Market Making. arXiv:1210.5781, preprint. Cartea, A., & Jaimungal, A. 2013. General intensity shapes in optimal liquidation.Applied Mathematical Finance, 20(6), 512–547. Cont, R, Stoikov, S., & Talreja, R. 2010. A stochastic model for order book dynamics.Operations Research, 58(3), 549–563. Cvitani´c, J., & Kirilenko, A. A. 2010. High frequency traders and asset prices. DOI:10.2139/ssrn.1569067, working paper. Du, S., & Zhu, H. 2014. Welfare and optimal trading frequency in dynamic double auctions.NBER Working Paper No. 20588. 30 Easley, D., & O’Hara, M. 1992. Time and the Process of Security Price Adjustment. The Journal of Finance , 47(2), 577–605. Foucault, T. 1999. Order ﬂow composition and trading costs in a dynamic limit order market.Journal of Financial Markets, 2, 99–134. Friedman, A. 1964. Partial Differential Equations of Parabolic Type. Prentice Hall, Inc. Gatheral, J., & Schied, A. 2011. Optimal trade execution under geometric Brownian motion in the Almgren and Chriss framework. International Journal on Theoretical and Applied Finance, 14(3), 353–368. Gayduk, R., & Nadtochiy, S. 2015. Liquidity Effects of Trading Frequency (extended version).arXiv:1508.07914, Technical report. Gayduk, R., & Nadtochiy, S. 2016. Endogenous Formation of Limit Order Books: dynamics Between Trades. arXiv:1605.09720, preprint. Glosten, L., & Milgrom, P. P. 1985. Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist market with heterogeneously informed traders. Journal of Financial Economics, 14, 71–100. Goettler, R. L., Parlour, C. A., & Rajan, U. 2005. Equilibrium in a Dynamic Limit Order Market. The Journal of Finance, 60(5), 2149–2192. Gu´eant, O., & Lehalle, C.-A. 2015. General intensity shapes in optimal liquidation. Mathematical Finance, 25(3), 457–495. Guilbaud, Fabien, & Pham, Huy ˆen. 2013. Optimal high-frequency trading with limit and market orders. Quanti- tative Finance, 13(1), 79–94. Kyle, A. S. 1985. Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading. Econometrica, 53(6), 1315–1335. Lachapelle, A., Lasry, J.-M., Lehalle, C.-A., & Lions, P.-L. 2013. Efﬁciency of the price formation process in presence of high frequency participants: a mean ﬁeld game analysis. arXiv:1305.6323, preprint. Lacker, D. 2014. A general characterization of the mean ﬁeld limit for stochastic differential games. arXiv:1408.2708v1, preprint. Lasry, J.-M., & Lions, P.-L. 2007. Mean ﬁeld games. Japanese Journal of Mathematics, 2, 229–260. Obizhaeva, A. A., & Wang, J. 2013. Optimal trading strategy and supply/demand dynamics. Journal of Financial Markets, 16, 1–32. Parlour, C. A. 1998. Price dynamics in limit order markets. The Review of Financial Studies, 11(4), 789–816. Predoiu, S., Shaikhet, G., & Shreve, S. 2011. Optimal execution of a general one-sided limit-order book. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics, 2, 183–212. Rosu, I. 2009. A dynamic model of the limit order book. Review of Financial Studies, 22, 4601–4641. Schied, A., Schoneborn, T., & Tehranchi, M. 2010. Optimal basket liquidation for CARA investors is deterministic. Applied Mathematical Finance, 17, 471–489. Schmeidler, D. 1973. Equilibrium points of nonatomic games. Journal of Statistical Physics, 7(4), 295–300. Stoikov, S., & Waeber, R. 2012. Optimal Asset Liquidation Using Limit Order Book Information. doi:10.2139/ssrn.2113827, working paper. Vayanos, D. 1999. Strategic Trading and Welfare in a Dynamic Market.Review of Economic Studies, 66, 219–254. 31 Figure 1: On the left: ask price ˆpa (in red) and the associated expected execution prices ˆλa (in blue); different curves correspond to different trading frequencies (N = 20,..., 500); black dashed line is the expected change in the fundamental price α(T−t). On the right: ask price ˆpa (in red) and the associated expected execution price ˆλa (in blue), bid price ˆpb (in orange) and the associated expected execution price ˆλb (in green), for N = 100 . Non-degenerate equilibrium exists only on a time interval where ˆλa < 0. All prices are measured relative to the fundamental price and are plotted as functions of time. Positive drift: α = 0.1,σ = 1,T = 1. Figure 2: The horizontal axis represents trading frequency, measured in the number of steps N. Left: time-zero bid-ask spread in the zero-drift case ( α = 0). Right: the maximum value of drift α for which a non-degenerate equilibrium exists on the entire time interval. Parameters:σ = 1,T = 1. 32