Queue Imbalance as a One-Tick-Ahead Price Predictor in a Limit Order Book Martin D. Gould∗‡ and Julius Bonart‡ ‡ CFM–Imperial Institute of Quantitative Finance, Department of Mathematics, Imperial College, London SW7 2AZ December 14, 2015 Abstract We investigate whether the bid/ask queue imbalance in a limit order book (LOB) provides signiﬁcant predictive power for the direction of the next mid-price movement. We consider this question both in the context of a simple binary classiﬁer, which seeks to predict the direction of the next mid-price movement, and a probabilistic classiﬁer, which seeks to predict the probability that the next mid-price movement will be upwards. To implement these classiﬁers, we ﬁt logistic regressions between the queue imbalance and the direction of the subsequent mid-price movement for each of 10 liquid stocks on Nasdaq. In each case, we ﬁnd a strongly sta- tistically signiﬁcant relationship between these variables. Compared to a simple null model, which assumes that the direction of mid-price changes is uncorrelated with the queue imbalance, we ﬁnd that our logistic regres- sion ﬁts provide a considerable improvement in binary and probabilistic classiﬁcation for large-tick stocks, and provide a moderate improvement in binary and probabilistic classiﬁcation for small-tick stocks. We also perform local logistic regression ﬁts on the same data, and ﬁnd that this semi-parametric approach slightly outperform our logistic regression ﬁts, at the expense of being more computationally intensive to implement. Keywords: Price prediction; queue imbalance; high-frequency trading; limit order books; market microstructure. 1 Introduction In most modern ﬁnancial markets, trade occurs via a continuous double-auction mechanism called a limit order book (LOB) [Gould et al., 2013]. In an LOB, traders interact by submitting orders that state their desires to buy or sell a ∗Corresponding author. Email: m.gould@imperial.ac.uk. 1 arXiv:1512.03492v1 [q-fin.TR] 11 Dec 2015 speciﬁed quantity of an asset at a speciﬁed price. Active orders reside in a queue until they are either cancelled by their owner or executed against an order of opposite type. Thanks to electronic LOB trading platforms, traders from around the world can monitor the quantities that are available for purchase or sale at speciﬁed prices, and can thereby deduce a detailed, up-to-date picture of market state. Since the widespread uptake of LOB trading, the question of whether infor- mation about LOB state can be used to formulate predictions of future price movements has remained a topic of primary interest to practitioners and re- searchers alike. Due to the potentially lucrative beneﬁts of success, the topic has attracted the attention of countless professional and novice traders, who have sought to reap the ﬁnancial rewards of discovering strategies that success- fully forecast future prices. The question has similarly attracted the attention of many scholars from a wide range of disciplines, who have attempted to quantify several important empirical properties of price series [Chakraborti et al., 2011, Cont, 2001], to understand the origins and nature of price movements [Bouchaud et al., 2009, Farmer et al., 2006], and to propose and evaluate models designed to explain the market dynamics from which price movements emerge [Farmer et al., 2005, Gould et al., 2013]. A key diﬃculty in using information about LOB state to predict future price movements is the need to identify which state variables to use as inputs when making predictions. In recent years, some authors (see, e.g., Cartea et al. [2015] and Yang and Zhu [2015]) have proposed that the queue imbalance, which de- scribes the diﬀerence between the volumes oﬀered for purchase or sale at the best bid and ask quotes in a limit order book (LOB), could constitute a sim- ple yet powerful quantity that is suitable for this purpose. Despite reasonably widespread discussion of this idea among practitioners, detailed, scientiﬁc anal- ysis of the true predictive power of this measure has remained limited. Given the apparent prevalence of this approach among many real traders, developing a detailed understanding of both its statistical performance and the possible market dynamics underlying its success is an important and timely task. In this paper, we study a recent, high-quality data set that describes the LOB activity for each of 10 liquid stocks on Nasdaq to assess whether the queue imbalance provides signiﬁcant predictive power for the direction of the next mid-price movement. We consider this question both in the context of a simple binary classiﬁer, which seeks to predict the direction of the next mid-price movement, and a probabilistic classiﬁer, which seeks to predict the probability that the next mid-price movement will be upwards. To implement these classiﬁers, we ﬁt logistic regressions between the queue imbalance and the direction of the subsequent mid-price movement for each of the stocks in our sample. We ensure that our results are statistically and sci- entiﬁcally rigorous by implementing formal hypothesis tests and quantitative performance measures of out-of-sample forecasting. For each of the 10 stocks in our sample, we test and strongly reject the hypothesis that the ﬁtted regres- sion curve does not ﬁnd a statistically signiﬁcant relationship between queue imbalance and the direction of the subsequent mid-price movement. 2 We also introduce a simple null model, which assumes that the direction of mid-price changes is uncorrelated with the queue imbalance. Compared to the null model, we ﬁnd that our logistic regressions improve out-of-sample perfor- mance of binary classiﬁcation by about 50–60% for large tick stocks and about 10–30% for small-tick stocks. We ﬁnd that our results for probabilistic predic- tions are slightly weaker, but still improve out-of-sample predictive performance by about 20–30% for large-tick stocks and about 2–6% for small-tick stocks. Although our logistic regression ﬁts indicate that queue imbalance provides signiﬁcant predictive power for price prediction, the parametric nature of this approach obscures the detailed market dynamics that relate queue imbalance to subsequent mid-price movements. To help address this problem, we also complement our logistic regressions with a semi-parametric approach, by ﬁtting local logistic regression curves to the same data. In contrast to the logistic re- gression ﬁts, whose shapes are constrained by the parametric form of the logistic sigmoid function, our local logistic ﬁts illustrate a more subtle relationship be- tween queue imbalance and mid-price movements, and thereby help to illuminate how the market microstructure underpins our results. We ﬁnd that our local logistic regressions slightly outperform our logistic regressions for both binary classiﬁcation and probabilistic prediction, although we note that the strength of this improvement is relatively small given the considerable increase in compu- tational power required to ﬁt a local logistic regression. To conclude, we discuss how several important diﬀerences in LOB behaviour could help to explain the diﬀerences that we observe between small- and large-tick stocks, and discuss many possible avenues for future research. There are many practical applications for the ﬁndings that we present. First, the ability to predict future price movements is a valuable tool for practitioners seeking to design trading strategies in ﬁnancial markets. Many ﬁnancial institu- tions invest vast sums of money to improve the predictive power of their forecasts by a tiny fraction of a percentage point, whereas the prediction methods that we present are extremely simple to implement and outperform our simple null model by a considerable margin. Second, thanks to their computational sim- plicity, the methods that we discuss can also be employed by electronic trading algorithms in real time, to help improve their performance. Third, the ability to formulate accurate forecasts of future price movements could be useful for traders who seek to implement optimal execution algorithms by deciding be- tween submitting limit or market orders. Fourth, the empirical framework that we consider is also a useful laboratory in which to test models. Speciﬁcally, comparing a model’s price predictions for a given queue imbalance to the cor- responding result ﬁtted directly from data could be useful as an indicator for how the model needs to be improved, or to rule it out altogether. The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we provide a detailed description of price formation in an LOB. In Section 3, we discuss several other publications that have addressed price prediction in an LOB, and we deﬁne the measures and terminology that we use for our own study. In Section 4, we describe the data that forms the basis of our empirical calculations. In Section 5, we discuss our statistical methodology. We present our main results in Section 6 and discuss 3 our ﬁndings in Section 7. Section 8 concludes. 2 Order Queues and Price Changes in a Limit Order Book 2.1 Limit Order Books More than half of the world’s ﬁnancial markets use electronic limit order books (LOBs) to facilitate trade [Ro¸ su, 2009]. In contrast to quote-driven systems, in which prices are set by designated market makers, trade in an LOB occurs via a continuous double-auction mechanism whereby institutions submit orders. An order x = (px,ω x,t x) submitted at time tx with price px and size ωx > 0 (respectively,ωx < 0) is a commitment by its owner to sell (respectively, buy) up to |ωx| units of the asset at a price no less than (respectively, no greater than) px. Whenever an institution submits a buy (respectively, sell) orderx, an LOB’s trade-matching algorithm checks whether it is possible for x to match to an active sell (respectively, buy) order y such that py≤px (respectively,py≥px). If so, the matching occurs immediately and the owners of the relevant orders agree a trade for the speciﬁed amount at the speciﬁed price. If not, then x becomes active, and it remains active until either it matches to an incoming sell (respectively, buy) order, or it is cancelled. Orders that result in an immediate matching upon arrival are called market orders. Orders that do not — instead becoming active orders — are called limit orders.1 The LOBL(t) is the set of all active orders for a given asset on a given platform at a given timet. For a detailed introduction to LOBs, see Gould et al. [2013]. At a given time t, the bid price b(t) is the highest stated price among active buy orders, b(t) := max {x∈L(t)|ωx<0} px, (1) and the ask price a(t) is the lowest stated price among active sell orders, a(t) := min {x∈L(t)|ωx>0} px. (2) The bid price and ask price are collectively called the best quotes. The bid-ask spread at time t is s(t) :=a(t)−b(t). (3) The mid price at time t is m(t) := a(t) +b(t) 2 . (4) 1Some platforms allow other order types (such as ﬁll-or-kill, stop-loss, or peg orders [Knight Capital Group, 2015]), but it is always possible to decompose the resulting order ﬂow into limit and/or market orders. Therefore, we study LOBs in terms of these simple building blocks. 4 We say that a price p is on the buy side of L(t) if p≤ b(t), on the sell side of L(t) if p≥a(t), or inside the bid–ask spread if b(t)<p<a (t). 2.2 Order Queues in a Limit Order Book LOBs implement two resolution parameters: the tick size π >0, which speciﬁes the smallest permissible price interval between diﬀerent orders, and the lot size σ > 0, which speciﬁes the smallest amount of the asset that can be traded. All orders must arrive with a price that is a positive integer multiple of π and a size that is an integer multiple of σ. For example, if π = $0.01, then the largest permissible order price that is strictly less than $1.00 is $0.99. Similarly, if σ = 10 shares, the the smallest permissible order size that is strictly greater than 100 shares is 110 shares. Because the tick size is strictly positive, the price axis of an LOB is a one- dimensional lattice, whose points correspond to positive integer multiples of π. An LOB can therefore be regarded as a set of queues, each of which consists of active buy or sell orders at a speciﬁed price (see Figure 1). At a given price p and time t, the total size of active buy orders (i.e., the length of the queue of buy limit orders) is given by nb(p,t ) := ∑ {x∈L(t)|ωx<0,px=p} |ωx| (5) and the total size of active sell orders (i.e., the length of the queue of sell limit orders) is given by na(p,t ) := ∑ {x∈L(t)|ωx>0,px=p} ωx. (6) In an LOB, the value ofb(t) increases whenever a new buy limit order arrives inside the bid–ask spread, and decreases whenever the total volume of buy limit orders at b(t) depletes to 0 (which occurs when all buy limit orders at b(t) either match to an incoming sell market order or are cancelled by their owners). Similarly, the value of a(t) decreases whenever a new sell limit order arrives inside the bid–ask spread, and increases whenever the total volume of sell limit orders ata(t) depletes to 0. The value ofm(t) increases (respectively, decreases) whenever either either of b(t) or a(t) increases (respectively, decreases). 3 Price Prediction and Queue Imbalance in an LOB During the past 20 years, many empirical and theoretical studies have sought to establish links between the state of an LOB and the subsequent price changes that occur within it. The literature on this topic is vast, and spans many diﬀerent disciplines, including economics, physics, mathematics, statistics, and psychology. For a recent survey of work in this ﬁeld, see Gould et al. [2013]. In 5 buy limit order sell limit order Bid Side Ask Side bid-price ask-price Price mid-price Total Size (χ) -10 -9 -8 -6 -5 -4 -3 -1 -2 0 -7 7 9 10 3 6 8 4 5 2 1 Figure 1: Schematic of an LOB. The horizontal lines within the blocks at each price level denote how the total size at that price is composed of diﬀerent active orders. this section, we review a selection of publications most relevant to our work, and introduce the notion of queue imbalance, which forms the basis for our empirical study. 3.1 Zero-Intelligence Models of LOB State Early studies of the links between queue dynamics and price formation in an LOB typically assumed that order ﬂows were governed by simple, independent stochastic processes. Several authors postulated models of LOB state to for- mulate predictions of future price movements. Models of this type are often called “zero-intelligence” LOB models, because they are not motivated by ra- tional traders who seek to achieve speciﬁed trading goals. Smith et al. [2003] introduced a zero-intelligence model in which limit order arrivals, market order arrivals, and cancellations all occur as mutually independent Poisson processes with ﬁxed rate parameters. Cont et al. [2010] extended this model by allow- ing the rates of limit order arrivals and cancellations to vary across prices. Huang et al. [2015] studied a model in which the order arrival rates depend on the lengths of order queues in L(t). Mike and Farmer [2008] considered a zero-intelligence framework in which order ﬂows also exhibit long-range auto- correlations, in agreement with empirical data. Despite the apparent simplicity of these approaches, zero-intelligence LOB models suﬀer from several important drawbacks. First, the LOB dynamics that emerge from their interacting order ﬂows are often extremely complex. Conse- quently, most analysis of zero-intelligence LOB models relies heavily on exten- 6 sive simulations, rather than analytical treatment. Second, although they make reasonably good predictions of the long-run statistical properties of LOB state (see, e.g., Farmer et al. [2005]), zero-intelligence LOB models typically produce poor predictions of price movements. Third, because such models ignore the strategies implemented by real traders, they fail to capture many important correlations and feedback loops between diﬀerent order ﬂows. This weakness further harms their ability to make good predictions of future price movements in real markets. 3.2 Simplifying the State Space Motivated by these weaknesses, several authors have proposed models that seek to produce more realistic LOB dynamics on a simpliﬁed LOB state space. Cont and De Larrard [2013] introduced a model in whichnb(b(t),t ) andna(a(t),t ) are assumed to be governed by independent diﬀusion processes. By studying this model in the hydrodynamic limit, in which stochastic ﬂuctuations are dominated by deterministic ﬂows, the authors obtained analytical expressions for several quantities of interest, such as the distribution of times between price changes, the distribution and autocorrelation of price changes, and the probability of a mid-price movement in a given direction, given nb(bt,t ) and na(at,t ). Despite the appealing nature of these results, Gar` eche et al. [2013] presented empirical results to illustrate that the dynamics of nb(bt,t ) and na(at,t ) are strongly inﬂuenced by a coupling between the two queues, and thereby brought into question Cont and de Larrard’s assumption of independence between the dynamics of nb(bt,t ) and na(at,t ). Avellaneda et al. [2011] studied a similar model in which nb(bt,t ) and na(at,t ) are also governed by diﬀusion processes, but with a speciﬁed correlation ρ. The authors solved their model to deduce a simple, closed-form predictor for the direction of the next mid-price movement, given nb(bt,t ), na(at,t ), and ρ. Although their assumption that nb(bt,t ) and na(at,t ) are related by a simple correlation parameter is clearly a simpliﬁca- tion of reality, the authors argued that their model produces reasonably good predictions of price movements in real LOBs. 3.3 Queue Imbalance in an LOB In a recent publication, Yang and Zhu [2015] argued that the property of the best bid and ask queues most useful for price prediction is not their lengths, but rather their imbalance. Speciﬁcally, at a given time t, let I(t) := nb(bt,t )−na(at,t ) nb(bt,t ) +na(at,t ) (7) denote the queue imbalance at time t. The quantityI measures the (normalized) diﬀerence between nb(bt,t ) and na(at,t ), and thereby provides a quantitative assessment of the relative strengths of buying and selling pressure in an LOB. 2 2Yang and Zhu [2015] deﬁne the queue imbalance using only nb(bt, t) on the numerator. This produces a linear rescaling of our deﬁnition in Equation (7), such that I∈ [0, 1]. We 7 IfI≈ 0 (which occurs when nb(bt,t ) andna(at,t ) are approximately equal), then the buying and selling pressures are approximately balanced. If I > 0 (which occurs when nb(bt,t )>n a(bt,t )), then the bid queue is longer than the ask queue, which suggests that there is a net positive buying pressure in the LOB. Conversely, ifI <0 (which occurs whennb(bt,t )<n a(bt,t )), then the ask queue is longer than the bid queue, which suggests that there is a net positive selling pressure in the LOB. Values of I close to 1 suggest a very strong buying pressure, and values of I close to−1 suggest a very strong selling pressure. Empirical study of how the queue imbalance in an LOB aﬀects future price changes dates back almost a decade, to when Cao et al. [2009] studied how the value of I at a speciﬁed depth inside the LOB (i.e., not only at the best quotes) inﬂuenced mid-price returns during the subsequent 5-minute interval. Stoikov and Waeber [2015] noted that the optimal execution of a single order over a short time horizon depends on the queue imbalance in an LOB. Cartea et al. [2015] studied queue imbalance at the trade-by-trade level on Nasdaq, and noted that the rate of buy (respectively, sell) market order arrivals and the probability of observing an upward (respectively, downward) price movement both increase considerably when I is strongly positive (respectively, strongly negative). Based on their analysis, they designed a trading algorithm whose objective is to place both buy and sell limit orders and thereby generate proﬁts from round-trip trades. Similarly to these previous publications, the aim of the present paper is to investigate whether queue imbalance I inﬂuences the future price dynamics in an LOB. Speciﬁcally, we seek to complement the analyses of queue imbalance in these papers with a more formal, quantitative analysis of whether the queue imbalanceI in an LOB provides signiﬁcant predictive power for the direction of the next mid-price movement. In contrast to the previous work in this area, we do not restrict our attention to large-tick stocks, but rather study the predictive power of queue imbalance for a selection of both small-tick and large-tick stocks. By comparing our results from these diﬀerent stocks, we seek to illuminate how the underlying market microstructure underpins the usefulness of I as a predictor of future price movements. 4 Data The data that we study originates from the LOBSTER database, which pro- vides an event-by-event description of the temporal evolution of the LOB for each stock listed on Nasdaq. 3 The LOBSTER database contains very detailed information regarding the temporal evolution of the relevant LOBs. However, for the present study we require only the time series of bid pricesb(t), ask prices a(t), and queue lengths nb(b(t),t ) and na(a(t),t ). We derive all of the statistics that we use for our empirical analysis from these 4 simple time series. To pro- choose to use nb(bt, t)− na(at, t) as the numerator because it instead produces an imbalance on the interval [−1, 1], and thereby simpliﬁes sign conventions. 3For a detailed introduction to LOBSTER, see http://LOBSTER.wiwi.hu-berlin.de. 8 duce our empirical results in Section 6, we study these time series for a selection of 10 liquid stocks during the entire year of 2014. The Nasdaq platform operates continuous trading from 09:30 to 16:00 on each weekday. Trading does not occur on weekends or public holidays, so we exclude these days from our analysis. We also exclude all activity during the ﬁrst and last 30 minutes of each trading day, to ensure that our results are not aﬀected by the abnormal trading behaviour that can occur shortly after the opening auction or shortly before the closing auction. After making these exclusions, we therefore study all trading activity from 10:00 to 15:30 on each of the 252 trading days in 2014. On the Nasdaq platform, each stock is traded in a separate LOB with price– time priority, with a tick size of π = $0.01 (see Section 2). Although this tick size is common to all stocks, the prices of diﬀerent stocks on Nasdaq vary across several orders of magnitude (from about $1 to more than $1000). Therefore, the relative tick size (i.e., the ratio between the stock price and π) varies con- siderably across diﬀerent stocks. In order to facilitate comparisons between stocks with diﬀerent relative tick sizes, we ﬁrst ranked all stocks listed on the Nasdaq exchange according to their total dollar volume of trades during 2014. From this list, we then selected the top 5 entries whose maximal trade price was below $50.00, and the top 5 entries whose minimal trade price was above $100 .00 (see Table 1). We call the ﬁrst group of stocks large-tick stocks because their low price makes their relative tick size large, and we call the second group of stocks small-tick stocks because their high price makes their relative tick size small. We also repeated our calculations for several other stocks whose prices fell between these two thresholds. We found that some such stocks behaved similarly to the large-tick stocks in our sample, whereas other behaved similarly to the small-tick stocks in our sample. In order to illustrate the clear separation between the results for diﬀerent types of stocks, we present only our results for the large-tick and small-tick stocks in our sample, and not for the other stocks with intermediate tick size. Table 1 lists the names of the stocks that we choose in this way, along with several summary statistics that describe their aggregate market activity. The LOBSTER data has many important beneﬁts that make it particu- larly suitable for our study. First, the data is recorded directly by the Nasdaq servers. Therefore, we avoid the many diﬃculties associated with data sets that are recorded by third-party providers, such as misaligned time stamps or incor- rectly ordered events. Second, the data is fully self-consistent, in the sense that it does not report any activities or updates that would violate the standard rules of LOB trading. By contrast, many other LOB data sets suﬀer from recording errors that can constitute a considerable source of noise when performing de- tailed analysis. Third, each limit order described in the data constitutes a ﬁrm commitment to trade. Therefore, our results reﬂect the market dynamics for real trading opportunities, not “indicative” declarations of possible intent. The LOBSTER database describes all LOB activity that occurs on Nasdaq, but does not provide any information regarding order ﬂow for the same assets on diﬀerent platforms. To minimize the possible impact on our results, we restrict 9 VM O ($bn) VLO ($bn) pmin ($) pmax ($) ⟨ nb(b(t),t ) ⟩ ⟨na(a(t),t )⟩ ⟨s(t)⟩ ($) MSFT 48.22 782.04 34.97 49.94 6206.7 6286.8 0.013 INTC 31.22 462.71 23.50 37.84 9597.5 9879.5 0.013 MU 28.72 341.83 20.65 36.50 3802.9 3922.8 0.014 CSCO 24.99 448.87 21.29 28.59 17114.9 18128.0 0.012 ORCL 16.00 254.02 35.65 46.70 3113.7 3244.9 0.015 GOOG 62.05 265.70 498.32 1228.88 133.4 134.9 0.360 AMZN 57.02 146.99 285.05 407.80 158.1 155.6 0.195 TSLA 51.37 111.60 136.90 291.40 204.4 203.2 0.212 PCLN 43.24 304.14 1017.07 1375.18 80.3 80.2 1.111 NFLX 40.69 135.79 299.50 488.98 120.3 120.0 0.352 Table 1: Summary statistics describing trading activity for the (top panel) large-tick and (bottom panel) small-tick stocks in our sample, which describes LOB activity on Nasdaq during 2014. The large-tick stocks are Microsoft (MSFT), Intel (INTC), Micron Technology (MU), Cisco Systems (CSCO), and Oracle (ORCL). The small-tick stocks are Google (GOOG), Amazon (AMZN), Tesla Motors (TSLA), Priceline (PCLN), and Netﬂix (NFLX). For each stock, the columns list the total size of market order arrivalsVM O (measured in billions of $), the total size of limit order arrivals at the best quotes VLO (measured in billions of $), the minimum trade price pmin (measured in $), the maximum trade price pmax (measured in $), the mean size of the bid queue ⟨ nb(b(t),t ) ⟩ (measured in number of shares), the mean size of the ask queue ⟨na(a(t),t )⟩ (measured in number of shares), and the mean bid–ask spread ⟨s(t)⟩ (measured in $). 10 our attention to stocks for which Nasdaq is the primary trading venue and therefore captures the majority of order ﬂow. Our results enable us to identify several robust statistical regularities linking queue imbalance to the directions of mid-price movements, which is precisely the aim of our study. We therefore do not regard this feature of the LOBSTER data to be a serious limitation for the present study. 5 Methodology 5.1 Sample Construction For each stock and each trading day in our sample, we ﬁrst create an ordered set T of times at which the mid price changes, T = { t ⏐⏐⏐⏐ m(t)⁄= lim ε↓0 m(t−ε) } . (8) Let t1 < t2 < ... < tN denote the times in T , and let t0 denote the time of the ﬁrst LOB event for the given stock on the given day (which, for our data, occurs at or after 10:00 — see Section 4). For each time ti ∈ T , we calculate an indicator variable yi to describe whether or not the mid-price movement at ti was upwards, yi := { 1, if m(ti)>m (ti−1), 0, if m(ti)<m (ti−1). (9) We choose to study price changes via this simple indicator variable, rather than studying the signed change in mid price, because the magnitude of such price changes are determined not only by nb(b(t),t ) and na(a(t),t ), but also by the prices and lengths of order queues deeper into the LOB. We therefore restrict our attention to the direction of mid-price movements, not their size. For each time ti ∈ T , we choose a time ˜ti uniformly at random in the open interval (ti−1,t i) and sample the imbalance I(˜ti) at this time. To ease exposition, we introduce the notation Ii =I(˜ti). (10) In this paper, we seek to assess the predictive power of Ii for forecasting yi. There are many other possible choices for when to sample the imbalance to perform predictions (such as sampling I immediately after ti−1 or immediately before ti), but we restrict our attention to the case of sampling ˜ti uniformly at random. We return to the discussion of possible alternative approaches in Section 8. For all stocks in our sample, both the number and temporal spacing between LOB events that aﬀectnb(b(t),t ) andna(a(t),t ) (i.e., market order arrivals and limit order arrivals and cancellations at the best quotes) varies considerably across diﬀerent time intervals ( ti−1,t i). In some cases, the arrivals of such 11 events are highly clustered, in the sense that the time intervals contain some periods with no updates to nb(b(t),t ) and na(a(t),t ) and other periods with many updates to nb(b(t),t ) and na(a(t),t ). In order to understand whether this event clustering strongly inﬂuences our results, we also repeated all of our calculations when constructing our random sample in event time . To do so, for each time ti∈ T , we ﬁrst construct a list of the times that either nb(b(t),t ) or na(a(t),t ) changed, during the time interval ( ti−1,t i). We then choose our sampling time ˜ti uniformly at random from this (discrete) set of event times. We found that all of our empirical results when choosing ˜ti in this way were qualitatively the same as those that we report throughout the paper, for which we choose ˜ti uniformly at random in the open interval ( ti−1,t i). 5.2 In-Sample and Out-of-Sample Data The number of mid-price changes that occur in a single trading day varies considerably both across diﬀerent stocks and across diﬀerent days. To ensure that our sample contains the same number of data points for each stock each day, we therefore draw a random subsample with a ﬁxed size among the N possible choices in the set T . For the results that we show in Section 6, we use a random subsample size 4 of 100. For each stock, we then aggregate the subsamples from each of the 252 diﬀerent trading days to produce an aggregated data set of 25200 data points. A key contribution of the present work is assessing the strength of predictive power provided by I. To avoid the possible dangers of data snooping when performing this analysis, we randomly partition each stock’s aggregated data set into two disjoint subsets: a training set, which contains 80% of the data (i.e., 20160 data points), and a testing set, which contains 20% of the data (i.e., 5040 data points). We perform the ﬁts of our logistic regressions and local logistic regressions using the training set (i.e., “in sample”), then evaluate the predictive power of these ﬁts using the testing set (i.e., “out of sample”). 5.3 Formulating Predictions The aim of the present study is to assess the predictive power ofIi for forecasting yi. We ﬁrst consider this question in the context of a simple binary classiﬁer, which seeks to predict whether, for a given queue imbalance Ii, the value of yi will be 0 or 1 (i.e., whether the direction of the next mid-price movement will be upwards or downwards). To perform this binary classiﬁcation, we seek to estimate a function ˆy that maps queue imbalance onto some subset of R, and a threshold value y∗∈ R, such that: • if ˆy(Ii)>y∗, then we predict yi to equal 1, • if ˆy(Ii)<y∗, then we predict yi to equal 0, 4We also repeated all of our calculations with a variety of subsample sizes ranging from 50 to 1000, and we found that our results were qualitatively the same in each case. 12 • if ˆy(Ii) =y∗, then we predictyi to equal either 0 or 1, each with probability 1/2. We then consider this question in the context of a probabilistic classiﬁer, which, for a given queue imbalance Ii, seeks to predict the probability that yi = 1. We note that if we choose the function yi for our binary classiﬁer such that ˆy : (−1, 1)→ [0, 1], (11) and if we interpret ˆy as ˆyi := P (yi = 1|Ii), (12) then we can use the same function ˆy to perform both binary classiﬁcation and probabilistic prediction. Consider a queue imbalance Ii′ chosen uniformly at random among all ob- servations for which yi = 1 and another queue imbalance Ij′ chosen uniformly at random among all observations for which yi = 0. If Ii provides predictive power to perform binary classiﬁcation, then the resulting values of ˆy will satisfy P(ˆyi′ > ˆyj′)> 1/2. (13) If, however, Ii provides no predictive power to perform binary classiﬁcation, then the resulting values of ˆy will satisfy P(ˆyi′ > ˆyj′) = P(ˆyj′ > ˆyi′) = 1/2. (14) Similarly, ifIi provides predictive power to perform probabilistic classiﬁcation, then the resulting values of ˆy will satisfy P(ˆyi′ > 1/2)> 1/2 and P(ˆyj′ > 1/2)< 1/2. (15) If, however, Ii provides no predictive power to perform probabilistic classiﬁca- tion, then the resulting values of ˆy will satisfy P(ˆyi′ > 1/2) = 1/2 and P(ˆyj′ > 1/2) = 1/2. (16) To formulate our estimate of the function ˆy, we perform a logistic regression of yi onto Ii. Speciﬁcally, we use the data in our training set to calculate maximum likelihood estimates of the coeﬃcients x0 and x1 in the relationship ˆy(I) = 1 1 +e−(x0+Ix 1). (17) For a detailed introduction to logistic regression, see Hosmer and Lemeshow [2004], McCullagh and Nelder [1989]. 13 5.4 Assessing Predictions To assess the predictive power of our logistic regressions for performing binary and probabilistic classiﬁcation, we compare their output to that of a simple null model in which we assume that I provides no useful information for predicting the direction of mid-price movements, such that ˆy(I) = 1/2 for all I. (18) In words, our null model predicts that the probability of an upward price move- ment is always 1/2, irrespective of the queue imbalance. To assess the predictive power of our ﬁts for performing binary classiﬁcation, we calculate the out-of-sample receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves and the corresponding area-under-ROC-curve statistics. The area under the ROC curve quantiﬁes how successfully the logistic regression ﬁts classify cases that result in a price move of a given direction. More precisely, for a given queue imbalance Ii′ chosen uniformly at random among all observations for which yi = 1 and another queue imbalance Ij′ chosen uniformly at random among all observations for which yi = 0, the area under the ROC curve is equal to the probability that the resulting values of ˆy will satisfy ˆyi′ > ˆyj′. For a detailed introduction to ROC curves, see Bradley [1997] and Hanley and McNeil [1982]. To assess the predictive power of our ﬁtted logistic regressions for performing probabilistic classiﬁcation, we use our function ˆy to make out-of-sample forecasts ˆyi for each Ii in the testing set, and calculate the corresponding residuals ri := ˆyi−yi. (19) We then calculate the mean square residual across all observations in the testing set. For the null model, ˆyi = 0.5 for all i, so ri is given by ri = { −1/2, if yi = 1, 1/2, if yi = 0 (20) and the mean squared residual is exactly 1 /4. 5.5 Local Logistic Regression After performing our logistic regression ﬁts, we also consider an alternative es- timation of the function ˆy by performing a local logistic regression of yi onto Ii. A local logistic regression is a semi-parametric estimation method that ﬁts a separate logistic regression at each point in the domain. Speciﬁcally, for a given imbalance I, the local logistic regression estimator of ˆy(I) is obtained by per- forming a standard logistic regression atI, but weighting the input observations according to their distance from I. For a detailed introduction to local logistic regression, see Loader [2006]. When performing our local logistic regression ﬁts, we use a standard tricube weight function with a nearest-neighbour bandwidth parameter, whose value we choose by performing a 5-fold cross validation in the training set. For a detailed discussion of parameter estimation via cross validation, see Hastie et al. [2010]. 14 6 Results We now present our main empirical results. In Section 6.1, we calculate the distribution of queue imbalances that we observe in our sample. We perform our logistic regression ﬁts in Section 6.2 and assess their out-of-sample performance in Section 6.3. In Section 6.4, we perform our local logistic regression ﬁts and analyze the resulting curves. 6.1 Distribution of I To help understand the distribution of queue imbalances that occur in our sam- ple, we ﬁrst calculate histograms of Ii for each of the 10 stocks. We plot these histograms in Figure 2. −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 0 2 4 6 8 10 Panel A: Large−Tick Stocks Imbalance Frequency Density MSFT INTC MU CSCO ORCL −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 0 2 4 6 8 10 Panel B: Small−Tick Stocks Imbalance Frequency Density GOOG AMZN TSLA PCLN NFLX Figure 2: Histograms of I for each of the 10 stocks in our sample. The left panel shows the results for large-tick stocks and the right panel shows the results for small-tick stocks. For large-tick stocks, it is common to observe a wide range of imbalances between about −0.5 and about 0 .5. The distribution of I decays gradually outside of this range. For some large-tick stocks, this decrease is approximately monotonic, up to statistical noise. For others, such as CSCO, there is another small local maximum close to I =±1. For small-tick stocks, the story is less straightforward due to a strong round- number eﬀect that appears at some values of I. Speciﬁcally, there exist several queue imbalances that occur much more commonly than do their neighbouring values. This eﬀect is particularly prominent at I = 0 and I = ±1/3, but is also visible at several other round-number values in the domain of I. To illustrate why these round-number eﬀects appear strongly for small-tick stocks, but not for large-tick stocks, we also calculate the empirical cumulative density functions (ECDFs) of the best-quote queue lengths nb(b(t),t ) and na(a(t),t ) (see Figure 3). For large-tick stocks, the curves decay smoothly across the 15 whole domain, which indicates that it is common to observe queues of a wide range of diﬀerent lengths. For small-tick stocks, by contrast, the ECDFs contain large jumps at some round numbers, such as 100 and 200. This implies that it is much more common to observe queues of these round-number lengths than it is to observe queues of other lengths. These round-number eﬀects for small-tick stocks subsequently manifest in the histograms in Figure 2. For example, if nb(b(t),t ) = 200 and na(a(t),t ) = 100 (both of which occur commonly), then I(t) = (200− 100)/(200 + 100) = 1/3. 1 100 10000 0.01 0.05 0.20 0.50 Panel A: Large−Tick Stocks Queue Length 1−ECDF MSFT INTC MU CSCO ORCL 1 100 10000 0.01 0.05 0.20 0.50 Panel B: Small−Tick Stocks Queue Length 1−ECDF GOOG AMZN TSLA PCLN NFLX Figure 3: Empirical cumulative density functions (ECDFs) of the best-quote queue lengthsnb(b(t),t ) andna(a(t),t ). In order to illustrate the tail behaviour, the plots show the survivor functions (i.e., 1 − ECDF) in doubly logarithmic coordinates. 6.2 Logistic Regression Fits We next perform our logistic regression ﬁts of ˆ y versus I (see Section 5.3). Figure 4 shows the ﬁtted logistic regression curves for each of the stocks in our sample, and Table 2 shows the corresponding maximum likelihood estimates and standard errors of the logistic regression coeﬃcients. Several particularly salient features are apparent from these results. First, the ﬁtted value of x0 is small for all stocks in our sample. This suggests that there is an approximately symmetric behaviour for buy-side and sell-side activ- ity. Speciﬁcally, the relationship between upward price movements for a given imbalance I =k is approximately the same as the relationship between down- ward price movements for a given imbalanceI =−k, fork∈ [0, 1]. By continuity of the logistic regression function, it thereby follows that upward and downward price movements are approximately equally likely when I = 0. Second, the ﬁtted value of x1 is positive in each case. This implies that the ﬁtted logistic regression line is a monotone increasing function ofI, and therefore suggests that the larger the queue imbalance, the higher the probability that 16 −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Panel A: Large−Tick Stocks Imbalance y^ MSFT INTC MU CSCO ORCL −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Panel B: Small−Tick Stocks Imbalance y^ GOOG AMZN TSLA PCLN NFLX Figure 4: Logistic regression ﬁts of ˆy versusI. The left panel shows the results for large-tick stocks and the right panel shows the results for small-tick stocks. x0 x1 Estimate St. Err. Estimate St. Err. MSFT 0.01 (0 .02) 2.49 (0 .04) INTC 0.03 (0 .02) 2.56 (0 .04) MU 0.03 (0 .02) 2.03 (0 .04) CSCO 0.06 (0 .02) 2.73 (0 .04) ORCL 0.05 (0 .02) 2.25 (0 .04) GOOG 0.03 (0 .01) 0.54 (0 .02) AMZN 0.03 (0 .01) 0.85 (0 .03) TSLA −0.01 (0 .01) 0.60 (0 .03) PCLN 0.03 (0 .01) 0.50 (0 .02) NFLX 0.01 (0 .01) 0.65 (0 .02) Table 2: Maximum likelihood estimates of the intercept x0 and coeﬃcient x1 in the logistic regression ﬁts of ˆy versusI. The top panel shows the results for large-tick stocks and the bottom panel shows the results for small-tick stocks. The numbers in parentheses indicate 1 standard error, which we estimate from the corresponding Fisher information matrix. For a full discussion of our logistic regression methodology, see Section 5.3. 17 x0 x1 Full Model MSFT 0.30 3831.73∗∗ 5265.76∗∗ INTC 2.61 4081.01∗∗ 5696.82∗∗ MU 3.06 3171.89∗∗ 3976.12∗∗ CSCO 11.13∗∗ 4261.37∗∗ 6205.00∗∗ ORCL 9.59∗∗ 3698.73∗∗ 4852.68∗∗ GOOG 4.74∗ 469.55∗∗ 483.24∗∗ AMZN 3.00 1002.24∗∗ 1061.45∗∗ TSLA 1.02 564.90∗∗ 583.63∗∗ PCLN 3.28 502.32∗∗ 517.13∗∗ NFLX 0.34 761.92∗∗ 791.63∗∗ Table 3: Test statistics for (ﬁrst two columns) Wald tests for individual coef- ﬁcients and (third column) likelihood ratio test for the full logistic regression ﬁts of ˆy versusI. The top panel shows the results for large-tick stocks and the bottom panel shows the results for small-tick stocks. For all tests, the asymp- totic distribution of the test statistic is given by a χ2 distribution with 1 degree of freedom, for which the 95% critical value is 3 .84 and the 99% critical value is 6.63. Entries marked with an asterisk are statistically signiﬁcant at the 95% level, and entries marked with a double-asterisk are statistically signiﬁcant at the 99% level. the next mid-price movement will be upwards. Third, the ﬁtted values of x1 are much larger for large-tick stocks (for which they vary from about 2 to about 3) than for small-tick stocks (for which they vary from about 0.5 to about 0.8). These diﬀerences in parameter estimates sim- ilarly produce substantial diﬀerences in the logistic regression ﬁts. For large-tick stocks, the large values of x1 produce substantial curvature in the ﬁtted logistic regression curves (see the left panel of Figure 4), whereas for small-tick stocks, the small values of x1 produce much ﬂatter, shallower ﬁtted logistic regression curves (see the right panel of Figure 4). Together, these results suggest that strong imbalances (of either sign) lead to stronger levels of predictability for large-tick stocks than they do for small-tick stocks. For example, the logistic regression curves predict that when I is close to 1, the probability of an upward price move is about 0.8 to 0.9 for large-tick stocks, but only about 0.6 to 0.7 for small-tick stocks. We next turn to the question of whether the x0 and x1 coeﬃcients cause a statistically signiﬁcant impact in the output of the logistic regressions. To address this question, we perform a Wald test for the x0 and x1 coeﬃcients in turn (see the ﬁrst two columns of Table 3). At the 95% level, the intercept x0 is not statistically signiﬁcant for MSFT, INTC, MU, AMZN, TSLA, PCLN, or NFLX, but is statistically signiﬁcant for CSCO, ORCL, and GOOG. For CSCO and ORCL,x0 is also statistically signiﬁ- cant at the 99% level. This result suggests that there is a statistically signiﬁcant asymmetry between buy-side and sell-side activity for these stocks. We stress, 18 however, that the strength of this asymmetry is very weak (see Table 2), and that we are only able to detect it with statistical signiﬁcance because our sam- ple is large. Therefore, even for these stocks, the behaviour of the ﬁtted logistic regression curve is very close to symmetric about I = 0. The coeﬃcientx1 is statistically signiﬁcant at the 99% level for all 10 stocks in our sample. This implies that the logistic regressions detect a strongly sta- tistically signiﬁcant relationship between the queue imbalance and the direction of the subsequent mid-price movement. We next turn to the question of the statistical signiﬁcance of the full logistic regression ﬁts. To address this question, we perform a likelihood ratio test of the ﬁtted logistic regressions against a nested model that contains only the intercept term, and thereby excludes the possible inﬂuence of queue imbalance (see the third column of Table 3). For all 10 stocks in our sample, the results of the likelihood ratio test are statistically signiﬁcant at the 99% level, which allows us to conclude with high statistical conﬁdence that the relationship between ˆ y and I illustrated by our logistic regressions is highly statistically signiﬁcant. 6.3 Assessing Predictive Power In Section 6.2, we concluded from our logistic regressions that the relation- ship between the queue imbalance and the direction of the subsequent mid- price movement is highly statistically signiﬁcant. We now turn to the question of how strongly the estimated logistic regression curve ˆ y improves the out-of- sample performance of binary and probabilistic classiﬁcation, in comparison to a simple null model, which assumes that the direction of mid-price changes is uncorrelated with the queue imbalanceI. Due to the large size of our sample, it could be the case that ˆy produces a relatively small increase in predictive power, despite the logistic regression ﬁts being statistically signiﬁcant. We ﬁrst address the out-of-sample performance of our logistic regression ﬁts for performing binary classiﬁcation. To do so, we calculate the ROC curves (see Section 5.3) for each of our logistic regression ﬁts in Section 6.2. We show these ROC curves, together with the corresponding ROC curve for the null model, in Figure 5. In each case, the out-of-sample ROC curves lie above the grey line for all choices of speciﬁcity, which implies that the logistic regression ﬁts outperform the out-of-sample predictive power of the null model at all levels of speciﬁcity. In Table 4, we list the area under the ROC curve for each stock (see Section 5.4). For large-tick stocks, the area under the ROC curve varies from about 0 .7 to about 0.8. For small-tick stocks, the results are weaker, and vary from about 0.6 to about 0.65. In both cases, however, these results indicate that I provides a substantial improvement in the out-of-sample predictive power of the binary classiﬁer. To verify that these results are not inﬂuenced by over-ﬁtting, we also calculate the area under the corresponding ROC curves for the in-sample ﬁts. In each case, the in-sample values of the statistics in Table 4 are very similar 19 Panel A: Large−Tick Stocks Specificity Sensitivity 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 MSFT INTC MU CSCO ORCL Panel B: Small−Tick Stocks Specificity Sensitivity 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 GOOG AMZN TSLA PCLN NFLX Figure 5: Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for the out-of-sample predictive power of a binary classiﬁer, based on the logistic regression ﬁts of ˆ y versusI from Section 6.2. The left panel shows the results for large-tick stocks and the right panel shows the results for small-tick stocks. The grey line in each plot denotes the expected performance of the null model, which assumes that the probability of an upward price movement is always equal to 1/2, irrespective of the queue imbalance. In Sample Out of Sample MSFT 0.781 0 .762 INTC 0.791 0 .798 MU 0.747 0 .752 CSCO 0.802 0 .805 ORCL 0.770 0 .770 GOOG 0.592 0 .581 AMZN 0.635 0 .642 TSLA 0.602 0 .602 PCLN 0.592 0 .583 NFLX 0.616 0 .627 Table 4: Area under the ROC curves (see Figure 5) for the logistic regression ﬁts of ˆy versusI shown in Figure 4. The top panel shows the results for large-tick stocks and the bottom panel shows the results for small-tick stocks. For the null model (i.e., ˆy(I) = 0.5 for all I), the expected area under the ROC curve is 0.5. 20 In Sample Out of Sample MSFT 0.191 0 .198 INTC 0.186 0 .183 MU 0.204 0 .202 CSCO 0.181 0 .180 ORCL 0.195 0 .195 GOOG 0.244 0 .246 AMZN 0.237 0 .235 TSLA 0.243 0 .243 PCLN 0.244 0 .245 NFLX 0.240 0 .239 Table 5: Mean squared residual ri of the logistic regression ﬁts of ˆy versus I shown in Figure 4. The top panel shows the results for large-tick stocks and the bottom panel shows the results for small-tick stocks. For the null model (i.e., ˆy(I) = 0.5 for all I), the mean squared residual is 0 .25. to the corresponding out-of-sample values, which indicates that the predictive power of the logistic regressions is similar for both the training and testing data. We next address the out-of-sample predictive power of our probabilistic clas- siﬁer. To do so, we compute the mean squared residual ri (see Equation (19)) between the observed value of yi and the predicted probability ˆyi, across all observations in the testing set (see Table 5). For large-tick stocks, the mean squared residuals vary from about 0 .18 to about 0.2. For small-tick stocks, the mean squared residuals vary from about 0.235 to about 0.245. For the null model, the mean squared residual of the null model is exactly 1 /4 (see Section 5.4). Therefore, when compared to the null model, the logistic regression ﬁts provide a reduction in mean squared residual of about 20% to 30% for large-tick stocks, and about 2% to 6% for small-tick stocks. For all stocks, the in-sample values of the mean squared residuals are very similar to the corresponding out-of-sample values, which conﬁrms that the logistic regressions do not suﬀer from over-ﬁtting. The results in Tables 4 and 5 together present an interesting picture of the out-of-sample performance of our logistic regression ﬁts. In terms of binary classiﬁcation of the direction of price movements (which we measure by calcu- lating the area under the ROC curve), the logistic regression ﬁts perform well for large-tick stocks and reasonably well for small-tick stocks. In terms of predicting the probability of an upwards mid-price movement (which we measure by cal- culating the mean squared residuals), the logistic regression ﬁts again perform well for large-tick stocks. For small-tick stocks, however, the results are much weaker, and the logistic regression ﬁts only slightly outperform the null model. Therefore, despite the queue imbalance being a statistically signiﬁcant predictor of subsequent price movements for all stocks, the improvement in out-of-sample forecasting power that it provides varies considerably across stocks. 21 6.4 Local Logistic Regressions In Sections 6.2 and 6.3, we calculated logistic regression ﬁts to estimate a para- metric relationship between the queue imbalance and the direction of the sub- sequent mid-price movement. Although these results are useful for perform fast and simple calculations regarding the statistical signiﬁcance of the possible rela- tionship betweenI andy, the parametric nature of this approach could obscure the detailed market dynamics that underpin this relationship, because the shape of the ﬁtted logistic regression curves is constrained by the parametric form of the logistic sigmoid function in Equation (17). To help address this problem, we now complement our results in Sections 6.2 and 6.3 with a semi-parametric approach, by ﬁtting local logistic regression curves to the same data (see Section 5.3). In contrast to the logistic regression ﬁts, these semi-parametric ﬁts enable us to consider more carefully the subtle relationship between queue imbalance and mid-price movements, and thereby help to illuminate the market dynamics that underpin our results. Figure 6 shows our ﬁtted local logistic regression curves for each of the stocks in our sample. For each ﬁt, we use a tricube weight function with a nearest-neighbour bandwidth parameter. To choose this bandwidth parameter, we perform a 5-fold cross validation within our training set, using the mean squared residual ri (which we seek to minimize) as our objective function. Al- though the globally optimal choice of bandwidth parameter varies somewhat across the diﬀerent stocks in our sample, in all cases it resides between about 0.5 and about 0 .8. For the results that we present in this section, we use the bandwidth parameter 0.65. We also repeated all of our calculations for a range of diﬀerent bandwidth choices between 0 .6 and about 0 .7, and we found that our results were qualitatively similar for all choices in this range. For large-tick stocks, the local logistic regression curves are approximately monotone increasing functions of I, which suggests that larger values of Ii cor- respond to larger values of yi. Similarly to the logistic regression curves (see Figure 4), the local logistic regressions predict that the probability of an up- ward price movement is about 0 .8 to 0.9 when I is close to 1. In contrast to the logistic regression curves, however, the local logistic regression curves sug- gest that the behaviour of the system exhibits 2 diﬀerent regimes. For values of I between about −0.25 and about 0 .25, the ˆy curve is quite steep, which indicates that when the bid and ask queues have similar lengths, a relatively small diﬀerence in the queue imbalance corresponds to a considerable change in the probability that the next price movement will be upwards. Outside of this region, the steepness of the ˆy curve decreases considerably. Therefore, for values ofI less than about−0.25 or greater than about 0.25, a further diﬀerence in queue imbalance corresponds to a smaller change in the probability that the next price movement will be upwards. For small-tick stocks, the local logistic regression curves predict that the probability of an upward price movement is about 0.6 when I is close to 1. For all small-tick stocks except PCLN, the local logistic regression curves are non- monotonic in I. This result is rather puzzling, because it suggests that there 22 −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Panel A: Large−Tick Stocks Imbalance y^ MSFT INTC MU CSCO ORCL −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Panel B: Small−Tick Stocks Imbalance y^ GOOG AMZN TSLA PCLN NFLX Figure 6: Local logistic regression ﬁts of ˆ y versus I. For each curve, we use a tricube weight function and a nearest-neighbour bandwidth of 0 .65. The left panel shows the results for large-tick stocks and the right panel shows the results for small-tick stocks. For full details of our local logistic regression methodology, see Section 5.3 and the discussion in the main text. are cases when a weaker imbalance increases the probability of an upward mid- price movement. This counter-intuitive ﬁnding brings into question whether the ﬁtted local logistic regressions ˆy really detect a meaningful relationship, or simply over-ﬁt to noise. To address this question, we again consider the out-of-sample predicted power of the local logistic regression curves for performing binary classiﬁcation and probabilistic classiﬁcation. Figure 7 shows the out-of-sample ROC curves (see Section 5.3) for each of our local logistic regression ﬁts, together with the corresponding ROC curve for the null model of ˆy(I) = 1/2 for all I. For each stock, the out-of-sample ROC curve for the local logistic regressions is very similar to the corresponding ROC curve for the logistic regression. In all cases, the ROC curve lies above the grey line, which indicates that the local logistic regression ﬁts outperform the out-of-sample predictive power of the null model at all levels of speciﬁcity. To quantify the strength of this increase in predictive power, and to consider the out-of-sample predictive power of the local logistic regression curves for performing probabilistic classiﬁcation, we again calculate the area under the ROC curve (see the ﬁrst two columns of Table 6) and the mean squared residual ri (see the ﬁnal two columns of Table 6). Similarly to our results in Tables 4 and 5, the in-sample values of the statis- tics in Table 6 are very similar to the corresponding out-of-sample values, which indicates that the predictive power of the local logistic regressions is similar for both the training and testing data. Therefore, the unusual shape of the ˆ y functions in Figure 7 is not a consequence of over-ﬁtting to noise. By comparing the performance measures for the logistic regressions in Ta- 23 Panel A: Large−Tick Stocks Specificity Sensitivity 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 MSFT INTC MU CSCO ORCL Panel B: Small−Tick Stocks Specificity Sensitivity 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 GOOG AMZN TSLA PCLN NFLX Figure 7: Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for the out-of-sample predictive power of the local logistic regression ﬁts of ˆy versusI. The left panel shows the results for large-tick stocks and the right panel shows the results for small-tick stocks. The grey line in each plot denotes the expected performance of the null model, which assumes that the probability of an upward price movement is always equal to 1/2, irrespective of the queue imbalance. Area Under ROC Curve Mean Squared Residual In Sample Out of Sample In Sample Out of Sample MSFT 0.781 0 .762 0.190 0 .198 INTC 0.791 0 .798 0.185 0 .183 MU 0.747 0 .752 0.204 0 .202 CSCO 0.802 0 .805 0.181 0 .179 ORCL 0.770 0 .770 0.195 0 .195 GOOG 0.592 0 .581 0.244 0 .246 AMZN 0.636 0 .642 0.236 0 .235 TSLA 0.602 0 .603 0.242 0 .242 PCLN 0.592 0 .583 0.244 0 .245 NFLX 0.616 0 .627 0.240 0 .239 Table 6: Statistics describing the predictive power of the local logistic regression ﬁts of ˆy versus I. The ﬁrst two columns show the area under the ROC curve and the second two columns show the mean squared residual of the ﬁts. The top panel shows the results for large-tick stocks and the bottom panel shows the results for small-tick stocks. For the null model (i.e., ˆ y(I) = 0.5 for all I), the expected area under the ROC curve is 0 .5 and the mean squared residual is 0.25. For a full discussion of our local logistic regression methodology, see Section 5.3 and the discussion in the main text. 24 bles 4 and 5 to the corresponding performance measures for the local logistic regressions (see Table 6), we are able to quantify the diﬀerences between these diﬀerent approaches. Interestingly, the values in Tables 4 and 5 are all very similar to the corresponding values in Table 6. This suggests that the perfor- mance of these two diﬀerent approaches is quite similar. Detailed comparisons of these tables reveal that the local logistic regressions slightly outperform the logistic regressions in some cases, but these improvements are all quite small. We provide a more detailed comparison of our results from logistic regression and local logistic regression in Section 7. 7 Discussion Our results in Section 6 illustrate the existence of a statistically signiﬁcant rela- tionship between the queue imbalance and the direction of the subsequent mid- price movement. For large-tick stocks, the relationship depends quite strongly on the queue imbalance (see upper rows of Table 2) and provides a considerable improvement in out-of-sample predictive power in terms of both binary classiﬁ- cation (see Table 4) and probabilistic classiﬁcation (see Table 5). For small-tick stocks, the relationship depends less strongly on the queue imbalance (see lower rows of Table 2), and the improvement in out-of-sample predictive power is more moderate (see Table 6). Among the stocks in our sample, the weakest out-of-sample performance that we observe occurs in the probabilistic classiﬁcation for GOOG, for which our ﬁts outperform the null model by about 2%. Although this number is certainly small compared to the performance that we achieve for other stocks, it is impor- tant to remember that many practitioners invest huge sums of money to improve their trading strategies by tiny fractions of a percentage point. Therefore, even this very moderate performance for GOOG could be economically signiﬁcant for some market participants. Moreover, both of our performance measures are unconditional averages that make forecasts for all data points, many of which correspond to situations where the imbalance is small (see Figure 2), and therefore where the predictability of the mid-price movement is weak. If we con- sidered only the situations in which the queue imbalance was close to ±1, then the out-of-sample performance of our estimators would improve considerably. This observation is particularly important from a practical standpoint, because some practitioners may only be interested in forecasting when the ability to do so is likely to be strong, and may therefore simply abstain from trading when I≈ 0. Similarly, it seems reasonable to assume that I is less informative when both nb(b(t),t ) and na(a(t),t ) are small, because the arrival of a single buy (respectively, sell) market order is likely to cause the mid price to increase (respectively, decrease). Therefore, if we considered only the situations in which both nb(b(t),t ) and na(a(t),t ) are considerably larger than 0, then the out-of- sample performance of our estimators would again improve considerably. It is interesting to consider why our results for large-tick stocks are so dif- 25 ferent from our results for small-tick stocks. We believe that the answer to this puzzle lies in the underlying market microstructure. Recall from Section 2 that in an LOB, there are usually two ways for m(t) to change: by a new limit order arriving inside the bid–ask spread, or by one of the bid or ask queue lengths depleting to 0. However, the mean bid–ask spread for the large-tick stocks in our sample is very close to its minimum possible value of the platform’s tick size, s(t) = π = $0.01 (see Table 1). This behaviour has an important consequence for LOB dynamics, because it removes the possibility that a new limit order will arrive inside the bid–ask spread, and thereby eliminates one of the two possible reasons for changes in m(t). It is therefore reasonable to believe that the queue imbalance (which quantiﬁes the relative lengths of the bid and ask queues) will provide stronger predictive power when s(t) =π, because the probability of an upwards price movement is governed only by the probability that the ask queue depletes before the bid queue (which, in turn, depends directly on the queue lengths), and not on the probability that a new buy limit order arrives inside the spread. Even when s(t) > π, there are still strong reasons for why market partici- pants may behave diﬀerently for small-tick and large-tick stocks. Similarly to most other LOBs, the Nasdaq platform operates a price–time priority rule (see Section 4), by which priority is given to the active buy (respectively, sell) orders with the highest (respectively, lowest) price, and ties are broken by selecting the active order with the earliest submission time. When s(t)>π , any market participant has the opportunity to submit a buy (respectively, sell) limit order with higher priority than any others in the LOB, simply by choosing the price of this order to be one tick higher than b(t) (respectively, lower thana(t)). There- fore, the tick size π determines the cost of “buying” priority in the LOB. For large-tick stocks, this cost is relatively high, so many traders choose to submit new limit orders that wait in the queues at the best quotes, and the typical sizes of nb(b(t),t ) and na(a(t),t ) are large. For small-tick stocks, this cost is relatively low, so many traders choose to submit new limit orders inside the bid–ask spread, and the typical sizes of nb(b(t),t ) and na(a(t),t ) are small. As noted above, the predictive power of I is likely to be larger in situations where nb(b(t),t ) andna(a(t),t ) are larger. In this way, the stronger out-of-sample per- formance for large-tick stocks can similarly be attributed to the longer queue lengths that typically occur for these stocks. For some stocks in our sample, we ﬁnd a weak but statistically signiﬁcant asymmetry in the ﬁtted logistic regressions, which manifests as a non-zero value of the interceptx0 (see Table 2). For these stocks, this result suggests that even when the imbalance is slightly less than 0, the probability that the next mid- price movement will be upwards is greater than 1 /2. We propose two possible explanations for this ﬁnding. First, the arrival of exogenous news may cause traders to change their trading behaviours, irrespective of the queue imbalance. For example, if a trader receives news that a given company’s earnings have outperformed expectations, then he/she may submit a large market order to buy the stock (and thereby cause an increase in mid price), even if the current queue imbalance is negative. We note that all stocks for which we ﬁnd x0 to be 26 statistically signiﬁcantly positive underwent considerable price increases during 2014, which is consistent with this hypothesis of an exogenous buying pressure. Second, some strategic liquidity providers may implement complex strategies that skew the queue imbalance via an asymmetric submission of limit orders. For example, if a strategic liquidity provider fears the possibility of a strong downward price movement, then he/she may choose to submit fewer sell limit orders than buy limit orders, even in the absence of any information about the likely future value of the asset. In a recent empirical study of strategic liquidity provision on Nasdaq, Bonart and Gould [2015] found strong evidence to suggest that liquidity providers implement strategies that created imbalanced net order ﬂow at the best quotes. Although it is diﬃcult to test these theories directly, we believe that both of these explanations are likely to contribute to the behaviour that we observe. In addition to our logistic regression ﬁts, we also perform local logistic re- gression ﬁts on the data. By comparing the entries in Tables 4 and 5 to the corresponding entries in Table 6, it is possible to compare the performance of the logistic regression and local logistic regression ﬁts. Most of the entries in Tables 4 and 5 are equal to the corresponding entries in Table 6, even up to the third decimal place. This implies that the performance of the two methods is very similar. In a small number of cases, however, the local logistic regression ﬁts slightly outperform the corresponding logistic regression ﬁts. Both approaches have beneﬁts and drawbacks. Performing logistic regression is much less computationally intensive than performing local logistic regression, and the full ﬁt of the logistic regression model consists of just 2 scalar values, x0 and x1. Saving the ﬁtted logistic regression curve to a computer hard disk therefore requires very little storage space. By contrast, saving the ﬁtted local logistic regression curve requires saving a full copy of the training data, which can be very large. However, local logistic regression has the important beneﬁt of providing more detailed information about the underlying LOB dynamics, because the ﬁtted regression curve is not constrained by the parametric form of the logistic sigmoid function. Therefore, careful analysis of the local logistic regression ﬁts can provide deeper understanding of the results. 8 Conclusions and Outlook In this paper, we have presented an empirical study of whether the queue im- balance I provides signiﬁcant predictive power for the direction y of the next mid-price movement. We used data describing the LOB activity for each of 10 liquid stocks on Nasdaq during 2014 to ﬁt logistic regression curves that en- abled us to perform both binary classiﬁcation and probabilistic classiﬁcation of y, givenI. For all 10 stocks in our sample, we found that our logistic regressions identiﬁed a strongly statistically signiﬁcant relationship between I and y. For the large-tick stocks in our sample, our logistic regression ﬁts provide a considerable improvement in both binary and probabilistic classiﬁcation. For the small-tick stocks, we found that the increase in predictive power was more 27 moderate, particularly for probabilistic classiﬁcation. We argued that the reason for these diﬀerences was the diﬀerences in underlying market microstructure. We also performed local logistic regression ﬁts on the same data, and found that this semi-parametric approach slightly outperforms the logistic regression ﬁts, at the expense of being more computationally expensive. In addition to these practical beneﬁts, our results also highlight many pos- sible avenues for future research. Throughout this paper, we have chosen to measure the queue imbalance via the quantity I, according to Equation (7), sampled at a time chosen uniformly at random between subsequent changes of m(t). Although we identify a statistically signiﬁcant relationship between I and y, there are many other possible ways to measure queue imbalance in an LOB. For example, we could measure the value ofI immediately after or immediately before each mid-price change, to examine how its predictive power varies accord- ing to the length of time that elapses before the next price change. Similarly, it would be interesting to see whether an alternative deﬁnition of the queue imbal- ance could provide stronger out-of-sample predictive power than the quantity I that we used for this study. Other possibilities could include quantities such as log(nb(b(t),t )/na(a(t),t )), or even simply nb(b(t),t )−na(a(t),t ). Moreover, we have only studied the imbalance between the best bid and ask queues. It is possible that the predictive power of our approach could be improved by also incorporating other statistics about the lengths or imbalance of other queues deeper into the LOB. Our results also raise interesting questions about the predictability of price movements on longer time scales. For example, does I provide useful informa- tion about the direction of price movements further into the future? If so, how does this predictive power diminish over time? And how do price movements remain unpredictable on longer timescales, given that we show them to be quite predictable in our one-step-ahead framework? Understanding the relationship between queue imbalance and subsequent price movements is also an important theoretical question. It would therefore be interesting to build models for how imbalance could evolve over time, and could thereby aﬀect the subsequent evolution of LOB state. In comparison to modelling the full state of an LOB (which is an extremely high-dimensional problem), the simple, one-dimensional nature of I(t) makes modelling its tem- poral evolution an attractive task. We aim to address these and many other questions about the predictive power of queue imbalance in our future work. Acknowledgements We thank Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, Rama Cont, Jonathan Donier, Till Hoﬀ- mann, Nick Jones, Julien Kockelkoren, Charles-Albert Lehalle, and Douglas Machado for useful discussions. We thank Jonas Haase and Ruihong Huang for technical support. Martin D. Gould gratefully acknowledges support from the James S. McDonnell Foundation and Julius Bonart gratefully acknowledges support from CFM. 28 References M. Avellaneda, J. Reed, and S. Stoikov. Forecasting prices from level-I quotes in the presence of hidden liquidity. Algorithmic Finance, 1(1):35–43, 2011. J. Bonart and M. D. Gould. Strategic liquidity provision in a limit order book. arXiv:1511.04116, 2015. J. P. Bouchaud, J. D. Farmer, and F. Lillo. How markets slowly digest changes in supply and demand. In T. Hens and K. R. Schenk-Hopp´ e, editors,Handbook of Financial Markets: Dynamics and Evolution , pages 57–160. North–Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2009. A. P. Bradley. The use of the area under the ROC curve in the evaluation of machine learning algorithms. Pattern Recognition, 30(7):1145–1159, 1997. C. Cao, O. Hansch, and X. Wang. The information content of an open limit- order book. Journal of Futures Markets , 29(1):16, 2009. ´A. Cartea, R. F. Donnelly, and S. Jaimungal. Enhancing trading strategies with order book signals. Working Paper, SSRN eLibrary ID 2668277 , 2015. A. Chakraborti, I. M. Toke, M. Patriarca, and F. Abergel. Econophysics review I: Empirical facts. Quantitative Finance, 11(7):991–1012, 2011. R. Cont. Empirical properties of asset returns: stylized facts and statistical issues. Quantitative Finance, 1(2):223–236, 2001. R. Cont and A. De Larrard. Price dynamics in a Markovian limit order market. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics , 4(1):1–25, 2013. R. Cont, S. Stoikov, and R. Talreja. A stochastic model for order book dynamics. Operations Research, 58(3):549–563, 2010. J. D. Farmer, P. Patelli, and I. I. Zovko. The predictive power of zero intelligence in ﬁnancial markets. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 102(6):2254–2259, 2005. J. D. Farmer, A. N. Gerig, F. Lillo, and S. Mike. Market eﬃciency and the long-memory of supply and demand: Is price impact variable and permanent or ﬁxed and temporary? Quantitative Finance, 6(2):107–112, 2006. A. Gar` eche, G. Disdier, J. Kockelkoren, and J. P. Bouchaud. Fokker–Planck description for the queue dynamics of large tick stocks. Physical Review E , 88(3):032809, 2013. M. D. Gould, M. A. Porter, S. Williams, M. McDonald, D. J. Fenn, and S. D. Howison. Limit order books. Quantitative Finance, 13(11):1709–1742, 2013. J. A. Hanley and B. J. McNeil. The meaning and use of the area under a receiver operating characteristic curve. Radiology, 143(1):29–36, 1982. 29 T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman. The Elements of Statistical Learning . Springer, New York, NY, USA, 2010. D. W. Hosmer and S. Lemeshow. Applied Logistic Regression. Wiley, New York, NY, USA, 2004. W. Huang, C. A. Lehalle, and M. Rosenbaum. Simulating and analyzing order book data: The queue-reactive model. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 110(509):107–122, 2015. Knight Capital Group. Retrieved 14 April 2015 from http://www.hotspotfx. com/download/userguide/HSFX/HSFX_UserGuide_wrapper.html, 2015. C. Loader. Local Regression and Likelihood . Springer, New York, NY, USA, 2006. P. McCullagh and J. A. Nelder. Generalized Linear Models , volume 37. Chap- man and Hall, London, UK, 1989. S. Mike and J. D. Farmer. An empirical behavioral model of liquidity and volatility. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control , 32(1):200–234, 2008. ISSN 0165-1889. I. Ro¸ su. A dynamic model of the limit order book.Review of Financial Studies , 22(11):4601–4641, 2009. E. Smith, J. D. Farmer, L. Gillemot, and S. Krishnamurthy. Statistical theory of the continuous double auction. Quantitative Finance, 3(6):481–514, 2003. S. Stoikov and R. Waeber. Reducing transaction costs with low-latency trading algorithms. Working Paper, SSRN eLibrary ID 2661618 , 2015. T. W. Yang and L. Zhu. A reduced-form model for level-1 limit order books. arXiv:1508.07891, 2015. 30