arXiv:1603.05313v3 [q-fin.TR] 30 Mar 2016 Market Dynamics vs. Statistics: Limit Order Book Example. Vladislav Gennadievich Malyshkin ∗ Ioﬀe Institute, Politekhnicheskaya 26, St Petersburg, 19402 1, Russia Ray Bakhramov † Forum Asset Management LLC, 733 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017 (Dated: March, 16, 2016) $Id: DynamicsVsStatistics.tex,v 1.75 2016/03/29 23:23:2 6 mal Exp $ Commonly used limit order book attributes are empirically c onsidered based on NASDAQ ITCH data. It is shown that some of them have the proper ties drastically diﬀerent from the ones assumed in many market dynamics study. Because of this diﬀerence we propose to make a transition from “Statistical” type of order book study (typical for academics) to “Dynamical” type of study ( typical for market practitioners). Based on market data analysis we conclude, that most of market dynamics information is contained in attributes with spike s (e.g. executed trades ﬂowI =dv/dt), there is no any “stationary case” on the market and typical market dynamics is a “fast excitation and then slow relaxation” typ e of behavior with a wide distribution of excitation frequencies and relaxatio n times. A computer code, providing full depth order book information and recently ex ecuted trades is available from authors[1]. ∗ malyshki@ton.ioﬀe.ru † rbakhramov@forumhedge.com 2 I disagree with the world. Penelope Fitzgerald I. INTRODUCTION Limit order book study is a hot topic of quantitative ﬁnance[2–7]. The reason is simple: while executed trades provide information about the “past” execu tion prices, order book may, possibly, provide information about “future” execution price s, what attract a lot of attention. Most of current order book study have a goal of building a “statist ical” type of theory. This typically mean 1) an introduction of some (often implicit) time–sca le. 2) Calculation of some statistical characteristics, that is claimed to help in describing market dynamics and, in best possible case, helps in predicting future price changes[8]. However, when one visit a trading ﬂoor of a major bank, or any hedg e fund (at least those the authors of this paper have seen), nobody uses “statistical” t ype of theory at all to make a trading decision. Market practitioners look not on statistical par ameters, they typically talk over the phone to each other and, most of them, watch time–d ependent variables (e.g. prices, moving averages, bond spreads, volatility charts, etc.) tr ying to make a trading decision. Only after the decision is already made a statistical theory of some kind is often deployed to estimate a proper hedge ratio or possible risk. Same thin g we have observed with HFT trading, where an algorithms is typically represented as a “h ardwired” trading idea and statistical characteristics are only used for e.g. thresho lds calculation. There is a diﬀerent mindset between academical studies, that is of “ statistical” type, and market practitioners mindset, that is of “dynamical” type. Som e market practitioners activity, such as watching all day prices and moving averages, may b e worthless, (we believe that price–information is insuﬃcient for successful trading[9]). D espite useless, or in some cases even counterproductive, market practitioners activity, w e, nevertheless, think that an eﬀort should be made to bring academic studies close to real market s, and the diﬀerent mindset issue should be addressed. The ﬁrst simple step in this direction is made in this paper: we are going t o plot several time–dependent characteristics of real market data to debunk s ome common in academic cir- cles opinions about limit order book. This may look as “trolling”: in our pr evious paper[10] 3 we have thrown away the “Supply and Demand”, and now throw away the “Statistics”. But this is the life of real markets. During all our more than 40 years of combined “hedge fund experience” 1) nobody used supplied and demand 2) statistics was used only to justify already made decision. II. LIQUIDITY DEFICIT Before we go ahead with charts related to order book study we pro vide brief introduction to our market dynamics theory[9], because we are going to use it for explanations. The execution rate, I = dv dt (1) the number of shares traded per unit time, is the key concept of ou r theory. Numerical estimation of (1) can be done by using either some crude techique su ch as “sliding window”, or, much better option, by an application of Radon–Nikodym derivat ives[11] on two measures dv and dt, see [9] for details of numerical estimation of it and the calculation of I0 (I “now”) with possible thresholds for I0 (using either boundary conditions for the probability state, or a projection of the state “now” to the states of minimal and max imal I). As we established empirically [9, 10] the trading rate (1) is the most imp ortant charac- teristics aﬀecting price dynamics. This is especially evident in a quasi-s tationary case [10], where high price changes are observed on high values of I, but with little volume traded. The (1) with thresholds deﬁne what market practitioners call “slow ” and “fast” markets. In this sense we agree with the Ref. [12] B. Mandelbrot and R. Huds on: “In fractal analysis, time is ﬂexible. The multifractal model describ es markets as de- forming timeexpanding it here, contracting it there. The more dram atic the price changes, the more the trading time-scale expands. The duller the price chart , the slower runs the market clock. Some researchers have tried linking this concept to t rading volume: High volume equals fast trading time. That is a connection not yet establis hed, and it need not be. Time deformation is a mathematical convenience, handy for ana lyzing the market; and it also happens to ﬁt our subjective experience. Time does not run in a straight line, like the markings on a wooden ruler. It stretches and shrinks, as if the rule r were made of balloon rubber. This is true in daily life: We perk up during high drama, nod oﬀ wh en bored. Markets do the same.” 4 But with one very important adjustment. Link how the “the trading time-scale expands”, not to the “trading volume”, but to the “trading rate” the I = dv/dt from (1). In our earlier papers[9, 10] we linked the high price volatility periods to the periods o f high I value, what is especially evident in a quasi-stationary case. In [5] authors emphasize that information propagates very fast a nd market makers update their quotes immediately. We think that for US equity and ﬁxed income markets the main source of this information is the fact that market participants “fe el” the trading rate I and once the it become large – they immediately start adjusting their quotes, thus making the large price movements. For these markets the trading rate I can be considered as the “driving force”. Market observation show, that prices react on t rading rate much stronger than on, say, news or other events. Some traders tried to estima te this trading rate “dynamic impact” experimentally[13] on NASDAQ exchange (one can move not v ery liquid stock a lot with just half a million in capital) but such experiments are really cost ly. For other markets (e.g. US real estate market) we do not have an answer wh ether the I (e.g. the total price of houses (or their number) sold in unit time) is the driving force of the market or is a consequence of some other, unknown factor. It may be both. We believe the trading rate I from (1) is the key factor deﬁning US equity market dy- namics and we will present it in all the charts below. III. ORDER BOOK CHAR TS Despite wide attention to order book study, the interpretation of attributes, used in these theories, often looks very much as “a falsis principiis proﬁcisci”, or, to quote the Ref. [14]: “Today many mathematical or conceptual models that are claimed t o be rigorous are based upon unvalidated and incorrect assumptions. Such models ar e rational in the sense that they are logically derived from their assumptions, except that it is the modeler who is using an incomplete representation of the reality.” Below we provide, as a simple example, three commonly used order boo k attributes and discuss their role in market dynamics. In all the Figs. 1, 2 and 3 we pre sent the data, obtained from NASDAQ ITCH data feed[15], for the AAPL stock on Se ptember, 20, 2012 round 10am. The time on x axis is in decimal fraction of an hour, e.g. 9.7 5 mean 9:45am. For a reference the execution ﬂow I0 is presented on each chart (Scaled to ﬁt the chart. 5 693 693.5 694 694.5 695 695.5 696 696.5 697 697.5 698 698.5 699 9.7 9.75 9.8 9.85 9.9 9.95 10 10.05 10.1 10.15 10.2 10.25 10.3 P t (Pbuy-Plast)*4 (Psell-Plast)*4 I0 Plast FIG. 1. Psell − Plast andPbuy − Plast (scaled to ﬁt the chart). The Plast is last execution price and Pbuy and Psell are the best order book bid & oﬀer. Calculated in Shifted Legendre basis with 7 elements in basis and τ =128sec. See Ref. [9], Section II.B for numerical calculation method.). The I is believed to be the driving force of the market and for this reason it is presented on all the charts. A. Midprice V alue The midprice, Pm = Psell + Pbuy 2 (2) where Pbuy and Psell are the best order book bid & oﬀer, is often considered as an import ant price to be used in order book dynamics models. In the Fig. 1 we prese nt the Psell − Plast and Pbuy − Plast. These ﬂuctuate only within about a spread value, but it is clear that during the periods of high value of I0 the trading typically occurs on one side of the book and the spread can either growths or shrink to minimal value when a “ maximal I” price is reached and buyers and sellers send to the exchange whatever liq uidity they have. In the last case the two types of matching “market sell matched limit bu y” and “market buy matched limit sell” become almost identical. This make the midprice (2) irr elevant during most interesting moments of high I0 (correspond to the moments of high price volatility). We also emphasized in [9], that current NASDAQ fee structure make ord er book manipulation 6 close to free. In addition to that, if you talk to market practitioner s, and our personal trading experience conﬁrms this, since about 2008–2010 nobody in a sane mind would trade according to the Pbuy and Psell levels of the order book. Actual exchange liquidity is typically signiﬁcantly better, than the Pbuy and Psell levels. If you send a “buy” order slightly lower than Psell or “sell” order slightly higher than Pbuy, then this order typically gets almost immediately matched by a market order coming. This means that actu al best buy/sell prices are substantially better than the order book reports and to trad e market order according to order book best levels guarantee to lose at least a few cents in price and lose the rebate paid by the exchange for executed limit orders, compared to an alterna tive of posting limit order at price few cents better than order book best price level. Moreov er, experiments show, that for high liquidity stocks, buy order with price min( Psell, Plast + δ) and sell orders with price max(Pbuy, Plast − δ) get almost immediately executed. The value of δ is about few cents (depend on stock liquidity, and spread). Another concept we have widely seen in academic publications is a conc ept of “patient” and “impatient” traders. We think that this concept has nothing to do with reality. The goal of all traders is to get orders executed at a good price. When some trader put a limit order deep inside order book — this is not because this trader is “patient”. It is very opposite: a trader put an order deep inside the order book only because this t rader want be the ﬁrst (very impatient) when the price reaches that level. We believe, that exchange trading since at least 2010 is not very much diﬀerent from a “dark pool” trading: y ou send an order at some price — you may or may not get it executed, and the order book information is of little value. Typical exchange order execution pattern is this: an or der came at some price in between book ”best buy” and ”best sell”, spend almost no time in th e order book, then it either get almost immediately executed or cancelled. The ratio obser ved is that more than 90% of orders being at best price level at some time end up being canc elled[9, 16]. The order book contains mostly ”old” orders, having no much eﬀect on execut ion rate. This make us to conclude that since at least 2010 available from exchange order b ook best price levels are way too conservative, and actual “exchange” info is not that muc h diﬀerent from a “dark pool” info. This mean that the order book spread and the midprice (2 ) are almost useless. 7 693 693.5 694 694.5 695 695.5 696 696.5 697 697.5 698 698.5 699 9.7 9.75 9.8 9.85 9.9 9.95 10 10.05 10.1 10.15 10.2 10.25 10.3 P t -Vbestbuy*1e-3 Vbestsell*1e-3 I0 Plast FIG. 2. The values of book volume on best buy/sell price level s (scaled to ﬁt the chart). B. V olume Disbalance Order book best levels volume relative disbalance (3) is often conside red to be an impor- tant attribute for market dynamics theories. ηdisbalance = Vbest sell − Vbest buy Vbest sell + Vbest buy (3) This attribute is commonly interpreted as deﬁning the asymmetry of “price impact”: the side with the biggest best level volume providing “price support”; pr ice move in this direction requires a bigger volume traded. In the Fig. 2 we present the absolu te value of order book best price level volume (scaled to ﬁt the chart). First, what is very clear from the charts, is the spikes in volume on best price levels, that correlate with high value of trading rate I (1). Another very clear observation from this chart is that large best p rice level volume can have a diﬀerent eﬀect on price dynamics. Check, for instance, time inter val between 9.95 and 10 .0. There large best bid volume can serve both as “price support” and a s “liquidity attractor”. For “liquidity attractor” market participants see large liquidity on th e best price level, and, if this price is acceptable to them, take it immediately, considering bes t level liquidity as an opportunity. This “liquidity attractor” eﬀect is opposite to the “pr ice support”. Ideologically the situation is similar to the situation with large price change. What ca n happen after asset price strong move in some direction. It can be both: bounce back or follow the trend. Very similar situations is here. Large order book best price level volume ca n cause both: “price support”(bounce back) and “liquidity attractor”(trend following ), not to mention the most 8 693 693.5 694 694.5 695 695.5 696 696.5 697 697.5 698 698.5 699 9.7 9.75 9.8 9.85 9.9 9.95 10 10.05 10.1 10.15 10.2 10.25 10.3 P t -τbestbuy*1e-2 τbestsell*1e-2 I0 Plast FIG. 3. Time spend in order book for the orders on best buy/sel l price level. common outcome — orders cancellation. We think that widely used in academic study best price level volume disb alance indicator (3) has a bad normalizing (spikes are the most informative features ) and volume disbalance should be interpreted ambivalently: both as “price support” and as “liquidity attractor”. C. Time In Order Book The best price level volume value is not a very good indicator for the r eason market participants typically keep the order book volume at some moderate level and update it as long as execution goes for the reason not to reveal their actua l intentions. In this sense average time (calculated as the diﬀerence between current time an d limit order origination time, weighted with order size) on best price level can serve as a bet ter than volume indicator of liquidity inﬂux. It should be noted, that NASDAQ exchange also has non–displayable (previously called “hidden”) orders, that cost more to place and are not reported in order book. They are only reported in execution. Executed non–displayable order id was actu ally available before Oc- tober 6, 2010, what allowed to interpolate hidden order origination t ime, but after this date NASDAQ broadcast 0 as hidden order id. In addition to that eﬀective July 14, 2014, NAS- DAQ does not report matching type (market–buy matched limit–sell or market–sell matched limit–buy) for non–displayable orders. See Appendix A of Ref. [15]. Fo r these reasons all 9 the order data analyzed in this paper actually misses all hidden order s information. In Fig. 3 for the orders on the best buy/sell level the average time spent in order book is presented. This time has spikes (similar to volume spikes, but more c lear ones), and these spikes correlate with large I (1). The picture is similar to the volume disbalance of subsection (III B), but the result is less ambivalent between “price support” and “liquidity attractor”. This can be interpreted in a way similar to “trading volum e vs trading rate” of Ref. [10], here it would be the “volume at best price level vs orders inﬂux (proportional to inverse time)”. As we emphasized in Ref. [9] the time spent in orde r book is one of a few good indicators obtained out of the order book data. The reas ons may be: diﬃculty to calculate (the order book is required), harder to manipulate (time is not possible to “ﬁx”, but the volume is easy) and being rate–like attribute. IV. DISCUSSION In this paper we emphasize the importance for academic community t o make a transition from “Statistical” to “Dynamical” type of order book study to bring order book study more in line with market practitioners activity. We propose the following steps in this direction : • Stop making distribution charts and start making time–dependent c harts. As a contri- bution to this pathway we provide computer code, see Appendix A as a reference im- plementation. Take e.g. com/ polytechnik/ algorithms/ ExampleBook Disbalance.java and modify the “processData” method, that is called on every book modiﬁcation event, and has three arrays as the arguments: recently executed trad es, order book buy side orders, order book sell side orders. It is seductively easy to make some statistics out of these arrays, but try not to do this, and, instead, do plain outp ut of the attributes calculated. Then look at them as time–dependent values. • Stop normalizing calculated values. Do not divide on standard deviatio n or other “ad hoc” selected scale. For example, used in numerous study the sell–b uy book order best level volume relative disbalance (3) we think can be used only by those who have never seen actual order book volume at best price level (or those who ha ve no risk to lose real money if the market goes against your positions). As we emphasized in the subsection 10 III B actual volume at best price level have huge spikes, the chang es are often of several orders of magnitude. The most important information is contained in these spikes, because they determine the liquidity available. Dividing the volume by th e absolute value (3) remove the spikes and make the attribute worthless. Mor eover, we think that most market study should be directed toward the “attribute s with spikes” as they deﬁne the dynamics, e.g. the trading rate (1), or time the order sp ent in the order book, considered in subsection III C. The “attributes with spikes” are fundamental to e.g. Limit Order Book structure or execution ﬂow: there is no any st ationary state for these variables; the data supported fact is that most of obse rvable variables are severely non–stationary and represent a combination of “fast ex citation and then slow relaxation” type of behavior with a wide distribution of excitation fre quencies and relaxation times. Once the “attributes with spikes” are identiﬁed — t he threshold for their estimation of “low” and “high” value is required. This is a complex p roblem, no simple thing with ﬁxed time scale statistics (e.g. standard deviation) w ould ever work. In our [9] paper we proposed a “probability states” –type of answe r, an application of that was demonstrated there for the calculation of I thresholds. • Stop linking model quality with the quality of price prediction. Predicte d price typi- cally provide completely meaningless result (but often very good Sha rpe Ratio). Be- cause of price prediction errors the trading strategy can give bot h positive and negative P&L. We think that model quality should be based on the quality of P&L prediction. P&L dynamics include not only price dynamics, but also trader actions . There is “a posse ad esse” question about the possibility of future price predic tion. We believe that price prediction is possible only in some seldom moments. The key e lement of any P&L trading strategy is an existence of at least four signals (trade r actions): “Enter Long”, “Exit Long (sell existing long)”, “Enter Short”, “Exit Shor t (buy to cover)”. A proﬁtable P&L trading strategy should open the position during th e time, when future market movement can be predicted (enter condition) and c losing the position when future direction is uncertain (exit condition). In our work [9] w e linked opening position (but the decision about “long” or “short” is still problematic ) with liquid- ity deﬁcit event and closing the position with liquidity excess[17]. Other approaches to opening and closing positions can be used, but what is important fo r any trading 11 strategy is the separation of price movement and trader actions. Together they give the P&L, that is “the ultimate criteria” of any trading strategy qua lity. In this sense the P&L dynamics is not “ad captandum vulgus”, what some academic s was telling us. And not only academics, the backtesting process in some pract ical automated trading machines we have seen was actually an estimation of price pre diction quality. We believe that the P&L dynamics, that separates trader actions a nd price movement, should be the fundamental topic of any market dynamics study. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Vladislav Malyshkin would like to thank Alberto Bicci and Charles–Albert Lehalle for fruitful discussions. Appendix A: Code implementation Computer code implementing the algorithms is available[1]. The code is ja va written. To reproduce the results follow these steps: • Install java 1.8 or later. • Download from [1] the data ﬁle S092012-v41.txt.gz and code archive SupplyDe- mandQuasiStationary.zip. • Decompress the code and recompile it. unzip SupplyDemandQuasiStationary.zip javac -g com/polytechnik/*/*java • Run the command: java com/polytechnik/algorithms/ExampleBookDisbalanc e \ S092012-v41.txt.gz AAPL >book_aapl.csv to extract order book edges information on every order book mod iﬁcation event. The output include last executed and book best prices, book best level volume, and book 12 best level time. Book edges approximation (e.g. volume via Christoﬀe l function) is also presented (for approximation the book orders are cut at high enough price level (about $1 from the best price), then 10–points Gauss–Radau qua drature is built on this price–volume distribution and the weight (equal to Christoﬀel f unction value) at best price give best price level volume interpolation). If one does no t need Christoﬀel function (for the volume) and Radon–Nikodym (for τ ) book edge approximation, then the class com/ polytechnik/ itch/ DumpData2Trader.java can be us ed instead of the com/ polytechnik/ algorithms/ ExampleBookDisbalance.java. • The “processData” method, that is called on every book modiﬁcatio n event, has three arrays as the arguments: recently executed trades, order boo k buy side orders, order book sell side orders; the method can be modiﬁed to produce other output. [1] Vladislav Gennadievich Malyshkin, (2014), the code for polynomials calculation, http://www.ioffe.ru/LNEPS/malyshkin/code.html. [2] Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, J. Doyne Farmer, and Fabrizio L illo, “How markets slowly digest changes in supply and demand,” ArXiv e-prints (2008), arXiv :0809.0822 [q-ﬁn.TR]. [3] Bence T´ oth, J´ anos Kert´ esz, and J Doyne Farmer, “Studi es of the limit order book around large price changes,” The European Physical Journal B 71, 499–510 (2009). [4] Zolt´ an Eisler, Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, and Julien Koc kelkoren, “The price impact of order book events: market orders, limit orders and cancellations,” Quantitative Finance 12, 1395–1419 (2012). [5] Paul Besson and Charles-Albert Lehalle, “The Deal/Book Split Analysis: A New Method to Disentangle the Contribution to Market and Limit Orders i n Any Price Change,” Available at SSRN 2377965 (2014). [6] Jonathan Donier and Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, “From Walr as’ auctioneer to continuous time double auctions: A general dynamic theory of supply and dema nd,” ArXiv e-prints (2015), arXiv:1506.03758 [q-ﬁn.TR]. [7] Alberto Bicci, “Limit Order Book and its modelling in ter ms of Gibbs Grand-Canonical En- semble,” ArXiv e-prints (2016), arXiv:1602.06968 [q-ﬁn.T R]. 13 [8] ´Alvaro Cartea, Sebastian Jaimungal, and Jason Ricci, “Buy l ow, sell high: A high frequency trading perspective,” SIAM Journal on Financial Mathemati cs 5, 415–444 (2014). [9] Vladislav Gennadievich Malyshkin and Ray Bakhramov, “M athematical Foundations of Real- time Equity Trading. Liquidity Deﬁcit and Market Dynamics. Automated Trading Machines. http://arxiv.org/abs/1510.05510,” ArXiv e-prints (2015), arXiv:1510.05510 [q-ﬁn.CP]. [10] Vladislav Gennadievich Malyshkin, “Market Dynamics. On Supply and Demand Concepts,” ArXiv e-prints (2016), arXiv:1602.04423. [11] A. N. Kolmogorov and S. V. Fomin, Elements of the Theory of Functions and Functional Analysis (Martino Fine Books (May 8, 2012), 8 May 2012). [12] Benoit Mandelbrot and Richard L Hudson, The Misbehavior of Markets: A fractal view of ﬁnancial turbulence (Basic books, 2014). [13] Eugeny Yakushev, (2009), private communication. [14] Nassim Nicholas Taleb, R Read, Raphael Douady, Joseph N orman, and Y Bar- Yam, “The precautionary principle: fragility and black swa ns from policy actions,” Extreme Risk InitiativeNYU School of Engineering Working P aper Series (2014). [15] Nasdaq OMX, NASDAQ TotalView-ITCH 4.1 , Report (Nasdaq OMX, 2014) Also see data ﬁles samples ftp://emi.nasdaq.com/ITCH/. [16] Nikolaus Hautsch and Ruihong Huang, “Limit order ﬂow, m arket impact and optimal order sizes: Evidence from (2011). [17] Note, that commonly used trading strategies, for which enter/exit conditions are diﬀerent only in threshold values can never work as a P&L trading strat egy. This is a trivial illustrative example of a “mean reverse strategy”: given price P , moving average PA, and enter and exit thresholds, satisfying σenter >σ exit. Then typical conditions are: “Enter Long”:P − PA < −σenter; “Exit Long”:P − PA >σ exit; “Enter Short”:P − PA >σ enter; “Exit Short”:P − PA< −σexit. For a P&L trading strategy enter condition must identify the moments when the price can be predicted, and exit condition must identify the moments, wh en the price cannot be predicted and the position must be closed to avoid price uncertainty ri sk (otherwise a price move against position held, that lead to a catastrophic P&L loss is guaran teed to happen sooner or later). The problem with these, just threshold–diﬀerent enter/exit conditions, such as e.g. “Enter Long”:P − PA< −σenter and “Exit Short”:P − PA < −σexit — they are essentially the same. 14 They do not carry any information, that qualitatively disti nguish possibility or impossibility of price prediction. In [9] we used low/high value of the exec ution rate I as the criteria distin- guishing enter/exit condition. This I–based criteria can determine possibility or impossibilit y of price prediction. It is qualitatively diﬀerent from the di rection determining criteria. A P&L trading strategy is ideologically similar (but not identic al, because P&L trading do have a di- rectional component) to volatility trading strategy. Take a position during low volatility and close it during high volatility to avoid unexpected price mo ve. Because price high volatility correspond to high I (the I is the driving force of the market), the position held must be closed when the value of I is high. Consequently, it should be opened when the I is low. The I, along with limit order cancellation ﬂow, describe what the authors of [5] call the “liquidity consumption”. The balance of “liquidity oﬀer” (o rders inﬂux to the Limit Order Book) and “liquidity consumption” is currently an active re search subject. Many authors made attempts to obtain large time scale price dynamic out of the d isbalance of “liquidity oﬀer” and “liquidity consumption”. Our numerical experiments (t he code is very similar to the one described in Appendix A), show that “liquidity oﬀer” and “liq uidity consumption” ﬂows have almost identical timing (check the position of the spikes in ﬂows plotted as time–dependent charts, do not use any statistics). This gives possible pred iction time, obtained from ﬂows– disbalance, not exceeding milliseconds scale (the ITCH dat a from [15] provide time resolution of one nanosecond). At such a small time scale there is very li ttle liquidity available and a ﬁerce competition for it among the HFT ﬁrms, make such a small timescales unworkable for a “regular” HFT ﬁrm. A larger time scale is required. The appro ach of subsection III C, where the time spent in the order book is demonstrated as a possible approach to reach a “workable” time scale. Another option to obtain a “workable” time scale is to use the dynamic equation I → max, that we introduced in Ref. [9]. Knowing the probability state ψ(t), maximizing the functional < Iψ2(t) > / < ψ2(t) > (stable estimator[18, 19]), is equivalent to knowing the “proper” time scale. Anyway, for any attainable to a “reg ular” HFT ﬁrm time scale, the “liquidity oﬀer” and the “liquidity consumption” can often b e considered as redundant, and the execution rate I is suﬃcient to be considered as a proxy for both. The situatio n here is similar to our alternative to Supply–Demand theory, the Liq uidity Deﬁcit theory[10], where supply and demand are considered as always matched, but the r ate of their matching I varies. The [10] demonstrate this on a large time scale (one trading d ay). Numerical experiment with 15 the code from Appendix A and NASDAQ ITCH data[15] can demonst rate “liquidity oﬀer” and “liquidity consumption” matching down to milliseconds scale (in a sense time diﬀerence in spikes position). [18] Gennadii Stepanovich Malyshkin, Optimal and Adaptive Methods of Hydroacoustic Signal Proce ssing. Vol 1. Optimal (Elektropribor Publishing, 2009) ISBN: 978-5-900780-90- 0. [19] Vladislav Gennadievich Malyshkin, “Norm-Free Radon- Nikodym Approach to Machine Learn- ing,” ArXiv e-prints (2015), arXiv:1512.03219 [cs.LG].