Learning zero-cost portfolio selection with pattern matching Tim Gebbiea,b, Fayyaaz Loonata,b aSchool of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa bQuERILab - Quantifying Emergence, Risk and Information Abstract We consider and extend the adversarial agent-based learning approach of Gy¨ orﬁet al to the situation of zero-cost portfolio selection implemented with a quadratic approximation derived from the mutual fund separation theorems. The algorithm is applied to daily sampled sequential Open-High-Low-Close data and sequential intraday 5-minute bar-data from the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE). Statistical tests of the algorithms are considered. The algorithms are directly compared to standard NYSE test cases from prior literature. The learning algorithm is used to select parameters for agents (or experts) generated by pattern matching past dynamics using a simple nearest-neighbour search algorithm. It is shown that there is a speed advantage associated with using an analytic solution of the mutual fund separation theorems. It is argued that the expected loss in performance does not undermine the potential application to intraday quantitative trading and that when transactions costs and slippage are considered the strategies can still remain proﬁtable when unleveraged. The paper demonstrates that patterns in ﬁnancial time-series on the JSE can be systematically exploited in collective but that this does not imply predictability of the individual asset time-series themselves. Keywords: online learning, pattern matching, portfolio control, algorithmic portfolio selection PACS: 89.65.Gh, 02.50.Ey 2000 MSC: 91-04, 91G10, 91G80 JEL: G11 G14 G17 055 1. Introduction Sequential investment strategies aim to facilitate port- folio control decisions by collecting information from past behaviour and states of the market and using this infor- mation to deploy capital across a selection of assets in a manner the can generate consistent wealth maximization over the long-term [14, 17, 22]. The intention of the paper is not to ﬁnd a proﬁtable trading strategy for quantitative trading but to show that such strategies exists by providing a simple, transparent and easily recoverable example in the domain of unlever- aged zero-cost portfolio selection for statistical arbitrage. Here we make no speciﬁc assumptions relating to the nature of price processes for the sake of the algorithms, however, the approach is broadly based on prior mathe- matical analysis that use assumptions of stationarity and ergodicity of the price increments in order to allow the study of asymptotic growth rates. In particular to ensure that such growth rates have well-deﬁned maxima when full knowledge of the distribution and its process have been achieved [14, 17, 18, 22]. We investigate the idea that by using pattern matching algorithms (where the patterns are unspeciﬁed) combined with learning algorithms, based on some purpose, such as wealth maximisation irrespective or risk [13, 14], we can: Email address: tim.gebbie@wits.ac.za (Tim Gebbie) 1. Beat a cash portfolio in the context of a self-funding strategy, a zero-cost portfolio strategy, and that 2. We can beat the best stock in the market [16]. The latter has been shown to be the case in prior literature, by investigating daily sampled stock data from the NYSE for long-only (fully invested) portfolio strategies [14, 17, 15, 16, 20]. Here we consider both of these cases: zero-cost, and fully invested strategies, in the context of the South African stock market, the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE), and do so for both daily sampled data and intraday data. The approach here should not be confused with ques- tioning the value of technical analysis where pre-speciﬁed patterns, in the form of some sort of library or set of rules, are used to try to generate systematic wealth [11]. We are considering the problem of probing phenomenology aimed at understanding ﬁnancial markets as a complex adaptive system [1, 3]. More speciﬁcally, we are considering the modelling of time-series arising from complex adaptive sys- tems, something more closely aligned with the context of nonlinear dynamical systems thinking [4]. The question of ﬁnding evidence of structure, as opposed to random- ness, in ﬁnancial time-series data, but beyond evidence of long-term memory or typical stylised facts [2]. We argue that we are not trying to show that speciﬁc patterns ex- ist, that such pattens are predictable, but rather that the Preprint submitted to July 12, 2021 arXiv:1605.04600v1 [q-fin.CP] 15 May 2016 interaction of a purposeful agent with a stock market us- ing pattern-matching can generate wealth that would not be expected from a typical null-hypothesis of geometric Brownian motion. We are speciﬁcally not looking for statistically preserved properties of time-series, in the sense of time-series models, but are rather looking for evidence of statistical repeating structures in time-series, but without a-priori ability to know the form that the structure will take, perhaps be- cause of the nonlinearity of the system in question [8, 10]. We are seeking indirect evidence of structure by show- ing that a purposeful agent can learn to make investment decisions [3], in a positivist manner, by looking for a-priori unspeciﬁed and unknown patterns in the data, that can be purposefully exploited, sequentially and systematically, to generate wealth in excess of that expected by randomness and the related normative perspectives of the functioning of ﬁnancial markets. This is not in itself new, there is a rich literature on attempts at probing the predictability of this or that ﬁnancial time-series. What can be considered con- troversial is the view that fairly naive computational learn- ing agents can generate wealth within the system without special insights or understanding of the system itself 1. By extracting positive growth rates in the excess of the performance of the best stock by using unleveraged combi- nations of underlying stocks over long periods of time this can be taken as building the case that there are indeed pat- terns, or some sort of structure, that almost repeat though time in a manner that their occurrence can be treated as exploitable information in collective. This has been shown to be the case for long-only portfolio’s [14, 17, 15, 16, 20]. We show this for self-funding strategies; zero-cost portfo- lio’s. To achieve this we construct sequential investment strategies based on pattern matching and demonstrate that these strategies can generate positive growth rates in excess of the best stocks in the investment universe, and substantial positive growth rates for zero-cost strate- gies in excess of that expected from investment in cash or risk-free assets. We do not address the question of whether it is risk that the investor is being compensated for, or even whether the strategies we are isolating are in fact statistical arbitrages, in the sense that the strategies long-term volatility tending to zero in conjunction with an always positive probability of positive performance at zero initial cost [12]. The appearance of patterns and organisation is a funda- mental property of complex adaptive systems [4]. Looking directly for pockets of predictability in complex dynamical systems [5] as an approximation to modelling complexity adaptive systems [4] is notoriously diﬃcult given the intri- cacies of noise and nonlinearity [6, 7]. Coupling purpose, via a learning criterion, here wealth maximisation irrespec- 1This view beneﬁted from conversations with D Hendricks and D Wilcox tive of risk, to the selection for patterns, in order to achieve the stated purpose, is the approach promoted here. It is in this sense that we built a framework that ex- tracts pockets of predictability, if they exist, via pattern searching, ideally in an online manner, in order to increase our agents wealth irrespective of risk, but speciﬁcally in the situation where the form of the patterns are always unknown, changing and dynamic, but are represented in collective past histories of the system components. In Section 2 we present the agent-based learning algo- rithm as an extension of prior work [13, 14, 17, 18] and [20, 22]. The contributions here are: (i) the algorithm is explicitly re-written in online form in order to make near-real-time applications tractable, (ii) the algorithms are modiﬁed for application to the zero-cost portfolio se- lection problem using the mutual fund separation theorems [25, 24], (iii) the algorithms are explicitly tested, using syn- thetic data, real daily data both from the NYSE and JSE, and for JSE intraday 5-minute bar-data. Section 3 describes the approach we have adopted for the generation of experts or agents modiﬁed for use in zero- cost portfolio strategies. The algorithm parameters are not tuned prior to use but are left to the online-learning algorithm to select. In Section 3.6, we consider strategies that target pre- dictable patterns using a simple modiﬁed version of the nearest-neighbour pattern-matching strategy developed by [22]. As in the case of the learning algorithm, the agent- generation algorithms have been modiﬁed in principle: (i) to support oﬄine and online algorithm use, (ii) they are explicitly framed for use with zero-cost portfolio selection problems, and (iii) portfolio optimizations have been re- placed with analytic quadratic approximations in order to improve execution times. In order to have true online pattern matching the algo- rithms would have to replaced with either look-up-tables built oﬀ-line or a hybrid method that combines oﬄine building of the history of the agents performance and then an almost online method that updates that cached his- tory of agents performance across parameters as the data arrives sequentially in real-time. Section 4 provides an overview of the data used in the various numerical experiments. The data is sequential and uniformly sampled and takes on the form of open-high-low-close (OHLC) data, this is described in Section 4.1. The use of open, high, low and close data combinations for the daily data testing can be carried over for intraday studies, and the use of close prices is a special case. The synthetic data is described in Section 4.2 along with the algorithm testing strategy. Brieﬂy, a simple Kolmogorov-Smirnov test is adopted to assess algorithm behaviour across 4 test cases: 1. SDC1: log-normal random data with zero-means, where no learning should be possible, 2 2. SDC2: log-normal random data where all assets have the same positive mean and as such basic learning is not possible for zero-cost portfolios (portfolios that have long and short positions that sum to zero), 3. SDC3: log-normal random data with varying posi- tives means, and 4. SDC4: where we have log-normal data with both pos- itive and negative means with the same ﬁxed variance. The synthetic data is used to understand and prove the behaviour of the zero-cost portfolio strategy (which we will call active portfolio’s) and the fully-invested portfo- lio strategy (which we will call absolute portfolio’s). The four real-world data sets are described in Section 4.3: 1. The standard daily sampled test-data set for the NYSE [14, 17, 15, 16, 20], 2. A more extensive, merged, daily sampled test-data set for the NYSE [32], 3. A daily sampled test-data set for the JSE, and 4. An intraday test-data set for the JSE. A general overview of the implementation of the numer- ical experiments is addressed in Section 5. Section 6 describes the results and analysis of the results, ﬁrst the synthetic data in section 6.1 and then for the real- world data, in Sections 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, and 6.5, respectively for the four real world case studies: NYSE, extended merge NYSE, daily sampled JSE and intraday JSE. 2. An online-learning algorithm for portfolio selec- tion The application is for a set of stocks ordered in time where each agent will consider diﬀerent combinations of stocks for each time-period based on features and strat- egy parameters. These diﬀerent agents compete in an adversarial manner in competition for capital allocations [13, 17, 18, 22]. Here agents with poor performance will have incremental capital allocations reduced and agents with robust performance will have incremental increases in capital allocation. Better performing agents will over time have their relative contribution to the aggregate portfolio increased so that their decisions are preferentially selected for trade at the onset of each trading or investment pe- riod based on information available at the end of the prior trading period. The online learning algorithm takes as inputs: a set of agents controls, and performances. These are enumerated over features (here price-relatives) and free-parameters of the temporally ordered objects (here stocks). The key feature used will be price relatives which are deﬁned for the m-th object as: xm,t = pm,t pm,t−1 (1) In vector notation we will write this equivalently as xt where the m-th component is xm,t. The controls that represent the agents’ are the portfolio weights by which each agent’s decision will contribute to the ﬁnal aggregate decision at a particular time. Agent performance is represented by factor (agent) mimicking portfolios that are formed from the portfolio controls at each time period. The controls are estimated and implemented at the beginning of each period. The relative changes in asset performance will then modify the relative weights of the asset over the investment period and the performance of a given agent is then determined at the end of the investment period. This is determined both by the controls, and selecting for the collection of objects the agent is holding, their weights, and the performance of those objects as deter- mined by price relatives. Agents do not have to hold the same number of objects. Agents can hold all or small groups of objects, they can short-sell objects and hold long positions in objects 2. The collection of objects a particular agent holds will be called the agent’s object cluster. The parameters that denote agents are typically a pa- rameter that is an index of the cluster of objects an agent has decided to use, and the algorithm speciﬁc parame- ters; typically a data window parameter k determining how much past data to include, and a parameter more speciﬁc to a given algorithm if it is required, such as a partition parameter 𝓁, and a forecast horizon dependent parameter, τ. Any four useful parameters can be used in the learn- ing algorithm that was implemented in this paper. The number of agents is then a function of these four free- parameters. The learning algorithm will then carry out the weighted averaging process based on agent past per- formance over the agents enumerated by these four param- eters. The parameters are denoted τ, w, k and 𝓁 respectively. We reserved parametersk and𝓁 for algorithm speciﬁc pa- rameters - this is done in order to try to align with their usage in the prior literature [20]. There are at most W values ofw, K values ofk, L values of𝓁 and τn values for the horizon parameter τ. The default value of the horizon parameter is 1: τ = 1. For simplicity and computational speed the results pre- 2Short-selling is when an asset is borrowed for a small fee, and the capital raised from the sale can then be used for other trading or investment activities, for example, the raised capital can be used to buy another asset by taking a long-position. The combination of long and short positions can be cash-neutral where the total value of the initial portfolio is zero. Such a portfolio is called a zero-cost or cash-neutral portfolio. 3 sented in this paper have used the default value 3. The choice of these parameters will determine the number of agents in the system. The number of agents is de- noted by n where the total number of agents will then be N =τnWKL . Then-th agent is represented by a tuple containing the controls at a given time and its performance (Hnm,t,Sn,t). This tuple will usually be represented in vector notation as (Hn,t,Sn,t) where the object index m is suppressed. For discrete values of sequential time running fromt = 1 until some maximal time T the agent controlsH are then collection of T time-ordered (N,M )-dimensional matrices that are represented as multi-dimensional double precision matrices in the software. The value of then-th agents controls for them-th object at time t is Hnm,t for discrete values of time. The perfor- mance of the agents is represented as a (N,T )-dimensional matrix where the n-th agent has its performance over the t-th time interval as Sn,t. There are at most M objects. So m can take on val- ues on the integer interval [1 ,M ] that would enumerate the objects. The number of objects remain static for a given agent even though they may be able to achieve zero positions in a particular agent. From the perspective of the learning algorithm the mechanism of agent generation is not important, it is re- quired that all N agents are correctly enumerated at each time increment. At the beginning of each time increment the controls determined at the end of the previous time increment are implemented and then held to the end of the time period at which time the agent performance is determined and the agent controls are then adjusted using the learning algorithm. The learning algorithm updates the agent mixture con- trolqn,t which is a measure of how much a given agent will contribute to the aggregate portfolio. The q variables con- trol the relative mixture of agents through time as they compete based on their past performance. The mixture controls cannot in general be thought of as probabilities, which makes their use and notation diﬀerent to some of the prior literature [20]. 2.1. Online-learning algorithm The learning algorithm is inspired by the universal portfolio approach developed by [17, 18] and reﬁned by [22]. The learning agent can be thought of as a multi- manager, using asset management language, where the multi-manager is selecting and aggregating underlying strategies from a collection of portfolios Hn,t and then aggregating using some selection method to a single port- foliobt that is implemented at each investment or trading period t. 3It is anecdotally noted that there is an advantage in learning for the horizon parameter but this does not change the basic point made in this paper The basic learning algorithm was incrementally imple- mented online, but oﬄine it can be easily parallelized across agents. The learning algorithm has ﬁve key steps: 1. Update the portfolio wealth : The portfolio con- trols bm,t for the m-th asset are used to update the portfolio returns for the t-th period ∆St = [∑ m bm,t(xm,t− 1) ] + 1 (2) St = St−1∆St. (3) Here the price relatives for the t-th period and m- th asset, xm,t, are combined with the portfolio con- trols for the period just ending to compute the realised portfolio returns for this period, period t. The port- folio controls were computed at the end of the prior period and implemented at the beginning of the cur- rent period. The relative amounts of each object in the portfolio will have changed by the relative price changes assuming no cash-ﬂows into or out of the portfolio during this investment period. 2. Update agent wealth : The agent controls Hnm,t were determined at the end of time-period t− 1 for time period t by some agent generating algorithm for N agents andM objects about which the agents make expert capital allocation decisions. At the end of the t-th time period the performance of each agent, Sn,t, can be computed from the change in the price rela- tivesxm,t for the each of the M objects in the invest- ment universe considered using the prices at the start, pm,t−1, and the end of the t-th time increment, pm,t, using the agent controls. ∆Sn,t = [∑ m Hnm,t(xm,t− 1) ] + 1. (4) Sn,t = Sn,t−1∆Sn,t. (5) 3. Update agent mixtures : We considered three dif- ferent agent mixture update rules: 1.) the univer- sally consistent choice, and 2.) an exponential gra- dient choice [23] and 3.) an exponentially weighted moving average. We generically refer to these online updates as rule g. In practice one would select one of the three update rules once for the duration of the oﬄine training, if one seeks to initialise the algorithm prior to deployment, or for use online during the sys- tem implementation in real-time. For the numerical experiments presented here we adopted the universal consistent approach inspired by [18, 22] as this demon- strates the principle. We can deﬁne the mixture of controls as the accumulated agent wealth is used as the update feature for the next unrealised increment with some normalisation, as such, the agent mixture 4 control for then-th agent for the next time increment, t + 1, is proportional to the measure of wealth: qn,t+1 =Sn,t. (6) the alternative choices can include the Exponential Gradient (EG) 4 approach of [23] or an Exponential Weighted Moving Average (EWMA)5 based learning strategy. We adopt the simplest update rule for the mixture of controls, it should be noted that there can be practical advantages to using more adaptive meth- ods such as EG and EWMA learning where the learn- ing rates can be used as additional parameters to be learnt using a thick modelling framework [15]. 4. Re-normalise agent mixtures : If the agent mix- ture is to be considered a positive probability then we require that ∑ nqn = 1 and that all qn≥ 0. This is the case of fully-invested agents where no shorting is allowed. We will call these types of agents absolute agents: qn,t+1 = qn,t+1∑ nqn,t+1 . (7) For agents that we will consider active the leverage is set to unity for zero-cost portfolios: (1.) ∑ nqn = 0 and (2.) ν =∑ n|qn| = 1. Here the mixture controls allow for shorting of one agent against another and the portfolio becomes self-funding. The mixture controls can no-longer be thought of as positive probabilities. qn,t+1 = qn,t+1− 1 N ∑ nqn,t+1 ∑ n|qn,t+1− 1 N ∑ nqn,t+1| (8) The leverage is normalised in order to ensure con- sistency between the learning algorithms and agent generating algorithms. 5. Update portfolio controls : The portfolio controls bm,t are updated at the end of time period t for time period t + 1 using the agent mixture controls qn,t+1 from the updated learning algorithm and the agent controls Hnm,t+1 from the agent generating al- gorithms using information from time period t and averaged over all n agents. bm,t+1 = ∑ n qn,t+1Hnm,t+1. (9) 4Exponential Gradient (EG) based learning: qn,t+1 =qn,te ( ηSn,t∑ nqn,tSn,t ) 5Exponential Weighted Moving Average (EWMA) based learning: qn,t+1 =λqn,t + (1−λ) ( qn,tSn,t∑ nqn,tSn,t ) The strategy is to implement the portfolio controls, wait until the end of the increment, measure the features, up- date the agents and then re-apply the learning algorithm to compute the agent mixtures and portfolio controls for the next time increment. Algorithm 1 Online-Learning Algorithm (OLA) Require: 1. updated agent-controls Hn,t+1 2. current feature realisation xt 3. current portfolio controls bt 4. current agent-controls Hn,t 5. past agent-wealth Sn,t−1 6. past portfolio wealth St−1 for t-state do Step 1: The portfolio wealth is updated St =St−1(bt(xT t − 1) + 1) Step 2: The agent wealth is updated Sn,t =Sn,t−1(Hn,t(xT t − 1) + 1) Step 3: The agent mixture is updated for rule g qn,t+1 =g(qn,t,Sn,t) Step 4: The agent mixtures are re-normalised qn,t+1 = {∑ nqn,t+1 = 1, qn,t+1≥ 0∑ n|qn,t+1| = 1,∑ nqn,t+1 = 0. Step 5: The portfolio controls are updated bt+1 =∑ nqn,t+1Hn,t+1 Leverage corrections if (ν =∑ m|bm,t|)⁄= 1 then renormalise controls bn,t+1 = 1 νbn,t+1 renormalise mixtures qn,t+1 = 1 νqn,t+1 end if end for return (bt+1,Sn,t,St,qn,t+1) 3. Agent generating algorithms The purpose of the agent generating algorithms are to sequentially generate the agent controlsHnm,t for then-th agent for the m-th object for implementation at the start of the t-th time period. These will be denoted in vector notation as Hn,t. We initially considered three diﬀerent agent-generating algorithms over which the thick modelling was carried out in order to learn the various algorithms’ free-parameters: 1.) a pattern-matching algorithm [20], 2.) a contrarian mean-variance portfolio algorithm we called anti-BCRP (as it trades against the Best Constant Rebalanced Port- folio for a given k-tuple of data) 6, and 3.) the ANTICOR 6The anti-BCRP algorithm can be used to learn for mean- 5 algorithm [16]. The various free-parameters of these algo- rithms, such as the window sizes k and partitions 𝓁 were then used to enumerate the agents that would compete for capital allocations in the learning algorithm. We adopted the pattern-matching approach [20] for the numerical experiments in this paper as we found a per- formance advantage in looking for more general patterns rather than merely targeting mean-reversion eﬀects, and more importantly, the pattern-matching algorithms are more generic as they do not require any a-priori choices for the structures that are learnt for. This was considered to be more faithful to the intent of the paper - where we seek to show that unspeciﬁed patterns can be learnt for in a manner that can both beat the best single stock in a universe of stocks and can beat a cash portfolio in a self-funding strategy. 3.1. Comments on Notation The feature realisations at time t for the m-th object, xm,t, are also denoted in vector notation as xt. The agent controls and the feature time-series are the key inputs in the online-learning algorithm to determine the agent mix- tures qn,t through time. The online learning algorithm is path-dependent and as such both a function of the history of agent controls as well as the feature time-series history. Following prior work we denote random feature variables asX and their realisations asx [20, 22] where for some vec- tor valued stationary and ergodic process{Xt}+∞ −∞ with re- alisations denoted as x1,x2,..., xt and their correspond- ing random variables as X1,X2,..., Xt. However, we will reﬁne the notation further in order to more eﬀectively enumerate the agents for our speciﬁc implementation. The strategies are based on constructing a k-tuple of the selected feature for m-objects. We will denote the agent-tuple by xk𝓁w,t and the k-tuple as xt−k t . The k- tuple is a slice of data of length k from the current time t, of width m enumerating all the objects. We will modify the k-tuple notation to {xt−k t }s(n),𝓁 to denote a k-tuple taken from an 𝓁-partition of the data for a given cluster of objects w = s(n). Here s is the cluster index of the n-th agent. We are suppressing the m index and using vector notation to write the k-tuple as x. The agent-tuple will be unique to the n-th agent where n is the unique agent index enumerating a particular combination of k,𝓁 andw. Ak-tuple is used to determine agent controlsHn,t. The initial features used are historical prices sequences which are assumed to be realisationx from some random process X. The pattern-matching algorithm will then reﬁne the k-tuple to groups of nearest-neighbours that are expected to reﬂect historical selected outcomes that better reﬂect reversion by directly using k past realisations of performance of each object, for a given partition, by ﬁnding the mean-variance wealth minimizing portfolio (in order to be contrarian), either fully- invested or zero-cost, and using the resulting portfolio weights for the agents with the speciﬁc window and partition parameters:H n,t+1 = H n,t+1(γ,−µ(xn,t), Σ(xn,t)) comparing with Eqn. (25) and (26). future outcomes than merely the last price change or price change sequence. This is done by comparing the current realisationxt−k t with the past. In this way, given a set of parameters enumerating then- th agent we will select the required tuple from the existing data realisations depending on the algorithm parameters using some selection function f xn,t =xn(k,𝓁,w),t =xk𝓁w,t =f𝓁,w(xt 1,xt−k t ) (10) where the m-th component of the k-tuple is xm n,t. 3.2. The Log-optimal strategy The log-optimal strategy under the assumptions of sta- tionarity and ergodicity has been shown to be the best possible choice of strategy over the long term [14]. This type of analysis has been extended to the semi-log-optimal case [20] where weakened conditions have been derived. The surprising result is that even with this weaker for- mulation the loss of optimality is such that log-optimality has, for all practical purposes, equivalent performance to portfolios selected using semi-log-optimality [20]. This provides an argument for the use of competing sequences of mean-variance portfolios in the framework of agent-based competition for capital. With an initial investment wealth ofS0 using a sequence of portfolio controls B ={bi}t−1 i=1 from time i = 1 until the current time t the portfolio wealth for a fully-invested portfolio is [20] St =S0ΠT i=1b(xi−1 1 )xT i =S0e ∑T i=1 log(b(xi−1 1 )xT i ). (11) This gives an average portfolio growth rate Wt(B) = 1 T ∑T i=1 log(b(xi−1 1 )xT i ). The log-optimal portfolio selec- tion problem is thus b∗(Xt−1 1 ) = arg max b E [ log(b(Xt−1 1 )Xt)|Xt−1 1 ] . (12) Here one is aiming to maximize the overall wealth through the incremental selection of the sequence of fully-invested portfolio controls B. 3.3. Universally consistent strategies The fundamental result of universal log-optimality is that no investment strategy can have a faster average rate of growth than that arising from the log-optimal portfolio [13, 14, 17, 18]. However, full knowledge of the distribu- tion of the process is required. Strategies achieving an equivalent growth rate without knowing the distribution are called universally consistent [14, 20] strategies. In principle one could via simulation enumerate all the possible controls and ﬁnd via brute-force the set of controls that solve the log-optimal portfolio selection problem. This is ambitious given current technology constraints and that the opportunity set of stocks is typically large and the data representing the features even larger - particularly for intraday quantitative trading problems. 6 In the idealized situation we would deﬁne some simplex Λ where there is a prior distributionµ on the simplex, such that some expert or agentb is a given realisation from this distribution of portfolios. We would then directly evaluate the µ-weighted fully-invested universal portfolio at time t [18, 19] b∗ t = ∫ ΛbSt−1(b,xt−1)dµ(b)∫ ΛSt−1(b,xt−1)dµ(b) (13) where ∫ Λdµ(b) = 1 and the portfolio value St at time t is as St(b,xt) = t∏ j=1 bxT j = t∏ i=1 m∑ j=1 bjxj,t. (14) Here the portfolio is fully-invested such that b1T = 1 for unit vector 1. Although we seek strategies that are universally consis- tent with respect to the class of stationary and ergodic processes. A pragmatic approach is required given both the unrealistic distributional assumptions, and the curse of dimensionality we face in enumerating control space 7. The strategy is to reduce the problem by ﬁnding a more informed subset of controls that can be used to approxi- mate the required sequence of portfolio controls that are used to represent a universally consistent strategy. In ad- dition to reducing the set of applicable controls one also aims to streamline the evaluation of these controls and their adaption through time, this can be achieved by re- ducing the log-optimality criterion to semi-log-optimality. 3.4. Semi-log optimality We choose to focus on the ﬁrst two moments of the price relative distributions: the mean and covariance. This will allow enhanced performance speed of the algorithms (see Figure 13) but with some loss in long-term optimality [30, 20] and as such a deviation from the universally consistent strategies. First, we have reduced the opportunity space in the sim- plex of all possible portfolios in order to make the problem of ﬁnding a portfolio that is optimal over the entire fea- ture space computationally tractable, this is achieve by using agent-generating algorithms and learning over the free-parameters for those agents generating algorithms. Second, we replaced the optimization with a quadratic approximation that will give us analytic solutions to re- place optimizations that we would otherwise have to solve numerically. In addition to a performance advantage, using the quadratic approximation this will also pro- vide a straight-forward method for considering both fully- invested and zero-cost portfolio’s in a single framework. Streamlining the algorithms for performance was ap- proached in two steps, ﬁrst, to separate the problem into 7For each random process in the long-term limit the growth-rate of these strategies is equivalent to that of the log-optimal portfolio when full-knowledge of the distribution is available. In order to con- struct such universally equivalent strategies one needs to know the conditional distribution X t given some past X t−1 1 . that of an online-learning algorithm and the agent generat- ing algorithms, then, second, to reduce the log-optimality criterion to semi-log-optimality. The semi-log-optimal portfolio selection takes on the form b∗(Xt−1 1 ) = arg max b E [ h(b(Xt−1 1 )Xt)|Xt−1 1 ] . (15) where h(z) = (z− 1)− 1 2(z− 1)2 from the second order Taylor expansion of log(z) at z = 1. A related approach was taken in [19] where they de- rived an analytic approximation for an eﬃcient universal portfolio. Our simpliﬁed mean-variance approach was mo- tivated by their development of an analytic algorithm, the diﬀerence here is that we want an algorithm that is online, analytic, explicitly includes zero-cost portfolios, and allows for the restriction of the solution space using some agent generating algorithm directly at each step rather than via side-information. 3.5. Active fund separation problem The determination of the optimal portfolio is se- quentially implemented using the exact solution to the quadratic approximation to log-optimality by solving the active fund selection problem. The active fund selection problem is a special case of the mutual fund selection prob- lem [25, 24]. This will give an analytic approximation that can both cater for long-only fully-invested agents (absolute agents) as well as leverage one8 zero-cost portfolio’s (active agents). We therefore consider the semi-log-optimal portfolio op- timization problem [25, 26, 24] for return expectation vec- torµ and asset return covariance matrix Σ with a portfolio control vectorω in terms of the risk aversion parameterγ. The conjugate transpose of a vector is denote as (·)T over a single investment period to deﬁne the control problem as: max ω { ωTµ− γ 2ωT Σω } s.t. ωT 1 = 1. (16) Here we have changed notation to denote the portfolio controls asω in order to avoid confusion with the portfolio strategy controlsb that are the result of the online-learning algorithm which aims to approximate the semi-log-optimal portfolio selection strategy for aggregate portfolio controls bt for time increment t. Here the portfolio controls ω are used to generate the agents that populate the agent control set Hn,t. It is the agent control set that is then used to generate the semi- log-optimal portfolio choice at each time t: bt. Eqn. (16) can be rewritten as the mutual-fund La- grangian L =ωTµ− γ 2ωT Σω−λω(ωT 1− 1). (17) 8∑ i|ωi| = 1 for portfolio controls ω. 7 and solved using elementary Kuhn-Tucker methods. Two equations are found in terms of the optimal solution for the portfolio control, ω∗, the ﬁrst gives the quadratic op- timal risk-return pay-oﬀ, and the second, the fully-invested portfolio investment constraint ω∗ = 1 γ Σ−1 (µ−λω1), (18) ω∗T 1 = 1 . (19) The Lagrange multiplier is determined by substituting Eqn. (18) into Eqn. (19) to ﬁnd: λω = 1T Σ−1µ 1T Σ−11− γ 1Σ−11. (20) This is then used to eliminate the Lagrange multiplier from Eqn. (18) to ﬁnd a formulation of the mutual fund sepa- ration theorem: ω∗ = Σ−11 1T Σ−11 + 1 γ Σ−1 ( µ− 11T Σ−1µ 1T Σ−11 ) . (21) The ﬁrst term on the right is the lowest risk portfolio and the second term is the zero-cost portfolio that encapsulates the relative views of the assets. We will typically work with the separation theorem in the form given in Eqn. (21). The second term will give us an eﬃcient method of generating zero-cost portfolio’s. It is then convenient to re-write the Mutual Fund Sep- aration theorem to an Active Fund Separation theorem explicitly from Eqn. (21) by deﬁning the lowest risk port- folio as the benchmark portfolio: ω∗ =ωB +ωA, (22) where ωB = Σ−11 1T Σ−11, (23) ωA = Σ−1 γ (µ1T− 1µT 1T Σ−11 ) Σ−11, (24) The formulae for ωB andωA will be directly used in the agent generating algorithms based on views encoded in the mean,µ, and the covariances, Σ, as a function of the var- ious agent generating parameters. The resulting controls Hn,t will then be determined from them-th component of eitherωA for the active agents orωB +ωA for the absolute agents for the n-th agent for time-increment t. For situations where we want agents constructed from zero-cost portfolios we will use the tactical solution from Eqn. (24) to generate the agents for a given k-tuple. In situations where we need fully invested agents we will use the combination of the benchmark fund and the active (or tactical) fund. Suppressing indexes over the m objects the agent con- trols for the n-that agent for the two possible cases: (1.) the absolute agents, and (2.) the active agents is then Hn,t = { hT 1 = 1,h =ωB(Σ) +ωA(γ,µ, Σ) s.t. h≥ 0 hT 1 = 0,h =ωA(γ,µ, Σ) s.t. hTh = 1. (25) Here the m-th component of Hn,t is Hnm,t and the port- folio weights are dependent on the agent-tuples xn,t for a given agent ωA = ωA(γ,µ(xn,t), Σ(xn,t)) (26) ωB = ωB(Σ(xn,t)). (27) For the active agent we enforce the leverage unity con- straint at the beginning of each time increment, this can be considered equivalent to setting the risk-aversion γ, at the beginning of each time increment, such that the lever- age is always unity. This is an important feature of the algorithm as we do not enforce uniform risk-aversion through time. We rather choose to ensure that capital be fully utilized given the available information. The following sections describe how the agent-tuples are constructed for the various agent gen- erating algorithms. 3.6. Agent generating algorithms from patterns In order to eﬃciently reduce the space of portfolio con- trols to eﬃciently generate a reasonable approximation to universally consistent strategies using Eqn. (13) we re- duce the set of applicable controls using agent-generating algorithms. The agent-generating algorithm we use in our numerical experiments will be a pattern-matching algo- rithm [20]. One can make various decisions about how to break data up into manageable pieces for the various al- gorithms, the most basic decisions relate to how to break up the data in time, we call this partitioning, the other choice relates to how we break the data up in terms of the objects themselves (often called the features), this we call clustering. Partitioning is typically a more intricate task because this has implications for the algorithm and system structure. The pattern-matching algorithm is based on two steps subsequent to the choice of clusters s(n): (1.) partition- ing and (2.) pattern-matching. Clusters can be chosen by a variety of methods, we would like to promote two methods: (i) correlation matrix based methods [27], and (ii) clusters based on economic classiﬁcations of stocks 9. The prior method, correlation based methods, have out- puts that can be directly used as inputs into the algorithms discussed here, speciﬁcally via s(n), the cluster member- ship parameters. It is however, the method based on ﬁxed economic sector classiﬁcations [29], that will be explicitly used in this paper for the intraday experiments in Section 6.5, this is both for speed and simplicity 10. In the daily numerical experiments we have ignored the impact of clustering and used the clusters s(n) of the n-th 9For example, using ICB (Industry Classiﬁcation Benchmark) sec- tors classiﬁcations [29] 10It should be noted that using ICB sectors to generate additional agents for the daily simulations does boost algorithm wealth perfor- mance but we chose to explicitly demonstrate the value of including sector information in the context of the intraday strategies 8 stock as being trivial, i.e. we consider a single stock clus- ter that includes all m objects. The inclusion of clustering indexing can be important to the practical implementation of these techniques as it is often useful to restrict trading signal decisions to similar stocks. There is a wealth ad- vantage to this, as we have shown when we considered the impact of clustering for the numerical experiments using intraday data (see Table 15). The pattern matching algorithm is split into two key components: First, the partitioning algorithm , which se- lects collection of time-order features from the full set of feature data. Second, the pattern-matching algorithm, where given a measured pattern derived from the feature data, is used by the algorithm to ﬁnd similar patterns in a given partition of the feature data. 3.6.1. Partitioning Subsets of time-ordered data are selected from the orig- inal time-order data for a given collection of objects. The collection of objects can in turn be a sub-collection of the original set of objects. Partitioning takes place in the time domain while clustering is in the object dimension. The purpose of partitioning is to prepare data subsets for pattern-matching [22]. Four distinct approaches to data partitioning are enumerated here, however only the trivial partition is used in the experiments. A partition is a collection{pt}𝓁 represented by a logical vector of the length of a given time-series where true is represented as one and false as zero to index membership in a given partition. When a partition is determined from features that determine the state of the system at a given time we will use that partition to represent the system in that state for the sake of pattern-matching. For the numerical experiments presented here we will use variations of the trivial partition: Here all the tempo- rally ordered data is kept in a single partition as repre- sented by a vector of ones of length of the time-series. {pt}1 ={(1,..., 1, 1, 1)}. (28) There are wealth advantages associated with more sophis- ticated partitions. We considered four diﬀerent partition- ing approaches: the trivial partition, the over-lapping par- tition 11: were data membership in partitions is repeated in order to bias the data towards a given time, for example, the last time-increments is repeated across all 𝓁 partitions for time-series of length T, the exclusive partition where the partitions are mutually exclusive subsets of the full partition, and the side-information partition [18]. The most heuristically useful partition is that of the side-information partition where partitions can be pre- selected in the partitioning algorithm based on rules con- ditioned on side-information [18], partitioning can be both 11Example of length T overlapping partition of features: {pt}T ={(0,..., 0, 0, 1), (0,..., 0, 1, 1),..., (1,..., 1, 1, 1)}. useful as a nuanced exploitation of information, for exam- ple by splitting feature data over diﬀerent regimes, and thus to generate distinct agents for diﬀerent regimes, and as an eﬀective approach to parallelization of algorithms. Here we would partition the time-series based on side- information arising from additional features drawn from the system being observed as in [18]. For example, we could use a Markov-switching algorithm with 𝓁 states, as- sign each time in the time-series a state index and the deﬁne the partition membership based on states, or we could choose a feature as side-information and 𝓁-tile the data into 𝓁 groups and then based on whether a given time has a side-information feature in a particular group it would be assigned to a given partition. Partitioning serves as a convenient mechanism for break- ing up the feature data into distinct states. This can be useful when choosing to search for patterns when the sys- tem is in a distinct state as it will enable the algorithm to search for patterns only in historic data residing from times in the past when the system was in a similar state. By combining a partitioning algorithm with a state-detection algorithm one can both improve computational times as well as algorithm performance in terms of wealth genera- tion [28], this is not explored further here. 3.6.2. Pattern-matching The pattern-matching algorithm will take a k-tuple and search a given partition of the feature data for similar pat- terns by ﬁnding the smallest distance measure between the k-tuple and data in a given partition. This best matching set of data in the partition will then be used to deter- mine a pattern-matching time j𝓁. The matching time will then be used to select a future outcome some time period τ ahead of the matched pattern. This future outcome is used to construct a tuple of data, the agent-tuple, itera- tively using the look-ahead rule: jn = j𝓁 +τ. A number of such pattern-matches will be accumulated to construct the agent-tuplexn,t and from this a mean and covariance are computed. This mean and covariance will then serve as the input into Eqn. (22) to determine that agent controls Hn,t+1, the n-th agents controls to be held for time-period t + 1. The pattern-matching algorithm is split into two sepa- rate algorithms. The ﬁrst algorithm, which we will call the pattern algorithm, generates patterns to be matched and partitions of data into which the pattern will be matched. The second algorithm will then take the pattern and the data partitions and generate matching times. The match- ing times will then be used to generate an agent-tuplexn,t. The pattern algorithm generates a k-tuples{xt t−k}s(n) [22] for matching, and a data partition {xt}(p𝓁,s(n)) us- ing a predeﬁned temporal partition {p𝓁} of the data and the cross-sectional cluster for the n-th agent s(n). This is iteratively done for each agent as enumerated by the parameters that deﬁne a given agent: the cluster member- ship w = s(n) of the n-th agent, the partition variable 𝓁, 9 thek-tuple variablek and the look-ahead horizon variable τ. For each set of variables that deﬁne the n-th agent the pattern algorithm will then call the matching algorithm. Algorithm 2 PATTERN-MATCHING Algorithm (PMA) Require: 1. features xt 2. n-agent parameters k, 𝓁, s(n), τ 3. partitions {p𝓁} for n-agents do Hn,t+1=Matching(τ,{p𝓁},{xt t−k}s(n),{xt}(p𝓁,s(n))) end for agents returnHt+1 The matching algorithm will ﬁnd matches for the k- tuples, xt t−k in the partitions. If there is a single parti- tion of data, the matching algorithm will ﬁnd the ˆ𝓁 closest matches. We consider two rules for calculating ˆ𝓁 and will refer to these as ruleP . This rule is introduced in order to easily compare our algorithms with prior literature, more speciﬁcally [20, 22]. The diﬀerence is related to how the partitions are deﬁned and implemented. We consider the trivial rule: ˆ𝓁 =𝓁 and the rule required to recover the Nearest-Neighbour (NN) algorithm perfor- mance described in [22]. The Gy¨ orﬁ et al Nearest Neigh- bour rule is where ˆ𝓁 is determined by a variablep𝓁∈ (0, 1). The choice of p𝓁 used in the experiments is the same as in [22]. p𝓁 = 0 .02 + 0.5𝓁− 1 L− 1 (29) ˆ𝓁 = ⌊p𝓁t⌋ (30) Wheret represents the number of time periods in the his- tory, and the ﬂoor is taken to ﬁnd the smallest partition at the given time. This modiﬁcation serves primarily to allow us to recover prior results in the literature using the framework we implemented in the software for the numer- ical experiments. If there are 𝓁 partitions of data the algorithm will ﬁnd the best match in each partition. The matching algorithm will ﬁnd 𝓁 best matches and from those best matches ex- tract𝓁 matching timesj𝓁 associated with the time of each k-tuple match. From the look-ahead rule the matching algorithm will then construct the agent-tuple xn,t. The matching algorithm will then compute the agent-control for this given agent-tuple hn,t. The distance between tuples is the 2-norm. Although we could use the distance between two matrices as the general distance in the algorithm, we have chosen to diﬀerentiate selecting the most recent vectors of object features and the test-tuple as the vector distance between these two vectors only for the case of k = 1, while for k> 1 we measure the distance of each object from the same object at a diﬀerence time independently from other objects. This will rather allow us to search for the best ﬁts of objects independently rather than in collective. This is an important reﬁnement, in the original version of the algo- rithm we followed [22] and used the 2-norm in full gen- erality independent of the window size k we found better performance by independently selecting for patterns using column-wise computed distances. 4. Data Description 4.1. OHLC data The data we will consider will be sequential data, but not necessarily continuously sequential. For this reason we will study OHLC (Open-High-Low-Close) bar-data where the closing price of a given bar is not necessarily the open- ing price of the subsequent bar of the data. We will ﬁrst study daily sampled data and then intraday data. The al- gorithms will be initially tested using synthetic data (see Section 4.2), and then the real world test data used in prior research [17, 22] (See Section 4.3) which are sequences of daily sampled closing prices. The data and algorithms can be easily extended to ac- commodate additional features as side-information [18]; such as volumes, spreads, and various ﬁnancial indica- tors and asset speciﬁc and state attributes. The side- information can be trivially used to re-partition data into additional sets of agents and then used as inputs into the learning algorithm. The wealth performance enhancement relating to the side-information extension is not demon- strated in the numerical experiments presented here. OHLC bar data is typically represented by a candle-stick graph as in Figure (1). Figure 1: The feature time-series data is best thought of as OHLC (Open-High-Low-Close) bar data. The ﬁlled box in the candle chart denotes the situation where the close price is lower than the open price, conversely the unﬁlled box has the close price higher than the open price. The time-series data is such that the closing price of time-incrementt is not necessarily at time t + 1 the start 10 Algorithm 3 MATCHING Algorithm (MTA) Require: 1. look-ahead-rule τ 2. partition {p𝓁} 3. k-tuple{xt t−k}s(n) 4. data partition {xt}(p𝓁,s(n)) for t-state do for p𝓁∈{p𝓁} do for j-states∈p𝓁 do ﬁnd a test-tuple st(j) t(j)−k ={xt(j) t(j)−k}(p𝓁,s(n)) ﬁnd distance to k-tuple ϵk,j ={xk t−k}s(n)−st(j) t(j)−k if k=1 then compute the 2-norm for vector ϵ1,j ϵj =∑ m∈objects √ϵm1,j2 =√ϵ1,jϵT 1,j distance measure of dim(objects) {ϵj}p𝓁←ϵm,j =ϵj∀m else column-wise 2-norms for matrix ϵj,k {ϵj}p𝓁←ϵm,j =∑k k′=1 √ ϵ2 mk′,j end if end for states if dim({p𝓁}) = 1 then Switch NN algorithm partition choice [22] ˆ𝓁 =P (𝓁,t ) Find ˆ𝓁 matching-times in a single partition j𝓁 = min j∀ dim(j)=𝓁 {ϵj} else Find the best match in each of the𝓁 partitions j𝓁 = min j∀p𝓁∈{p𝓁} {ϵj}p𝓁 end if end for partitions update the look-ahead-rule jn =j𝓁 +τ Update the agent-tuple xn,t ={xt 1}t∈jn Update the mean and covariance µ =µ(xn,t− 1) Σ = Σ(xn,t− 1) Update the agent-controls Hn,t+1 =Hn,t+1(γ,µ, Σ) end for t-state returnHn,t+1 of time increment t + 1. The closing price can in fact be at some time t +δ for some arbitrary data-speciﬁc time- incrementδ. A low-frequency example is that of a typical trading day on the JSE, the market opens in the morning with some opening price, ot, at 9h00, the market may then close at some closing time 17h00, after a closing auction period, the oﬃcial closing price ct, is then printed soon after the market close (perhaps after some randomisation period). The market is then closed for some time-period over-night until the market opens again on the subsequent day. There is a period, δ, when the market is close and as such infor- mation is not continuously being priced into the traded assets. Information that accumulates over-night will then be priced into the market prices through the process of the opening auction and subsequent trading in the various assets. Our approach to OHLC data is applicable to a variety of synchronously sampled or re-sampled data sets, including intraday data: 1. close-to-close: Here the prices pm,t for them-th assets are the time-series of close prices. The price relatives xm,t are then the computed from the close price time- series cm,t xm,t = cm,t cm,t−1 . (31) The algorithm is trying to exploit information relating to price changes from the close of trading of one time increment to the close of trading of a subsequent time increment. 2. open-to-close: Here the prices pm,t for them-th assets are the ordered time-series pairs of open and close prices on the same data the price relatives are then computed as xm,t = cm,t om,t . (32) Here one is trying to exploit price relative changes within a trade increment, for example, across a sin- gle day from the market opening to the market close ignoring the over-night price changes. 3. close-to-open: Here the prices pm,t for the m-th asset are the price changes from the close of the trade period at t− 1 to the next trade period at time t xm,t = om,t cm,t−1 . (33) Here one is looking to exploit the change in prices between trade periods where the information cannot yet be fully reﬂected in trading until the trading com- mences in the next trade period. 4. open-to-open: Here the prices pm,t for the m-th asset are the time-series of opening prices. The price rela- tivesxm,t are then computed from the opening prices 11 Timet−δ t t + 1−δ t + 1 t-th trading period trading gap cm,t−1 om,t cm,t om,t+1 Feature δt Figure 2: Feature time-series investment period for thet-th time increment showing that the end of thet-th increment does not always have to coincide with the start of the next, here the t+1-th, investment period. The opening price is denote as om,t and the close price for the period as cm,t for the m-th asset. om,t xm,t = om,t om,t−1 . (34) This is looking for ineﬃciencies in the prices changes from market opening to market opening. The important missing component of information is that related to volume (and additional features such as spread, order-imbalance and order-book resilience for intraday data). For example, the opening price is a less reliable price when it has been determined oﬀ signiﬁcantly lower volumes of trading, as compared with a typical closing price. In the case where the closing auction of a given market has more volume than the typical opening auction the relative uncertainties in the prices can be substantial. The typical time increment for a given feature is given in ﬁgure (2). We promote the use of a state-detection algo- rithm and side-information partitioning in order to address these types of concerns. In the context of this work such issues do not change our conclusions. It is expected that the learning algorithm will still at- tempt to maximise the long-term wealth given a speciﬁc agent generating algorithm for a given feature set. For both daily data and intraday data the feature set that is of most interest to us in this study will be those associated with the “close-to-close” and “close-to-open” price relative features. 4.2. Synthetic Data The algorithm was tested on four synthetic data cases (SDC) for both active and absolute portfolios. The syn- thetic data was generated for 10 stocks over 1000 time pe- riods. The price relatives xm,t for each stock at each time period was randomly generated from a lognormal distribu- tion ( lognrnd function in MATLAB generated using the Mersenne Twister psuedorandom number generator [31] and initialised using a speciﬁc seed value), each synthetic data case deﬁnes a mean, µ, and variance, v, used to gen- erate the dataset. The mean, ¯µ, and standard deviation, ¯σ, of the associated normal distribution is given by : ¯µ = log ( µ2 √ v +µ2 ) (35) ¯σ = √ log ( v µ2 + 1 ) (36) Table 1 summarises the four synthetic data cases, each case was generated 30 times and initialised with seed values 1, 2,..., 30 respectively. 1. Synthetic Data Case 1 (SDC 1): was generated from a lognormal distribution with a mean price rel- ative, µ = 1, and a variance, v = 0.0002, to simulate a stock market where there is no signiﬁcant increase or decrease in the value of a stock over time. The expected outcome is that neither the active port- folio nor the absolute portfolio will be able to learn which stocks it should hold a long position or short position. 2. Synthetic Data Case 2 (SDC 2): was generated from a lognormal distribution with a mean price rel- ative,µ = 1.001, and a variance, v = 0.0002, to simu- late a stock market where the value of the stocks are increasing over time. The expected outcome is that the absolute portfolio will learn which stocks to hold a long position on, however the active portfolio will not be able to learn which stocks to hold a short position on as no stocks decrease in value over time. 3. Synthetic Data Case 3 (SDC 3): was generated from a lognormal distribution with a random mean price relative, µ≥ 1, assigned to each stock and a variance,v = 0.0002. The random means is calculated as follows: µm = 1 + max[0, min(0.0005 + 0.0005δ, 0.001)] (37) where δ is a random number generated from a stan- dard normal distribution (using the randn function in MATLAB with the Mersenne Twister psuedoran- dom number generator [31] and initialised using a spe- ciﬁc seed value). This simulates a stock market where some stocks are increasing in value and some stocks are decreasing in value over time. The expected outcome is that both the active portfo- lio and the absolute portfolio will learn to hold a long position on the stocks increasing in value over time and hold a short position on the stocks decreasing in value over time, however it is expected that the ab- solute portfolio will beat the active portfolio due to the growth rate of the stocks increasing in value over time. 12 Summary of Random Datasets Dataset µ v SDC 1 1.000 0.0002 SDC 2 1.001 0.0002 SDC 3 random≥ 1 0.0002 SDC 4 mixed 0.0002 Table 1: The means and variances that were chosen when generating the synthetic data sets. The random means for SDC 3 was calculated using Eqn. (37) and the means for SDC 4 was generated as described in section 4. 4. Synthetic Data Case 4 (SDC 4): was generated from a lognormal distribution with mixed means as- signed to the price relatives,µ = 0.999 was assigned to 3 stocks and µ = 1.001 was assigned to the remaining stocks, and a variance, v = 0.0002. This dataset sim- ulates a stock market where the value of some stocks are increasing and the value of some stocks are de- creasing. The expected outcome is that both the active portfo- lio and the absolute portfolio will learn to hold a long position on the stocks increasing in value over time and hold a short position on the stocks decreasing in value over time. 4.3. Real Data The algorithm is tested on four sets of real data, sum- marised in Table 2, two data sets from the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) obtained at [32] and two data sets from the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) obtained at [33]. 1. NYSE Data: This is described in [32] 12 and con- tains close-to-close price relatives for 36 stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange from 1962-1984. This is the same data set used by Gy¨ orﬁ et al in [20, 22] and Cover in [17]. 2. NYSE Merged Data: This is described in [32] 13 and the dataset contains close-to-close price relatives data for 23 stocks listed on the New York Stock Ex- change from 1962-2006. The data of the 23 stocks during 1962-1984 is identical to the data described above in point 1. 3. JSE OHLC Data: This was obtained from Thom- son Reuters Tick History (TRTH) [33] and contains daily data for 42 stocks listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) from 1995-2015 (using RIC chain 0#.JTOPI), however not all of the 42 stocks 12This data set comes from the website of Yoram Singer[32] 13This data was original sourced from Yahoo! Finance and was cleaned and prepared by G´ abor Gelencs´ er and made available on his website [32]. Summary of Real Datasets Data Set Time Period # Stocks NYSE [32] 1962-1984 36 NYSE Merged [32] 1962-2005 23 JSE daily OHLC [33] 1995-2015 42 JSE Intraday [33] 2013 40 Table 2: Description of the real data sets that the algo- rithm was tested on. were listed in 1995 and the data for these stocks be- gins at a later time 14. The data lists the open, high, low and close prices for all of the 42 stocks. This raw data was processed into four datasets containing close-to-close, open-to-close, close-to-open and open- to-open price relatives respectively. Splits, mergers 15 and missing data were handled by assigning a price relative of 1 for that day. 4. JSE Intraday Data: The transaction data was ob- tained from Thomson Reuters Tick History (TRTH) [33] and consisted of top-of-book and transaction up- dates for 40 stocks listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) during 2013 in RIC chain 0#.JTOPI. The transaction data was converted into 5-minute bar data using the trade price and volume weighted av- eraging. The 5-minute bar-data starts at 9h30 and ends at 16h30 for normal trading days and starts at 9h30 and ends at 11h30 for early close days. A normal trading data on the JSE starts with an opening auc- tion between 8h30 and 9h00, continuous trading takes place between 9h00 and 16h50, and the day ends with a closing auction between 16h50 and 17h00. 5. Implementation The wealth achieved by the portfolio and the wealth achieved by the agents is determined using Algorithm 1 (OLA). The agent controls Hn,t, introduced in section 2, used in Algorithm 1 is determined by using Algorithm 2 (PMA), which calls up Algorithm 3 (MTA)16 to determine the agent controls for each agent. Algorithm 3 updates an agents wealth as described in Eqn. (25). In the exper- iments 50 agents were used with K = (1, 2,..., 5) and L = (1, 2,..., 10), similar to choice of agents (‘experts’) used by Gy¨ orﬁet al in [20, 22]. All Results and data processing was done in MATLAB. The algorithm was implemented for both the absolute and active case using a MATLAB class that we namedpattern, 14The data has an implicit survivorship bias however this does not impact the results of this paper 15Splits and mergers were identiﬁed as having a xm,t < 0.7 and xm,t > 1.3 respectively. 16Calendar eﬀects are not fully accounted for. 13 Wealth (S) from Investing in Synthetic Data Data Port. Wealth Best Agent Best Avg. Best Avg. SDC 1 Abs. Act. 1.231 1.451 0.992 1.052 1.806 1.753 1.250 1.358 SDC 2 Abs. Act. 3.241 1.451 2.612 1.052 4.654 1.753 3.270 1.358 SDC 3 Abs. Act. 2.320 1.490 1.685 1.171 3.091 1.782 2.090 1.451 SDC 4 Abs. Act. 2.455 2.927 1.896 2.055 2.931 3.270 2.250 2.297 Table 3: Wealth achieved by the active and absolute port- folios for 30 runs of each synthetic data case. a MATLAB class was used instead of function because this allows the algorithm to easily be extended to a more online approach. The pattern class was extended to include our recovered version of the Gy¨ orﬁ et al Nearest Neighbour [22] algorithm so that the running time comparisons in section 6 will be accurate. The Cover et al [17] Universal Portfolios algorithm was recovered by creating a MATLAB function that implement the algorithm. 6. Results and Analysis 6.1. Synthetic Data The algorithm was tested on four synthetic data cases (SDC) to illustrate how the algorithm performs in diﬀerent types of markets. Table 3 displays the best and average wealth achieved by the active and absolute portfolios for 30 runs of each synthetic data case initialised with seed values 1, 2,..., 30 respectively. On all of the datasets the algorithm, when using ab- solute portfolio, eventually learns the stocks that are in- creasing in value over time as observed for SDC 2, 3 and 4. Similarly the algorithm, when using active portfolio, even- tually learns to hold a long position on the stocks that are increasing in value over time and hold a short position on the stocks that are decreasing in value over time; as ob- served for SDC 3 and 4. Figures 3, 4, 5 and 6 shows the wealth achieved by the active and absolute portfolios, as well as the wealth achieved by each synthetic stock when randomly generated using an initial seed value of 7. Tables 4 and 5 displays average p values from the two- sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests when comparing the following combinations of the total wealth gained from the portfolio (S1), the wealth gained from the best agent of the portfolio (S2) and the wealth gained from the best stock (S3): 1. S2 >S 1 : The alternative hypothesis that the cumula- tive distribution function (CDF) of the wealth gained from the best agent of the portfolio, S2, is larger than the CDF of the total wealth gained from the portfolio, S1, at the 5% signiﬁcance level. Average p values of Wealth (S) for Active Portfolios Best Agent vs. Tot. Wealth Best Agent vs. Best Stock Best Stock vs. Tot. Wealth Hyp. S2 >S 1 S2 >S 3 S3 >S 1 ¯p p> ¯p ¯p p> ¯p ¯p p> ¯p SDC 1 0.809 0.172 0.031 0.000 0.654 0.013 SDC 2 0.809 0.172 0.000 0.000 0.873 0.407 SDC 3 0.830 0.172 0.000 0.000 0.904 0.563 SDC 4 0.725 0.013 0.000 0.000 0.622 0.006 Table 4: Comparisons of the averagep values of the wealth gained from the active portfolio. The ﬁrst p value in each column is average p value, of the 30 data sets for each case, using two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests for the alternative hypotheses (Hyp.). The second p value is ob- tained from the two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests for the alternative hypothesis that the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of thep values for the 30 data sets for each case is larger than the CDF of the average p value at the 5% signiﬁcance level. 2. S2 >S 3 : The alternative hypothesis that the CDF of the wealth gained from the best agent of the portfolio, S2, is larger than the CDF of the wealth gained from the best stock, S3, at the 5% signiﬁcance level. 3. S3 > S1 : The alternative hypothesis that the CDF of the wealth gained from the best stock, S3, is larger than the CDF of the total wealth gained from the portfolio, S1, at the 5% signiﬁcance level. The two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was chosen because it is a non-parametric test and makes no assump- tion about the distribution of the datasets. 6.2. NYSE Data The algorithm was run on the NYSE data set for both absolute and active portfolios on the same pairs of stocks used by Cover in [17] and by Gy¨ orﬁet al in [20, 22]. Ta- ble 8 shows the wealth achieved by the active and absolute portfolios and is compared to reference results from the lit- erature when using the nearest neighbour strategy (GNN ) by Gy¨ orﬁet al [20, 22] and the universal portfolio strategy (UP) by Cover [17]. G∗ NN denotes our best recovery of the results of the near- est neighbour strategy [20, 22]. The results achieved by from the universal portfolio strategy was identically re- covered [17]. The last row of table 8 shows the results of the strategies when running on all 36 NYSE stocks. The algorithm compares well to the two stocks combina- tions used by Cover in [17] and by Gy¨ orﬁet al in [20, 22]. A surprising result is how the wealth achieved by the port- folio when run over all 36 stocks compares to results by 14 Average p Values of Wealth Gained (S) from the Absolute Portfolio Best Agent vs. Wealth Best Agent vs. Best Stock Best Stock vs. Wealth Hyp. S2 >S 1 S2 >S 3 S3 >S 1 ¯p p> ¯p ¯p p> ¯p ¯p p> ¯p SDC 1 0.893 0.407 0.000 0.000 0.647 0.013 SDC 2 0.642 0.013 0.000 0.000 0.567 0.001 SDC 3 0.593 0.002 0.000 0.000 0.795 0.100 SDC 4 0.846 0.274 0.000 0.000 0.644 0.006 Table 5: Comparisons of the averagep values of the wealth gained from the absolute portfolio. The ﬁrst p value in each column is the average p value, of the 30 data sets for each case, using two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests for the alternative hypotheses (Hyp.). The second p value is obtained from the two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests for the alternative hypothesis that the cumulative distri- bution function (CDF) of the p values for the 30 data sets for each case is larger than the CDF of the averagep value at the 5% signiﬁcance level. Comparison of p Values of Wealth Gained (S) from the Active Portfolio SDC 1 SDC 2 SDC 3 SDC 4 SDC 1 - 0.9765 0.0669 0 SDC 2 0.9786 - 0.0669 0 SDC 3 0.7928 0.7916 - 0 SDC 4 0.9653 0.9649 0.9535 - Table 6: Comparison of the average p values from two- sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests for the alternative hy- pothesis that the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of wealth gained from the active portfolio on SDC i is larger than the CDF of wealth gained from the active portfolio on SDC j at the 5% signiﬁcance level, where i represents the rows and j represents the columns of the table. The p values is the average of 30 comparisons, each comparison using a seed value of 1, 2,..., 30 respectively. Comparison of p Values of Wealth Gained (S) from the Absolute Portfolio SDC 1 SDC 2 SDC 3 SDC 4 SDC 1 - 0 0 0 SDC 2 1.0000 - 1.0000 0.9997 SDC 3 1.0000 0 - 0.1289 SDC 4 1.0000 0 0.5055 - Table 7: Comparison of the average p values from two- sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests for the alternative hy- pothesis that the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of wealth gained from the absolute portfolio on SDC i is larger than the CDF of wealth gained from the absolute portfolio on SDC j at the 5% signiﬁcance level, where i represents the rows and j represents the columns of the table. The p values is the average of 30 comparisons, each comparison using a seed value of 1, 2,..., 30 respectively. Synthetic Data Case 1 time 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 S 0.95 1 1.05 1.1 1.15 (a) absolute active time 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 S (Wealth) 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 (b) Figure 3: (a) The wealth achieved by the active and ab- solute portfolios on SDC 1 that consists of a time period of 1000 and 10 stocks. (b) The wealth of each randomly generated stock. 15 Synthetic Data Case 2 time 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 S 1 1.5 2 2.5 (a) absolute active time 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 S (Wealth) 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 (b) Figure 4: (a) The wealth achieved by the active and ab- solute portfolios on SDC 2 that consists of a time period of 1000 and 10 stocks. (b) The wealth of each randomly generated stock. Synthetic Data Case 3 time 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 S 1 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 (a) absolute active time 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 S (Wealth) 1 1.5 2 2.5 (b) Figure 5: (a) The wealth achieved by the active and ab- solute portfolios on SDC 3 that consists of a time period of 1000 and 10 stocks.(b) The wealth of each randomly generated stock. 16 Synthetic Data Case 4 time 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 S 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2 (a) absolute active time 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 S (Wealth) 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 (b) Figure 6: (a) The wealth achieved by the active and ab- solute portfolios on SDC 4 that consists of a time period of 1000 and 10 stocks. (b) The wealth of each randomly generated stock. Wealth Achieved by Investing in Various Combinations of Stocks From NYSE Dataset Stocks Strat. Wealth Best Agent IROQU KINAR Abs. Act. GNN G∗ NN UP Best 1.02e+12 1.00e+11 1.16e+12 1.01e+12 38.67 8.92 1.76e+13 4.97e+11 1.44e+13 1.63e+13 COMME MEICO Abs. Act. GNN G∗ NN UP Best 3.56e+03 4.28e+01 3.51e+3 3.58e+03 72.63 52.02 2.61e+04 2.49e+02 3.15e+4 2.60e+04 COMME KINAR Abs. Act. GNN G∗ NN UP Best 2.99e+12 1.05e+11 4.78e+12 3.09e+12 78.47 52.02 3.46e+13 3.75e+11 8.26e+13 3.75e+13 IBM COKE Abs. Act. GNN G∗ NN UP Best 7.84e+01 9.70e+00 74.37 7.83e+01 14.18 13.36 2.74e+02 1.98e+01 296.3 2.67e+02 36 STOCKS Abs. Act. GNN G∗ NN Best 5.42e+01 5.29e+01 3.3e+11 3.43e+11 54.14 1.36e+02 7.13e+01 7.7e+12 7.45e+12 Table 8: Comparison of the total wealth achieved from the active (Act.) and absolute (Abs.) portfolios to the wealth achieved from the Gy¨ orﬁet al nearest neighbour (GNN ), attempted recovery of the Gy¨ orﬁet al nearest neighbour (G∗ NN ), the universal portfolio (UP) and a buy-and-hold of the best stock strategies. 17 Wealth Gained in NYSE Data Experiments time 1965 1967 1970 1972 1975 1977 1980 1982 S (Wealth) 100 102 104 106 108 1010 1012 IROQU & KINAR (NYSE) Absolute Portfolio Active Portfolio Gyorfi Nearest Neighbour Universal Portfolios (a) time 1965 1967 1970 1972 1975 1977 1980 1982 S (Wealth) 100 102 104 106 108 1010 36 stocks (NYSE) Absolute Portfolio Active Portfolio Gyorfi Nearest Neighbour (b) Figure 7: Comparison of the wealth gained from diﬀer- ent methods when investing in (a) iroqu and kinar (b) 36 stocks from the NYSE dataset. Gy¨ orﬁet al in [20, 22], this may be due to a loss of accu- racy in the quadratic approximation step of the algorithm as the number of stocks increase. 6.3. NYSE Merged Data The algorithm was run for both absolute and active portfolios on the NYSE Merged dataset on two stock com- binations and on all of the 23 stocks in the dataset. The two stock combinations chosen were stocks Commercial Metals and Kin Ark Corp. and stocks IBM and Coca- Cola. 6.4. Daily sampled JSE data The algorithm was run for both absolute and active portfolios on various sets of two stock combinations, namely stocks AngloGold Ashanti Ltd and Anglo Ameri- can PLC, stocks Standard Bank Group Ltd and FirstRand Ltd, and stocks Tiger Brands Ltd and Woolworths Hold- ings Ltd. The algorithm was also run for both absolute and active portfolios on a combination of 10 stocks, 20 stocks and 30 stocks. In each case the date for which the data of a stock starts may be diﬀerent, the time period for the algorithm therefore starts with the stock that has a Wealth Gained in NYSE Merged Data Experiments time 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 S (Wealth) 100 105 1010 1015 COMME & KINAR (NYSE Merged) Absolute Portfolio Active Portfolio Gyorfi Nearest Neighbour Universal Portfolios (a) time 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 S (Wealth) 100 105 1010 1015 23 stocks (NYSE Merged) Absolute Portfolio Active Portfolio Gyorfi Nearest Neighbour (b) Figure 8: Comparison of the wealth gained from diﬀerent methods when investing in (a) comme and kinar (b) 23 stocks from the NYSE Merged dataset. 18 Wealth Achieved by Investing in Various Combinations of Stocks From NYSE Merged Dataset Stocks Strat. Wealth Best Agent COMME KINAR Abs. Act. G∗ NN UP Best 3.07e+19 7.36e+16 3.19e+19 2192.43 1344.3 4.37e+20 7.93e+16 4.73e+20 IBM COKE Abs. Act. G∗ NN UP Best 1.79e+03 7.79e+00 1.79e+03 229.13 365.92 5.12e+03 2.63e+01 4.75e+03 23 STOCKS Abs. Act. G∗ NN Best 8.05e+04 1.45e+06 3.68e+17 3496.7 3.34e+05 5.42e+05 5.60e+18 Table 9: Comparison of the total wealth achieved from the active (Act.) and absolute (Abs.) portfolios to the wealth achieved from the attempted recovery of the Gy¨ orﬁ et al nearest neighbour strategy (G∗ NN ), the attempted recovery of the universal portfolio strategy ( UP∗) and a buy-and- hold strategy of the best stock (Best). later starting time. The JSE OHLC dataset was processed into four datasets containing close-to-close, open-to-close, close-to-open and open-to-open price relatives, the algo- rithm was run on each of these datasets. 6.5. Intraday JSE data The algorithm was run for both absolute and active portfolios on various sets of two stock combinations, namely stocks AngloGold Ashanti Ltd and Anglo Ameri- can PLC, stocks Standard Bank Group Ltd and FirstRand Ltd, stocks Tiger Brands Ltd and Woolworths Holdings Ltd, and stocks MTN Group Ltd and Vodacom Group Ltd. The algorithm was also run for both absolute and active portfolios on the same combination of 10 stocks used on the JSE OHLC Dataset. 6.6. The Impact of Market Frictions An important criticism of any strategy simulation re- lates to the need to account for the impact of market frictions, this includes: transaction costs, the cost of the capital for trading, the cost of market access, the cost of regulatory capital for taking risky trading positions, and market impact. These are all required to be included in any estimate of performance slippage for any realistic as- sessment of the viability of trading activity. 6.6.1. Daily strategy trading frictions The argument that the zero-cost low frequency (daily traded) strategies are viable, even when unleveraged, is Wealth Achieved by Investing in Various Combinations of Stocks From JSE OHLC Dataset (close-to-close) Stocks Strat. Wealth Best Agent ANGJ AGLJ Abs. Act. G∗ NN UP Best 4.05 1.28 4.02 2.52 3.61 13.10 3.40 13.27 SBKJ FSRJ Abs. Act. G∗ NN UP Best 55.53 7.77 55.60 18.17 21.09 187.62 13.40 189.08 TBSJ WHLJ Abs. Act. G∗ NN UP Best 7.07 0.49 7.07 8.24 8.97 19.97 1.80 19.49 10 STOCKS Abs. Act. G∗ NN Best 68.49 9.28 194.76 89.72 135.03 12.84 854.62 20 STOCKS Abs. Act. G∗ NN Best 16.20 9.52 98.84 89.72 63.18 12.11 330.37 30 STOCKS Abs. Act. G∗ NN Best 20.48 7.34 124.91 85.03 58.27 6.24 590.51 Table 10: The total wealth achieved by the active (Act.) and absolute (Abs.) portfolios compared to the wealth achieved from the attempted recovery of the Gy¨ orﬁ et al nearest neighbour strategy (G∗ NN ), the attempted recovery of the universal portfolio strategy ( UP∗) and a buy-and- hold strategy of the best stock (Best) on the close-to-close dataset. 19 Wealth Achieved by Investing in Various Combinations of Stocks From JSE OHLC Dataset (close-to-open) Stocks Strat. Wealth Best Agent ANGJ AGLJ Abs. Act. G∗ NN UP Best 1.24 1.04 1.24 0.97 2.66 2.60 2.82 2.56 SBKJ FSRJ Abs. Act. G∗ NN UP Best 12.35 1.57 12.31 7.89 12.47 25.13 3.06 25.14 TBSJ WHLJ Abs. Act. G∗ NN UP Best 4.38 0.79 4.46 4.89 4.98 9.00 1.88 8.83 10 STOCKS Abs. Act. G∗ NN Best 7.11 2.68 13.45 56.36 11.43 3.39 30.53 20 STOCKS Abs. Act. G∗ NN Best 8.82 5.28 11.00 56.36 16.87 5.24 27.01 30 STOCKS Abs. Act. G∗ NN Best 8.07 5.66 22.53 51.02 15.80 5.50 54.80 Table 11: The total wealth achieved by the active (Act.) and absolute (Abs.) portfolios compared to the wealth achieved from the attempted recovery of the Gy¨ orﬁ et al nearest neighbour strategy (G∗ NN ), the attempted recovery of the universal portfolio strategy ( UP∗) and a buy-and- hold strategy of the best stock (Best) on the close-to-open dataset. Wealth Achieved by Investing in Various Combinations of Stocks From JSE OHLC Dataset (open-to-close) Stocks Strat. Wealth Best Agent ANGJ AGLJ Abs. Act. G∗ NN UP Best 97.75 50.21 97.53 3.41 4.68 395.58 91.82 398.74 SBKJ FSRJ Abs. Act. G∗ NN UP Best 2.53 1.04 2.53 2.66 2.97 5.12 1.80 5.00 TBSJ WHLJ Abs. Act. G∗ NN UP Best 5.59 5.00 5.59 1.94 1.89 12.73 7.19 12.75 10 STOCKS Abs. Act. G∗ NN Best 15.90 15.21 101.80 169.83 33.40 19.86 415.97 20 STOCKS Abs. Act. G∗ NN Best 4.80 6.80 30.26 169.83 8.88 6.07 104.46 30 STOCKS Abs. Act. G∗ NN Best 5.16 4.58 50.17 1278.83 11.98 5.57 317.92 Table 12: The total wealth achieved by the active (Act.) and absolute (Abs.) portfolios compared to the wealth achieved from the attempted recovery of the Gy¨ orﬁ et al nearest neighbour strategy (G∗ NN ), the attempted recovery of the universal portfolio strategy ( UP∗) and a buy-and- hold strategy of the best stock (Best) on the open-to-close dataset. 20 Wealth Achieved by Investing in Various Combinations of Stocks From JSE OHLC Dataset (open-to-open) Stocks Strat. Wealth Best Agent ANGJ AGLJ Abs. Act. G∗ NN UP Best 5.11 1.43 5.07 2.28 3.18 26.65 9.10 25.66 SBKJ FSRJ Abs. Act. G∗ NN UP Best 113.43 13.97 113.02 20.29 20.55 412.75 18.87 415.45 TBSJ WHLJ Abs. Act. G∗ NN UP Best 45.30 5.52 45.80 8.81 9.24 266.17 28.54 273.44 10 STOCKS Abs. Act. G∗ NN Best 60.62 12.03 254.00 69.49 342.40 20.57 2292.47 20 STOCKS Abs. Act. G∗ NN Best 14.73 9.13 44.88 69.49 73.61 14.76 192.99 30 STOCKS Abs. Act. G∗ NN Best 21.54 11.48 161.16 131.89 73.88 18.89 1069.81 Table 13: The total wealth achieved by the active (Act.) and absolute (Abs.) portfolios compared to the wealth achieved from the attempted recovery of the Gy¨ orﬁ et al nearest neighbour strategy (G∗ NN ), the attempted recovery of the universal portfolio strategy ( UP∗) and a buy-and- hold strategy of the best stock (Best) on the open-to-open dataset. Wealth Gained close-to-close JSE OHLC Data time 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 S (Wealth) 2 4 6 8 10 12 ANGJ & AGLJ (JSE OHLC close-to-close) Absolute Portfolio Active Portfolio Gyorfi Nearest Neighbour Universal Portfolios (a) time 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 S (Wealth) 100 101 102 10 stocks (JSE OHLC close-to-close) Absolute Portfolio Active Portfolio Gyorfi Nearest Neighbour (b) time 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 S (Wealth) 100 101 102 20 stocks (JSE OHLC close-to-close) Absolute Portfolio Active Portfolio Gyorfi Nearest Neighbour (c) time 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 S (Wealth) 100 101 102 30 stocks (JSE OHLC close-to-close) Absolute Portfolio Active Portfolio Gyorfi Nearest Neighbour (d) Figure 9: Comparison of the wealth gained from dif- ferent methods when investing in (a) ANGJ and AGLJ (b) 10 stocks (c) 20 stocks (d) 30 stocks from the JSE OHLC close-close dataset. This does not account for price-impacts and frictions, nor for the need to approx- imate an expected close price just prior to market close as one solves for the portfolio controls, there will always be a diﬀerence between the controls solved for just prior to market close and those required once the market has closed and the oﬃcial closing prices printed. 21 Wealth from Diﬀerent JSE OHLC Data Sets Data Set close-to-close close-to-open open-to-close open-to-open S (Wealth) 0 20 40 60 80 100 ANGJ & AGLJ (JSE OHLC) Absolute Portfolio Active Portfolio Gyorfi Nearest Neighbour (a) Data Set close-to-close close-to-open open-to-close open-to-open S (Wealth) 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 SBKJ & FSRJ (JSE OHLC) Absolute Portfolio Active Portfolio Gyorfi Nearest Neighbour (b) Data Set close-to-close close-to-open open-to-close open-to-open S (Wealth) 0 10 20 30 40 50 TBSJ & WHLJ (JSE OHLC) Absolute Portfolio Active Portfolio Gyorfi Nearest Neighbour (c) Data Set close-to-close close-to-open open-to-close open-to-open S (Wealth) 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 10 stocks (JSE OHLC) Absolute Portfolio Active Portfolio Gyorfi Nearest Neighbour (d) Figure 10: Comparison of wealth achieved from the ab- solute portfolio, active portfolio and Gy¨ orﬁ nearest neigh- bour porfolio on the(a) close-to-close (b) open-to-close (c) close-to-open and (d) open-to-open JSE OHLC datasets. Here we ﬁnd that there is no particular combination of OHLC data for which there is a systematic preference, e.g. close-to-close, the case of considering the close price change from one day end to another is not systematically more proﬁtable than other combinations of data times. These tests do consider the reality of trading prior to a time point, for example market close, one cannot a-priori know what the close price will be, this has to be approxi- mated. This excludes price-impact eﬀects. Wealth from Stock-Pairs of JSE Intraday Data Stocks Strat. Wealth Best Agent ANGJ AGLJ Abs. Act. G∗ NN UP Best 1.38 2.16 1.36 0.66 0.87 3.33 5.01 3.21 SBKJ FSRJ Abs. Act. G∗ NN UP Best 1.82 2.02 1.82 1.08 1.08 2.19 2.01 2.15 TBSJ WHLJ Abs. Act. G∗ NN UP Best 1.95 2.24 1.95 0.91 0.99 3.06 3.29 2.99 MTNJ VODJ Abs. Act. G∗ NN UP Best 2.13 2.13 2.13 1.12 1.18 3.55 3.25 3.57 10 STOCKS Abs. Act. G∗ NN Best 1.89 3.86 3.95 1.93 2.79 5.40 14.05 20 STOCKS Abs. Act. G∗ NN Best 1.74 3.42 5.68 1.93 2.35 4.29 21.62 30 STOCKS Abs. Act. G∗ NN Best 1.67 3.07 6.03 1.93 2.16 3.76 12.61 Table 14: The total wealth achieved by the active (Act.) and absolute (Abs.) portfolios compared to the wealth achieved from the attempted recovery of the Gy¨ orﬁ et al nearest neighbour strategy (G∗ NN ), the attempted recovery of the universal portfolio strategy ( UP∗) and a buy-and- hold strategy of the best stock (Best) on the JSE Intraday Dataset. 22 Wealth from JSE Intraday Data Experiments time Apr-2013 Jul-2013 Oct-2013 S (Wealth) 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 ANGJ & AGLJ (JSE Intraday) Absolute Portfolio Active Portfolio Gyorfi Nearest Neighbour Universal Portfolios (a) time Apr-2013 Jul-2013 Oct-2013 S (Wealth) 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 10 stocks (JSE Intraday) Absolute Portfolio Active Portfolio Gyorfi Nearest Neighbour (b) Figure 11: Comparison of the wealth gained from diﬀerent methods when investing in (a) ANGJ and AGLJ (b) 10 stocks from the JSE Intraday dataset. JSE Intraday Data with cluster deﬁned agents RESI INDI FINI Act. Best Agent 9.1018 3.4470 3.6698 Total Wealth 4.6368 Abs. Best Agent 5.6655 2.6341 2.6059 Total Wealth 2.2093 Table 15: Wealth achieved by active and absolute portfo- lios when using economic sectors as clusters. Using three clusters increases the number of competing agents by a factor of 3, from 50 to 150. The inclusion of a larger set of agents increase the out-of-sample wealth performance of the two strategies. See Tables Appendix A.2.2, Appendix A.2.1, and Appendix A.2.3 for the particular stocks in each sectors, Resources (RESI), Financials (FINI) and In- dustrials (INDI), respectively. The total wealth includes the relative competition between agents deﬁned by the three economic sectors. The sector speciﬁc wealth is given the best performing agents from each cluster groups of stocks. 20 JSE Stocks time Apr-2013 Jul-2013 Oct-2013 S (Wealth) 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 20 stocks (JSE Intraday) Absolute Portfolio Active Portfolio Gyorfi Nearest Neighbour Absolute Portfolio (Clustered) Active Portfolio (Clustered) Figure 12: Comparison of the wealth gained from diﬀerent methods when investing in 20 stocks from the JSE Intra- day dataset, the plot includes the results of using clusters on the stocks. It is important to note that the clustered portfolios have 150 agents and the portfolios without clus- ters have 50 agents. JSE Intraday Data Running Times Stocks 10 20 30 time (seconds) #105 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 Absolute Portfolio Active Portfolio Gyorfi Nearest Neighbour Figure 13: Running time of the portfolios in seconds of the diﬀerent strategies. This demonstrates the speed advan- tage of using the analytic quadratic approximation as com- pared to numerically solving the log-optimal constrained optimization at each time-step for each agent combina- tion. As expected the fully invested analytic solution is fastest, the zero-cost portfolio next, because of the addi- tional leverage constraint, and the slowest the algorithm that required the numerical solution of the optimization. 23 based on the 7 years of history 17. Consider Table 10 for the active case for the Top 10 JSE stocks (see appendix Appendix A). Here we would argue for 15bps of daily proﬁt before costs (from Table 10 using the accumulated daily wealth of 9.53). We consider the strategy that trades close of the one day to the close of the next day (close-to- close). This is considered in order to take into account liquid- ity eﬀects. The closing auction is the most liquid time to trade on the JSE. It is unlikely that one would be able to achieve low slippage trading near the daily market open- ing. We consider the combination of cost of capital (the borrowing costs required to source trading capital and cost of regulatory capital) and a small penalty for slippage due to the diﬀerences between the realized closing prices and the estimated closing prices that the algorithm would re- quire in order to estimate the portfolio controls 18 as 10bps per day. In practise it should also be noted that such a trading strategy can be converted to one that trades in equity swaps, so-called contracts-for-diﬀerence (CFDs), this would convert the uncertainty about slippage into an up-front fee and allow for excellent implementation of the required model positions with a known cost and no mean- ingful liquidity concerns. If the daily strategy was im- plemented with these types of delta-one instruments our estimates of slippage can then be considered conservative. We argue that we can realistically earn a modest 5bps of unleveraged self-funded trading proﬁt per day, or an annual return of 12% of unleveraged proﬁt-and-loss. 6.6.2. Intraday strategy trading frictions We assume: 1.) a daily slippage of 50bps for the (self- ﬁnancing) zero-cost statistical arbitrage strategy, 2.) bor- rowing costs on the capital required for trading over the year to be 10%, and 3.) that the strategy we denote as the active strategy generated a 4.63 wealth gained over a year of trading (see Table 15). Putting these together we argue for an upper limit on the proﬁt, even when unleveraged, to be a return of 20% for 250 days of trading 19. The strategy turn-over is important in realistic assess- ments of proﬁtability for intraday trading. We try to ac- count for this in our indicative costing of the slippage by 17Although this may be considered short in the context of many academic studies, this is of the order of the time-scale of the business cycle so we considered this realistic. 18This can in practice be carried out during the closing auction, just prior to the market close, by estimating online, the equilibrium price that could be the result of maximizing execution volume for the lowest surplus when the market is cleared at market close, bearing in mind that there is a short randomization period at the end of the auction that needs to be accounted for. It is fairly straight-forward to estimate suﬃciently reasonable market clearing prices. If this is not considered realistic, one can then merely consider the trading to have occurred during a post market close period (such as that found on the LSE and JSE) where one can transact at the market close price but at lower volumes. 19The strategy generates 62bps per day, the slippage is 50bps, leaving 12bps, less the 5bps for the cost of capital, then leaves 7bps to accumulate as proﬁt-and-loss per trading day. assuming that we have 100% turn-over of inventory at each trading period with a consistent cost of 0.55bps (0.0055%), per trading period20 with an additional 4bps to give an in- dicative slippage of 50bps for the intraday trading per day. 7. Conclusion In prior work it has been shown that in South African ﬁnancial markets persistence and long-memory are generic [2]. This paper adds to our knowledge of the South African market by showing that in addition to evidence supporting long-memory processes, price processes have patterns that are exploitable in a straight-forward manner. We provide a simple portfolio value based learning algo- rithm, a multi-manager in the language of asset manage- ment, that selects an over-all portfolio with weights b by considering a selection of N diﬀerent strategies Hn with their underlying portfolio weights being constructed for underlying strategies that are enumerated over a variety of combinations of time-series patterns, time-scales, clusters and partitions. This is considered in the context of univer- sally consistent strategies [17, 22] but with an extension to directly consider self-ﬁnancing zero-cost quantitative trad- ing strategies - what we call the active portfolio. When applying the algorithms to real daily test data, it compares well to results from our implementation of algorithms from the literature [17, 22] and actual results from the literature from the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) dataset (see Tables 8 and 9). The active version of the algorithm, when applied to in- traday data from the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE), is shown to have performed well in comparison to the best stock, and compares favourably with methods from prior work [17, 22] (see 14). We show that on the Johannes- burg Stock Exchange data the algorithms can learn trends and patterns and enhance out-of-sample wealth accumu- lation for both daily and intraday applications (see Tables 10 and 14). This is demonstrated on both low frequency data, daily sampled data, and higher frequency data, in- traday uniformly sampled transaction data. We have shown that there is an advantage to include agents that are clustered on stock economic sector clas- siﬁcations (see Table 15); this increases the number of agents (or experts) considered by the learning algorithm through including sector membership into the resource, ﬁ- nancial and industrial stocks sectors, which in turn boosts the out-of-sample performance. This suggests that com- bining more sophisticated clustering algorithms [27] with 20If we considered trading to be for a 7 hour period starting a half hour after market opening, and stopping 15 minutes before the market closing auction (using the JSE market times), this then leads to 84 = 12×7 5-minute trading periods across the day, this would give the worst case scenario of 8400% turn-over per day, at a transaction cost of 0.55bps per trading period, we argue that this then leads to a transaction cost of 46bps per day, additional frictions of 4bps are added to this to get the over-all daily slippage estimate of 50bps per day. 24 machine learning can be advantageous in the domain of quantitative trading. The pay-oﬀ between computational performance and wealth accumulation can be seen by considering the in- creased duration of the simulation as one increases from 10 stocks, to 20 stocks through to 30 stocks in Figure 13. The commensurate loss in performance can be seen in Ta- ble 14. For example, the 20 stock simulation generated a wealth of 1.74 for the absolute portfolio and 5.68 for the Gyorﬁ et al nearest-neighbour strategy with the ab- solute portfolio being almost 5 × 104 seconds faster (or 18% faster). For intraday statistical arbitrage problems for quantitative trading with many (50 >) assets, compu- tational delays can lead to lags between information arrival and order-execution that can negatively impact a strate- gies proﬁt-and-loss performance. We have shown that in the daily dataset for the Johan- nesburg Stock Exchange, when considering open, high, low and close price data, there is an advantage when consid- ering strategies that relate to the patterns arising across closing price to closing price data (see Table 10). It is dif- ﬁcult to proﬁtable trade the market opening price to the market closing price as intraday dynamics seems to be- come important and one tends to incur signiﬁcant market frictions associated with poor market liquidity near the market opening. This provides evidence that one can in principle beat the best stock (or the money market ac- count in the case of the self-ﬁnancing strategy) as pattern persistence is suﬃciently robust in the markets considered. Towards addressing the key criticism related to correctly estimating the impact of market frictions, in Section 6.6 we give our estimates for the impact of market frictions on both the intraday strategy, where an estimated annual return of upto 20% for the unleveraged self-ﬁnancing strat- egy, and the daily strategy, trading the closing price of the market from one day to the next, at an annual return of upto 12% (see Section 6.6). Using this we argue that the self-ﬁnancing zero-cost portfolio strategy can be consid- ered tractable both intraday and across days, that after a reasonable estimates of costs, one is still able to learn how to exploit patterns the recur in the ﬁnancial times-series data considered in this study. It should also be noted that for optimised intraday trading the event-time paradigm should be implemented rather than the calendar-time ap- proach that was used for simplicity in the experiments in this paper. This is fairly straight-forward to implement us- ing equal volume buckets and online down-sampling trans- action data to a time-series of volume-weighted average prices for equal volume buckets [35]. The aim here is to show that there are repeated patterns that can be exploited on both daily samples and intraday time-scales. We do not claim that being able to exploit such patterns is necessarily proﬁtable as a commercial en- terprise, what we are claiming is that structure does ex- ist in the ﬁnancial market time-series that is indicative of existence of repeated structures that emerge and change through time, but after reasonable costs can be consid- ered a riskless proﬁt, or at least be considered a signature of the ability to generate systematic proﬁts from patterns in ﬁnancial time-series data. We do not know whether there is a ﬁnite state repre- sentation of the system that could be used to generate the observed time-series dynamics. We have evidence for non-linear structure in the time-series data, by providing a simplistic algorithm that can exploit structure in time- series data, when it exists, and we know that the algorithm would behave quite diﬀerently for random data. To show that this is indicative of some ﬁnite state representation would require online state-detection, either via some type of cluster methodology [28], or via some sort of state-space reconstruction algorithm following the methods of deter- ministic chaos [5, 6, 7]. This paper makes no statement about the existence of a ﬁnite and suﬃciently stable ﬁnite state representation. The other criticisms could relate to both barriers to entry to reasonably cost eﬀect market access, as well as the scalability of these types of strategies due to stock liquidity. In terms of the prior, many proprietary trad- ing structures within hedge-funds and banks would have very low transaction costs due to bulk trading activities - hence we consider our daily transaction costs of 50bps as onerous but realistic. In terms of the liquidity concerns, we have limited ourselves, in the Johannesburg Stock Ex- change data set, to collections of the 10 and 20 most liquid stocks. These stocks can be traded in meaningful volumes. We could speculate that it is the buying and selling pat- terns of large institutional mutual funds, or capital ﬂows of large institutional participants in capital markets, that create key feed-backs which generate persistence in pat- terns of price dynamics. Realistically there are a variety of potential candidate sources of top-down and bottom- up feedbacks within a system as complex and adaptive as the ﬁnancial market systems; these could provide var- ious mechanisms that can balance disorder with order in a meta-stable conﬁguration of states over various time- scales [3]. We argue that fairly naive computational learn- ing agents can generate wealth within the system without special insights or understanding of the system itself. 8. Acknowledgements TG would like to thank AIMS South Africa for their sup- port and hospitality at Muizenberg. The authors would like to thank Diane Wilcox for conceptual contributions, Turgay Celik for discussions and ideas relating to algo- rithm testing, Dieter Hendricks and Raphael Nkomo for various conversations relating the quantitative trading and machine learning for trading. This work was in part sup- ported by NRF grant number 89250. The conclusions herein are due to the authors and the NRF accepts no liability in this regard. 25 References References [1] B. Arthur (1995) Complexity in Economics and Financial Mar- kets, Complexity 1 (1), 20–25. [2] D. Wilcox & T. Gebbie (2008) Periodicity and scaling of eigen- modes in an emerging market, International Journal of Theoret- ical and Applied Finance 11 (7), 739–760. [3] D. Wilcox & T. Gebbie (2014) Hierarchical Causality in Fi- nancial Economics (August 24, 2014). Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2544327. [4] J. P. Crutchﬁeld, (2011), Between order and chaos, Nature Physics, Vol. 8, January 2012, 17-23 [5] N. H. Packard, J. P. Crutchﬁeld, J. D. Farmer and R. S. Shaw (1980), Geometry from a time series, Phys. Rev. Lett. 45 7126 [6] M. Casdagli, S. Eubank, J. D. Farmer and J. Gibson (1991) State space reconstruction in the presence of noise Physica D 51 5298 [7] T. Sauer, J. Yorke and M. Casdagli (1991), Embeddology, J. Stat. Phys. 65 579616 [8] E. Bradley (1998) Nonlinear Time-Series Analysis, CU-CS-867- 98, Computer Science Technical Reports. Paper 815. http:// scholar.colorado.edu/csci_techreports/815 [9] C. R. Shalizi, J. P. Crutchﬁeld (2001) Computational mechanics: Patterns and prediction, structure and simplicity, J. Stat. Phys. 104:817-879 http://arxiv.org/pdf/cond-mat/9907176v2.pdf [10] Shalizi CR, Shalizi KL, Crutchﬁeld JP (2002) Pattern Discov- ery in Time Series, Part I: Theory, Algorithm, Analysis, and Convergence. http://arXiv.org/abs/cs.LG/0210025. [11] A. Lo, H. Mamaysky, J. Wang, (2000) Foundations of Tech- nical Analysis:Computational Algorithms, Statistical Inference, and Empirical Implementation, The Journal of Finance, Vol. LV, No. 4., Aug. 2000. [12] R. Jarrow, M. Teo, Y-K. Tse, M. Warachka (2012), An improved test for statistical arbitrage, Journal of Financial Markets, v.15, no.1, 2012 Feb, p.47(34) [13] J. L. Kelly (1956) A new interpretation of information rate, Bell. Syst. Tech. 35, 917-926. [14] P. H. Algoet & T. M. Cover (1988) Asymptotic optimality and symptotic equipartition properties of log-optimum investments, Annals of Probability, 16 (2), 876–808. [15] A. Blum & A. Kalai (1999) Universal Portfolios With and With- out Transaction Costs, Machine Learning 35 (3), 193–205. [16] A. Bordin, R. El-Yaniv & V. Gogan (2004) ”Can we learn to beat the best stock”, Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 21 , 579–594. [17] T. M. Cover (1991) Universal Portfolios, Math. Finance. 1 (1), 1–29. [18] T. M. Cover & E. Ordentlich (1996) Universal Portfolios with Side Information, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 42 (2), 348–363. [19] J. E. Cross & A. R. Barron (2003) Eﬃcient Universal Portfolios for Past-Dependent Target Classes, Mathematical Finance 13 (2), 245–276.999 [20] L. Gy¨ orﬁ, A. Urban, I. Vajda (2007) Kernel-based semi-log- optimal empirical portfolio selection strategies, International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance 10 (3), 505–516. [21] L. Gy¨ orﬁ, F. Udina, H. Walk (2007) Experiments on universal portfolio selection using data from real markets. Working paper http://tukey.upf.es/papers/NNexp.pdf [22] L. Gy¨ orﬁ, F. Udina, H. Walk (2008) Nonparametric nearest neighbor based empirical portfolio selection strategies, Statistics & Risk Modeling, De Gruyter, 26(2), 145-157 [23] D. P. Helmbold, R. E. Schapire, Y. Singer & M. K. Warmuth (2007) On-line portfolio selection using multiplicative updates, Mathematical Finance 8 (4), 325–347. [24] W. Lee (2000) Theory and Methodology of Tactical Asset Allo- cation, Frank Frabozzi Associates. [25] R. Merton (1995) Continous Time Finance, Chapter 4, Black- well. [26] A. F. Perold & W. F. Sharpe (1988) Dynamic Strategies for Asset Allocation, Financial Analysts Journal 44 (1), 16–27. [27] D. Hendricks, D. Wilcox & T. Gebbie (2016) High-speed detec- tion of emergent market clustering via an unsupervised parallel genetic algorithm. S Afr J Sci. 2016;112 (1/2), Art. 2014-0340 http://dx.doi.org/10.17159/sajs.2016/20140340 [28] D. Hendricks, T. Gebbie & D. Wilcox (2016) Detecting intraday ﬁnancial market states using temporal clusterings Quantitative Finance, doi:10.1080/14697688.2016.1171378 [29] Industry Classiﬁcation Benchmark http://www.icbenchmark. com/ICBDocs/Structure_Defs_English.pdf [30] I. Vajda (2006) Analysis of semi-log-optimal investment strate- gies, Prague Stochastics eds. M. Huskova and M. Janzura (Mat- fyz press, Prague, 2006), pp. 719727. [31] M. Matsumoto & T. Nishimura (1998) Mersenne Twister: A 623-dimensionally equidistributed uniform pseudo-random num- ber generator, ACM Transactions on Modeling and Computer Simulation 8, 3–30. [32] G. Gelencs´ er & G. Ottucs´ ak (2006) NYSE data sets at the log-optimal portfolio homepage, http://www.szit.bme.hu/~oti/ portfolio [33] Thomson Reuters (2015), Thomson Reuters Tick History, https://tickhistory.thomsonreuters.com. [34] N. Jegadeesh (1990) Evidence of predictable behavior of security returns. The Journal of Finance, 45(3), 881-898. [35] D. Easley, M.M. L´ opez de Prado, and M. O’Hara. The volume clock: Insights into the high-frequency paradigm (digest sum- mary). Journal of Portfolio Management, 39(1):19(29), 2012. 26 Appendix A. Ticker lists Appendix A.1. NYSE Name NYSE NYSE Merged 3M Company Alcoa Altria Group Arco Coca Cola Commercial Metals Dow Chemical Company DuPont Eastman Kodak Espey Exxon Mobil Fischback Ford Motor Company Fortune Brands General Electric General Motors Gran Tierra Energy Inc. Gulf Oill Hewlett-Packard IBM Ingersoll-Rand Plc Iroquois Ltd. Johnson & Johnson Kimberly-Clark Corp Lukens Mei Corp. Merck & Company Mobil Kin Ark Corp. Pillsbury Procter & Gamble Schlumberger N.V. Sears Sherwin-Williams Texaco Wyeth Appendix A.2. JSE intraday and daily data In the following tables ∗ represents stocks that are included in the JSE daily dataset grouping and not the JSE intraday dataset grouping, and + represents stocks that are include in the JSE intraday dataset grouping and not the JSE daily dataset grouping. Appendix A.2.1. Financials / JSE-FINI (J212) Name RIC Stock grouping Financial (JSE-FINI) J212 10 20 30 Standard Bank Grp. Ltd SBKJ.J Firstrand Ltd FSRJ.J Absa Group Ltd ASAJ.J ∗ ∗ Old Mutual Plc OMLJ.J Nedbank Group Ltd NEDJ.J Sanlam Ltd SLMJ.J Investec Plc INPJ.J RMB Holdings Ltd RMHJ.J Growthpoint Prop Ltd GRTJ.J African Bank Inv. Ltd ABLJ.J Capital Shop Cnt. Grp Plc CSOJ.J Reinet Investments Sca REIJ.J Redeﬁne Properties Ltd RDFJ.J Discovery Holdings Ltd DSYJ.J Liberty Holdings Ltd LBHJ.J Appendix A.2.2. Resources / JSE-RESI (J201) Name RIC Stock grouping Resources (JSE-RESI) J201 10 20 30 BHP Billiton PLC BILJ.J Anglo American PLC AGLJ.J Sasol LTD SOLJ.J Anglo Platinum Ltd AMSJ.J Impala Platinum Hld. Ltd IMPJ.J Anglogold Ashanti Ltd ANGJ.J Gold Fileds Ltd GFIJ.J Exxaro Resources Ltd EXXJ.J African Rainbow Minerals ARIJ.J Lonmin PLC LONJ.J Harmony G M Co Ltd HARJ.J Assore Ltd ASRJ.J Northam Platinum Ltd NHMJ.J Optimum Coal Hldgs Ltd OPTJ.J Merafe Resources Ltd MRFJ.J Petmin Ltd PETJ. J Wesizwe Platinum Ltd WEZJ.J Sentula Mining Ltd SNUJ.J DRDGold Ltd DRDJ.J Simmer and Jack Mines SIMJ.J 27 Appendix A.2.3. Industrials/JSE-INDI (J211) Name RIC Stock grouping Industrials (JSE-INDI) J211 10 20 30 SABMiller Plc SABJ.J MTN Group Ltd MTNJ.J Comp. Fin Richemont CFRJ.J Naspers Ltd NPNnJ.J Kumba Iron Ore Ltd KIOJ.J Vodacom Group Ltd VODJ.J Bidvest Ltd BVTJ.J Shoprite Hldgs Ltd SHPJ.J + Remgro Ltd REMJ.J Aspen Pharmacare Hldgs APNJ.J Tiger Brands Ltd TBSJ.J ArcelorMittal SA Ltd ACLJ.J Steinhoﬀ Inter. Hldgs SHFJ.J Truworths International TRUJ.J Mediclinic International Ltd MDCJ.J Massmart Hldgs Ltd MSMJ.J + Mondi Plc MNPJ.J Mondi Ltd MNDJ.J Imperial Hldgs Ltd IPLJ.J Pik n Pay Stores Ltd PIKJ.J Woolworths Hldgs WHLJ.J The Foschini Grp Ltd TFGJ.J Netcare Ltd NTCJ.J Pretoria Port Cement PPCJ.J Sappi Ltd SAPJ.J Telkom SA Ltd TKGJ.J Aveng Ltd AEGJ.J 28