Can Agent-Based Models Probe Market Microstructure? D. F. Platt ∗1,2 and T. J. Gebbie1,2,3 1School of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg 2QuERILab - Quantifying Emergence, Risk and Information 3Department of Statistical Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town Abstract We extend prior evidence that naively using intraday agent-based models that involve realistic order- matching processes for modeling continuous-time double auction markets seems to fail to be able to provide a robust link between data and many model parameters, even when these models are able to reproduce a number of well-known stylized facts of return time series. We demonstrate that while the parameters of intraday agent-based models rooted in market microstructure can be meaningfully calibrated, those exclusively related to agent behaviors and incentives remain problematic. This could simply be a failure of the calibration techniques used but we argue that the observed parameter degeneracies are most likely a consequence of the realistic matching processes employed in these models. This suggests that alternative approaches to linking data, phenomenology and market structure may be necessary and that it is conceivable that one could construct a useful model that does not directly depend on the nuances of agent behaviors, even when it is known that the real agents engage in complex behaviors. Keywords: agent-based modeling, calibration, complexity, market microstructure, hierarchical causality JEL Classiﬁcation : C13· C52· G10 1. I ntroduction Financial agent-based models (ABMs) have seen increasing prevalence in quantitative ﬁ- nance literature in recent years, with a wide variety of models emerging that are capable of replicating the stylized facts of ﬁnancial return time series, such as a fat-tailed distribution and volatility clustering (Barde 2016). This is largely due to their replacement of empirically inconsistent economic assumptions, such as that of a Gaussian return distribution and the efﬁcient market hypothesis, with assumptions rooted in agent behaviors (LeBaron 2005). Despite this, there still exists signiﬁcant skepticism as to the value and validity of this class of models, particularly in relation to cur- rent validation techniques (Hamill and Gilbert 2016). The vast majority of ﬁnancial ABMs, particularly those replicating continuous dou- ble auction markets at an intraday time scale, are still validated by demonstrating an abil- ity to produce return time series replicating a number of empirically-observed stylized facts (Panayi et al. 2013). A detailed survey of such stylized facts is presented by Cont (2001). Though a solid starting point, this method of validation has brought with it a number of signiﬁcant challenges. A key concern is the fact that a very large number of models with very different design philosophies are able to replicate the stylized facts of return time series equally well, leading to difﬁculty in model comparisons and the pre- cise identiﬁcation of which mechanisms lead to the aforementioned stylized facts (Barde 2016). This, combined with concerns that increases in the mechanistic complexity of intraday ABMs may not provide improved representa- tions of the dynamics and processes that gov- ern market behavior and structure on shorter time scales necessitates a more comprehensive investigation into model validation. This leads to a need to calibrate such mod- els to transaction data in an attempt to obtain parameters that allow the models in question ∗Corresponding author, dfplatt@mweb.co.za 1 arXiv:1611.08510v3 [q-fin.CP] 31 Aug 2017 to generate ﬁnancial return time series with moments and other statistical characteristics comparable to empirical measurements, such that an empirically measured series and a sim- ulated series can then be said to come from the same distribution (Fabretti 2013). Such investi- gations have been done in the work of Fabretti (2013) and Gilli and Winker (2003), among var- ious other studies. An exhaustive survey is presented by Kukacka and Barunik (2016). The majority of these prior investigations have focused primarily on the calibration of very simple models that produce time series appropriate at a daily time scale and typically make use of closed-form approximations to calculate market prices, in the vein of closing auctions occurring at the end of each trading day in real ﬁnancial markets. Models of this class include the Farmer and Joshi (2002) and Kirman (1991) models. Overall, these experi- ments have proven relatively successful, with calibration using these methods generating sat- isfactory results. Despite this, the methods employed by Fab- retti (2013) and Gilli and Winker (2003) have not been readily applied to intraday models employing realistic order matching processes approximating continuous double auction mar- kets, with the general calibration literature for this class of models also being relatively sparse. The underlying questions of when, and to what extent, one can use aggregate properties of ﬁnancial ﬂuctuations or return time series phenomena to probe the complex hidden fea- tures and structures inherent in real ﬁnancial markets remains open. ABMs have been used to successfully extract hidden structure for ag- gregate return data on daily sampled frequen- cies (Fabretti 2013), but this still remains largely unexplored territory in the case of intraday data. For this reason, we had previously applied the calibration framework of Fabretti (2013) in Platt and Gebbie (2016), attempting to calibrate the Jacob Leal et al. (2015) model, a model rep- resenting both high- and low-frequency trader interactions in the context of a continuous dou- ble auction market. This model has a variety of features that are common in more complex in- traday models, such as matching orders mecha- nistically rather than market clearing at or near an equilibrium price. Other examples of this class of models include the Chiarella and Iori (2002), Chiarella et al. (2009) and Preis et al. (2006) models. In this prior investigation (Platt and Geb- bie 2016), we demonstrated and veriﬁed the ability of the model to generate well-known return time series stylized facts, while still suf- fering from parameter degeneracies when sub- jected to the established calibration procedures of Fabretti (2013). We also found the dynamics of the simulated price time series to be dom- inated by the underlying dynamics of order prices within the model, with parameters re- lating to order price determination being the only meaningfully calibrated parameters. This suggested that some parameters may not have the meaning or effect that the model designer had originally intended. This can be regarded as problematic if such agent-based modeling research focuses on the varying of parameter values to determine the effect of various phenomena in ﬁnancial mar- kets when the link between the parameters and real data from the markets being considered is weak. If these types of models are used to make both regulatory and structural inferences about market microstructure then the robust- ness of the ability to link parameters to real data and the ability to understand how param- eters drive model behavior is essential. The original investigation of Jacob Leal et al. (2015) attempts to determine the effect of different numbers of high-frequency traders on the prevalence of ﬂash crashes in a simu- lated market by varying a suitable parameter. Our prior investigation found that the param- eter in question in the model of Jacob Leal et al. (2015) was degenerate and had a poorly behaved effect on a number of moment and test statistic values of the generated price time series; this included the mean, standard devia- tion, kurtosis and generalized Hurst exponent (Platt and Gebbie 2016). This is also in spite of the model’s ability to replicate a number of 2 well-known stylized facts. The source of these degeneracies is difﬁcult to determine. They may emerge because the Jacob Leal et al. (2015) model generates order prices for most of its traders without consulting the current state of the limit order book (LOB), and instead uses a geometric random walk that references previous market prices. They may also be a consequence of the use of realistic order matching processes rather than closed- form approximations to market prices, which may affect the link between the underlying parameters and empirical measurements. Al- ternatively, it may be that the modeling frame- work is fundamentally incomplete and that key drivers of measured price dynamics are absent from the models themselves. This ultimately leads us to consider two key questions in the following investigation: Firstly, since some success was found in calibrating parameters related to order price dynamics in our previous investigation (Platt and Gebbie 2016), is it possible that despite the existence of degeneracies in parameters relat- ing to agent behaviors, parameters which relate to the order book and market microstructure can be meaningfully calibrated? Secondly, can aspects of market microstruc- ture not explicitly modeled in an ABM, such as order ﬂow correlation, be detected through cal- ibration? In other words, can we probe model incompleteness through calibration? We attempt to shed light on these concerns by applying the calibration methodology pre- viously considered (Platt and Gebbie 2016) to another well understood intraday ABM approx- imating a continuous double auction market using realistic matching procedures, but now using an order placement mechanism that is more closely related to the current state of the order book, namely the Preis et al. (2006) model. An important precedent in the literature is that relating to the zero-intelligence agent ar- gument of Farmer et al. (2005), which suggests that very basic models with high parsimony and clear falsiﬁability can match observations surprisingly well. These types of models are driven by simple relationships between order ﬂow and price process parameters with no ex- plicit need for parameters related to more so- phisticated agent behaviors. Our study there- fore considers a more sophisticated model that has similar basic parameters as an important subset. 2. T he Preis et al . M odel A. Model Overview We consider the model ﬁrst presented by Preis et al. (2006) and later elaborated upon by Preis et al. (2007). Referring to Figure 1, the model consists of two agent types, liquidity providers, who sub- mit limit orders to buy or sell an asset to a LOB, and liquidity takers, who submit market orders to buy or sell an asset to the same LOB, through a series of T Monte Carlo steps. LOB Liquidity Takers Liquidity Providers Market Price Time Series Market OrdersLimit Orders Match Orders, Determine New Mid Price Results in Figure 1: An illustration of the agent types and interac- tions within the model During each of these Monte Carlo steps, active liquidity providers ﬁrst submit limit or- ders, referencing a decision based on the cur- rent state of the LOB, after which liquidity tak- ers submit market orders, resulting in a num- ber of trades. Based on the mid price 1 of orders in the LOB following the execution of all trades in a Monte Carlo step, a new market price for the 1The average of the best bid (buy order with the highest price) and best ask (sell order with the lowest price) in the LOB. 3 asset can be determined, ultimately resulting in a series of market prices, one for each Monte Carlo step. Simulation Start Model Initializa- tion, 10 MC Steps Liquidity Takers Place Market Orders Liquidity Providers Place Limit Orders Liquidity Providers Cancel Limit Orders Determine New Mid Price Update Liquidity Taker Buy Probability Update Liquidity Provider Placement Depth Simulation End Enter Standard MC Steps MC Step 1 to T− 1 MC Step T, Exit Standard MC Steps Figure 2: Flowchart describing a typical simulation of T Monte Carlo steps We present an outline of the overall simula- tion in Figure 2, where the steps indicated are elaborated upon in subsequent subsections. B. Liquidity Provider Agent Speciﬁ- cation Each simulation contains NA liquidity providers, who submit limit orders to the LOB at a given frequency, α. This means that for any given Monte Carlo step, approximately ⌊αNA⌋ limit orders are placed by liquidity providers. Each of the aforementioned orders is of size 1 and is a buy order with probability qprovider = 1 2. The price of each of these orders is deter- mined by the current placement depth param- eter, λ(t), and the current state of the order book, namely the current best bid, pb, and the current best ask, pa, where the price of a limit buy order is given by p = pa− 1− η (1) and the price of a limit sell order is given by p = pb + 1 + η (2) where η is an exponentially distributed ran- dom number, generated according to η =⌊−λ(t) ln(u)⌋ (3) and u∼ U(0, 1). The placement depth parameter is time varying, and is directly related to the buy prob- ability of liquidity takers, qtaker (t), discussed in more detail in subsequent subsections, and the initial placement depth parameter, λ0. It is given by λ(t) = λ0   1 + ⏐⏐⏐qtaker (t)− 1 2 ⏐⏐⏐ √⟨[ qtaker (t)− 1 2 ]2⟩ Cλ   (4) where Cλ is an integer parameter and⟨[qtaker− 1 2 ]2⟩ is determined by iterating qtaker (t) for 105 Monte Carlo steps separately before the main simulation and obtaining the mean value of [qtaker− 1 2 ]2. It should be noted that the above order placement mechanism is entirely driven by the current characteristics of the LOB. This is in contrast to the placement mechanism used by Jacob Leal et al. (2015), which is based on the previous history of market prices. A more de- tailed LOB-based order placement mechanism is presented by Mandes (2015). During each Monte Carlo step, liquidity providers may also cancel previously placed orders. This is implemented by randomly can- celling each limit order in the LOB with proba- bility δ. Finally, the model requires some form of initialization to produce a viable order book be- fore actual trading can begin. This is done in a series of 10 initial Monte Carlo steps, in which liquidity providers place limit orders around an initial price, pa = pb = p0, with no liquid- ity taker activity present. This corresponds to the placement of approximately⌊10αNA⌋ limit orders. 4 C. Liquidity Taker Agent Speciﬁca- tion Each simulation contains NA liquidity takers, who submit market orders to the LOB at a given frequency, µ. This means that for any given Monte Carlo step, approximately⌊µNA⌋ market orders are placed by liquidity takers. Each of the aforementioned orders is of size 1 and is a buy order with probability qtaker (t), with qtaker (0) = 1 2. A sell market order simply executes and results in the removal of the best bid from the LOB and a buy market order simply executes and results in the removal of the best ask from the LOB, since all orders are of size 1. Unlike qprovider , qtaker (t) is not ﬁxed, but rather evolves over time. It is implemented as a mean-reverting random walk, with mean qtaker (0), increment ∆S, and a mean reversion probability of 1 2 +|qtaker (t)− 1 2|. 3. C alibration Experiment Design A. Data The dataset used in all calibration experiments is acquired in the TRTH (Thomson Reuters 2016) format, presenting a tick-by-tick series of trades, quotes and auction quotes. We convert the dataset to a series of one- minute price bars, with each price correspond- ing to the ﬁnal quote mid price for each minute, where the mid price of a quote is given as the average of the level 1 bid price and level 1 ask price associated with that quote, as was previ- ously done in Platt and Gebbie (2016). From this series of prices, we may obtain a series of log prices 2, which is the series we attempt to calibrate the model to. The transaction dataset often presents events occurring outside of standard trading hours, 9:00 to 17:00, but we consider only quotes with a timestamp occurring in the pe- riod from 9:10 to 16:50 on any particular trad- ing day. This is a result of the fact that the opening auction occurring from 8:30 to 9:00 tends to produce erroneous data during the ﬁrst 10 minutes of continuous trading and the fact that the period from 16:50 to 17:00 repre- sents a closing auction. In all calibration experiments, we investi- gate a one-week period, corresponding to a to- tal of 2300 one-minute price bars, representing 460 minutes of trading each day from Monday to Friday. Finally, we consider a single, liquid stock listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange, Anglo American PLC, over the period begin- ning at 9:10 on 1 November 2013 and ending at 16:50 on 5 November 2013. This dataset was also considered in Platt and Gebbie (2016). B. Calibration Framework As previously discussed, we apply the calibra- tion framework described by Fabretti (2013) to an intraday ABM approximating a continuous double auction market through the use of re- alistic order matching procedures, as opposed to a model operating at a daily time scale and using closed-form approximations to market prices. We make use of the method of simulated moments (Winker et al. 2007) to construct an objective function that measures errors relat- ing to the mean, standard deviation, kurtosis, Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test and generalized Hurst exponent when comparing a log price time series measured from the data and a log price time series simulated using the Preis et al. (2006) model. We aim to minimize this objective function by employing the Nelder-Mead simplex algo- rithm combined with the threshold accepting heuristic (Gilli and Winker 2003). We reproduce the implementation we pre- viously described in Platt and Gebbie (2016) without any alteration, again making use of 5 2This is a technical requirement of the method of Fabretti (2013) and is discussed in detail in Platt and Gebbie (2016). 3A single calibration experiment involving the Nelder-Mead simplex algorithm may take in excess of 7 hours when parallelized over the 2× 16 = 32 workers of an HP Z840 workstation with 2 Intel Xeon E5-2683 CPUs, making more Monte Carlo replications computationally too expensive relative to the reduction in the variance of the estimates. 5 Monte Carlo replications, due to computational constraints 3. 4. C alibration Results A. Free and Fixed Parameters In all calibration experiments, we consider 6 free parameters, with only NA set to be ﬁxed. This particular simpliﬁcation was made for the purposes of maintaining computational tractability, since increasing the value of NA can have a detrimental impact on the speed of simulation. We have chosen NA = 250, as was selected by Preis et al. (2006). The remaining model parameters, namely δ, λ0, Cλ, ∆S, α and µ, deﬁned in Section 2, are set to be free parameters and we randomly gen- erate initial values for these parameters during each calibration experiment. We initialize δ, ∆S and µ between 0 and 0.1, α between 0.1 and 0.5, λ0 between 0 and 200, and Cλ between 0 and 20. B. Nelder-Mead Simplex Algorithm Since we consider n = 6 free parameters in our calibration experiments, we begin with n + 1 = 7 simplex vertices, each consisting of randomly generated initial values for the 6 free parameters. In our experiments, it was noted that 100 iterations of the Nelder-Mead simplex algo- rithm with threshold accepting almost always produced convergent behavior and we thus conducted 20 calibration experiments with this ﬁxed number of iterations. Despite the presence of convergent behav- ior, we ﬁnd that the obtained parameter sets are somewhat different for various calibration ex- periments, with dependence on the set of initial vertices. We also observed this phenomenon in Platt and Gebbie (2016), but ﬁnd a greater aver- age reduction in the initial search space when considering the parameter conﬁdence intervals 4 obtained for the Preis et al. (2006) model in comparison to those obtained for the Jacob Leal et al. (2015) model. These conﬁdence intervals are shown in Table 1. T able 1: Nelder-Mead Simplex Algorithm Calibration Results Parameter 95% Conf Int s√n δ [0.0554, 0.0782] 0.0054 λ0 [137.3818, 190.9182] 12.7892 Cλ [11.0808, 21.3192] 2.4458 ∆S [0.0272, 0.0572] 0.0072 α [0.1545, 0.2517] 0.0232 µ [0.0692, 0.1014] 0.0077 95% conﬁdence intervals for the set of free parameters, obtained from 20 independent calibration experiments involving the Nelder-Mead simplex algorithm combined with the threshold accepting heuristic This is indicative of convergence to local minima, even with the inclusion of methods aiming to overcome this problem, namely the threshold accepting heuristic. It would there- fore appear that there exists signiﬁcant difﬁ- culty in identifying a unique, optimal parame- ter set. As was discussed by Fabretti (2013), we also ﬁnd that these different parameter sets form a region of feasible parameters, all producing similar objective function values, despite differ- ences in the parameter values themselves. In Platt and Gebbie (2016), we found that such a trend existed, but not as prominently as in this case, where we now ﬁnd that all the calibration experiments conform to this behavior. It is also worth noting that, as was found in Platt and Gebbie (2016), the majority of the obtained parameter sets again produce ﬁts of similar quality to that of Fabretti (2013), which we demonstrate in Section 4.C. C. Comparison of Calibrated Model and Empirical Data It was mentioned in the preceding sections that while no unique parameter set could be 4The intervals are calculated as: ¯x± t∗ s√n , where ¯x is the sample mean, s is the sample standard deviation, n is the sample size, and t∗ is the appropriate critical value for the t distribution. 6 established, all of the experiments converged to different parameter sets with similar objective function values producing reasonable behavior when compared to the simulated data. In this section, we consider the best parameter set, as measured by the objective function, obtained in the Nelder-Mead simplex algorithm calibration experiments. For this parameter set, we simulate 20 price paths and obtain the 95% conﬁdence intervals for the estimates of the mean, standard de- viation, kurtosis, and Hurst exponent of the simulated log prices and compare this to the empirical moments obtained from the transac- tion data. T able 2: Best Parameter Set Obtained Through Calibra- tion Calibrated Parameter Parameter Value δ 0.0733 λ0 180 Cλ 33 ∆S 0.0328 α 0.2129 µ 0.0653 Best parameter set obtained through the implementation of Nelder-Mead simplex algorithm combined with the threshold accepting heuristic T able 3: Comparison of Empirical and Calibrated Mo- ments Moment Simulated Value Empirical Value m1 [5.4628, 5.5137] 5.5143 m2 [0.0268, 0.0387] 0.0300 m3 [2.3716, 3.3788] 1.2402 m4 [0.5795, 0.5993] 0.5658 95% conﬁdence intervals for the simulated moments ob- tained using the calibrated parameters compared to the empirically measured moments, with m1, ...,m4 corre- sponding to the mean, standard deviation, kurtosis and generalized Hurst exponent respectively As seen in Table 3 and also demonstrated in prior work (Platt and Gebbie 2016), we ob- serve that the parameter sets obtained through the calibration procedure employed are indeed able to produce ﬁts of similar quality to that of Fabretti (2013) for the mean and standard deviation, while slightly overestimating the Hurst exponent and severely overestimating the kurtosis. This is predominantly due to the fact that the weight matrix obtained through the method of Fabretti (2013) tends to assign very large weights to errors on the mean and standard deviation, while assigning very small weights to errors on kurtosis, leading calibra- tion to either underestimate or overestimate kurtosis in the investigations of both Fabretti (2013) and Platt and Gebbie (2016). We provide a detailed discussion on pos- sible shortcomings of the method of Fabretti (2013) in Section 6. Despite the previously mentioned ﬂaws, the above seems to suggest that members of this class of models, namely ABMs of contin- uous double auction markets using realistic order matching processes, are indeed capable of reproducing a number of characteristics of empirically-sampled data to some degree and that the calibration methodology of Fabretti (2013) can indeed determine appropriate pa- rameter sets, but that the parameters produc- ing such ﬁts are simply not unique. In the following subsections, we detail possible rea- sons for this behavior through an investigation of the behavior of the objective function. D. Parameter Analysis In an attempt to illustrate the behavior of the objective function with respect to changes in pa- rameter values, we generate surfaces represent- ing the objective function values correspond- ing to various parameter value pairs, as has been done by Gilli and Winker (2003) and Fab- retti (2013). We repeat the process previously employed in Platt and Gebbie (2016), where we consider 1000 points in a two-dimensional space generated using a two-dimensional Sobol sequence, corresponding to various possible values of a parameter pair. We then obtain the objective function value for each combination of the values in the parameter pair using 5 Monte Carlo replications, resulting in an ob- 7 jective function surface. The base parameter set used for these experiments is presented in Table 2. -2 0.1 0 2 4 0.2 6 f(θ) ×105 0.08 8 10 α 0.3 0.06 12 µ 14 0.040.4 0.02 0 Figure 3: Type 1 (Platt and Gebbie 2016) parameter sur- face illustrating the effect of α and µ on the objective function As is clearly visible in Figures 3 and 4, we see that δ, ∆S, α and µ all exhibit a similar ef- fect on the objective function. While there are indeed certain regions that produce particu- larly bad ﬁts to the data, the vast majority of the surfaces are relatively ﬂat, indicating a very wide range of feasible parameters producing a reasonable ﬁt to the data, with no clear way to distinguish an optimal global minimum. This is a similar insight to that expressed by Fabretti (2013). 0 1000 2000 0.08 3000 0.02 f(θ) 4000 0.06 5000 δ 0.04 6000 ∆S 7000 0.04 0.06 0.02 0.08 Figure 4: Type 1 (Platt and Gebbie 2016) parameter sur- face illustrating the effect of δ and ∆S on the objective function This is the likely reason why parameter con- vergence was not observed, despite the fact that the objective function values were similar for each experiment, as a very large area of the pa- rameter space produces very similar dynamics. The effect of these parameters on the dynamics of the obtained log price time series is thus not clearly deﬁned, again indicative of parameter degeneracies in a similar vein to those found for the Jacob Leal et al. (2015) model in Platt and Gebbie (2016). 100 200 300 400 500 505 600 f(θ) 700 800 λ0Cλ 900 10010 1000 15015 Figure 5: Type 3 (Platt and Gebbie 2016) parameter sur- face illustrating the effect of λ0 and Cλ on the objective function In contrast to this, however, Figure 5 indi- cates that both Cλ and λ0 produce a very well- deﬁned effect on the objective function. This is an interesting observation. In Platt and Gebbie (2016), we observed a similar trend in the case of the Jacob Leal et al. (2015) model, with all parameter surfaces behaving in a haphazard manner, except for those dealing with parame- ters that drove the random walk which deﬁned order prices in the order book. It is therefore not surprising that Cλ and λ0 happen to drive the order placement depth process, λ(t), and hence order prices in this model. In our previous investigation (Platt and Gebbie 2016) we conjectured that this behavior could be attributed to the fact that the Jacob Leal et al. (2015) model set order prices accord- ing to the previous history of market prices only and not the current state of the order book. This may have reduced the effect of order size and order frequency effects on the obtained log price time series. This could, in turn, cause the 8 associated parameters to become degenerate. It was believed that consideration of the order book dynamics during order placement, which would be more directly affected by the other parameters in the model, would lead to greater parameter stability. Despite this, it now seems that this was not the case. We have found that even with such considerations in the Preis et al. (2006) model, we have again produced similar ﬁnd- ings, leading to a more unfortunate conclusion that increased mechanistic complexity may not enhance the ability of models to be open to credible calibration. In this context, one should consider the work of Bookstaber et al. (2016), which pro- vides a number of signiﬁcant mechanistic ex- tensions to the Preis et al. (2006) model, most notably the inclusion of heterogeneous deci- sion cycles and new agent types, such as large ﬁrms. As with much of the existing ABM litera- ture, stylized fact-centric validation procedures are employed exclusively, with the authors ex- plicitly stating that such validation procedures are fairly rigorous. Our results indicate that this may in fact not be the case and that there is at least cause for some skepticism as to whether certain of the extensions to the model result in parameter degeneracies not detected by styl- ized fact-centric validation. It is important to note that in the case of the Jacob Leal et al. (2015) model, a single parame- ter associated with one of the smooth objective function surfaces previously mentioned did show convergence, though neither λ0 nor Cλ have demonstrated this behavior in this inves- tigation. This is most likely due to the fact that other parameters in the Jacob Leal et al. (2015) model never produced signiﬁcant effects on the ob- jective function in comparison to the single successfully calibrated parameter. In the Preis et al. (2006) model, however, there are regions where the objective function value can become very large for certain val- ues of δ, ∆S, α and µ, whereas they typically have a very small effect on the objective func- tion. This is because these regions typically represent unstable model dynamics, for exam- ple α close to µ and a high order cancelation rate, δ, leading to an illiquid order book that is frequently depleted of orders, which in turn drives unrealistic and unstable simulated price dynamics. These very high objective function values in these regions may have affected convergence in λ0 and Cλ, since their effect would not be as dominant as it would be for typical parameter values, this dominance being the reason for the observed convergence in Platt and Gebbie (2016). Rather than blindly accepting such rea- soning, however, we rigorously demonstrate that such convergence is indeed possible in Section 4.E. It would therefore seem that regardless of the equations used to construct intraday ABMs of continuous double auction markets involv- ing realistic order matching processes, the dy- namics of the obtained market price time se- ries are predominantly driven by the equations used to determine order prices in the model, with other parameters degenerating to a signif- icant extent. This may suggest that prices are much more than just the aggregation of predeﬁned mech- anistic classes of agents (Wilcox and Gebbie 2014). E. Veriﬁcation of λ0 and Cλ Conver- gence In order to verify that λ0 and Cλ can be uniquely determined when the dynamics of the other parameters do not introduce noise into the calibration procedures, we consider a separate calibration experiment involving only λ0 and Cλ. Rather than using the Nelder-Mead sim- plex algorithm as before, we now consider a genetic algorithm, since 3 initial simplex ver- tices would be too small a parameter space to randomly initialize. We begin with a randomly initialized initial population of 100 individuals, using the same parameter bounds as in the Nelder-Mead sim- plex calibration experiments, and iterate this 9 population for 50 generations, determined to be sufﬁcient for convergence. We then repeat this process a total of 8 times in order to obtain conﬁdence intervals as in Section 4.B. All other parameters are set according to the values in Table 2. T able 4: Genetic Algorithm Calibration Results (λ0, Cλ) Parameter 95% Conf Int s√n λ0 [193.2596, 196.5567] 0.6972 Cλ [18.7165, 19.4306] 0.1510 95% conﬁdence intervals for λ0 and Cλ, obtained from 8 independent calibration experiments involving a genetic algorithm Referring to Table 4, we see that when only λ0 and Cλ are considered in a calibration ex- periment, we observe meaningful convergence in both parameters. The identiﬁed region of convergence is also consistent with the visible minimum in Figure 5. T able 5: Genetic Algorithm Calibration Results ( δ, ∆S, α, µ) Parameter 95% Conf Int s√n δ [0.0653, 0.0958] 0.0064 ∆S [0.0163, 0.0405] 0.0051 α [0.1167, 0.1926] 0.0160 µ [0.0608, 0.0924] 0.0067 95% conﬁdence intervals for δ, ∆S, α and µ, obtained from 8 independent calibration experiments involving a genetic algorithm Finally, we repeat the genetic algorithm ex- periment employed for parameters λ0 and Cλ, but this time consider δ, ∆S, α and µ as free parameters and as expected ﬁnd that these pa- rameters cannot be uniquely identiﬁed using the genetic algorithm, as shown in Table 5. 5. R ealistic Order Matching Procedures and Price Dynamics In both our current and previous investigations (Platt and Gebbie 2016), it appears that certain features of the microstructure of a market, such as order book depth and the associated dynam- ics of the prices of limit orders, can be reliably probed by the calibration of intraday ABMs to transaction data. In contrast to this, however, it seems that the parameters of these models associated with the frequency at which traders submit orders, the speciﬁc number of trader agents participating in a particular market and various other phenomena that are rooted in agent behavior tend to be difﬁcult to infer with signiﬁcant conﬁdence. This naturally leads to a discussion on the effect of various processes within an intraday ABM on the simulated price time series when this time series is generated using realistic or- der matching processes. Bouchaud et al. (2008) argue that prices in real markets are driven by two main phenomena, the response of prices to individual orders and the ﬂow of orders arriv- ing in the market. We therefore investigate how this may apply to a market simulated using an intraday ABM. It is evident that the processes which de- termine order prices within an intraday ABM directly inﬂuence the ﬁrst of these phenom- ena in a well-deﬁned way. These processes directly determine the prices of limit orders within the LOB and these order prices deﬁne the mid prices or trade prices (depending on the model in question) that will eventually be set as market prices. This likely explains the fairly well-deﬁned effect of the parameters in- ﬂuencing order prices on both the simulated price time series and objective function in the case of the Jacob Leal et al. (2015) and Preis et al. (2006) models. The second mechanism, namely the order ﬂow, requires more careful consideration. A key question to consider is whether the Preis et al. (2006) model does in fact produce a realistic, nontrivial order ﬂow. A well-known property of order ﬂow in real ﬁnancial markets is long memory (Bouchaud et al. 2008). This phenomenon can be observed by plotting the autocorrelation function of the time series of trade signs for a particular mar- ket over some period (+1 for buyer initiated 10 trades and -1 for seller initiated trades), which typically demonstrates a slow decay in auto- correlation as the number of lags is increased in most empirical investigations (Kuroda et al. 2011). 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 Lag -0.05 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 Autocorrelation Autocorrelation Function 95% Confidence Bands Figure 6: Autocorrelation function for trade signs in- ferred from our calibration dataset Using the measured data and following the method of Lee and Ready (1991), which was also applied to similar datasets in Harvey et al. (2017), we classiﬁed trades as either buyer or seller initiated and computed the associated trade sign autocorrelation function. This au- tocorrelation function is presented in Figure 6 and conﬁrms that long memory dynamics are captured in the order ﬂow associated with the data to which the model was calibrated. T able 6: Default Model Parameter Set Parameter Default Value δ 0.0250 λ0 100 Cλ 10 ∆S 0.0010 α 0.1500 µ 0.0250 Default model parameter set presented in Preis et al. (2006) and Preis et al. (2007) Figure 7 shows the autocorrelation function for trade signs generated by the Preis et al. (2006) model, initialized with the default pa- rameters described by Preis et al. (2006), which we present in Table 6. We see that the character- istic slow decay in autocorrelation associated with long memory is absent, indicative that such dynamics are not captured by the model when initialized with the default parameters of Preis et al. (2006). 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 Lag -0.05 -0.04 -0.03 -0.02 -0.01 0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 Autocorrelation Mean Autocorrelation Function 95% Autocorrelation Function Mean Confidence Intervals 95% Confidence Bands Figure 7: Autocorrelation function for trade signs gen- erated over 50 Preis et al. (2006) model simu- lations initialized with the parameter set pre- sented in Table 6 Referring to Figure 8, where we repeat this exercise using the calibrated parameters pre- sented in Table 2, we see that the slow decay in autocorrelation associated with long memory processes is now present, indicating that the calibration process has determined a parame- ter combination that results in a more realistic order ﬂow than the model’s default parame- ters. On closer inspection, it was found that shift- ing the values of individual parameters in Ta- ble 2, with the exception of ∆S, and repeating this exercise did not cause these more realistic long memory dynamics to disappear. When shifting ∆S, however, it was found that smaller values of this parameter resulted in long mem- ory dynamics no longer being present in the order ﬂow. This is in fact consistent with the surface presented in Figure 4: For the δ value presented in Table 2, ap- proximately 0.07, we see that smaller ∆S val- 11 ues tend to result in poorer objective function values, whereas values of ∆S roughly larger than 0.03 tend to result in fairly similar and relatively low objective function values. Not surprisingly, this region of lower objective func- tion values in fact corresponds relatively well to those in which long memory was observed in the simulated order ﬂow. 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 Lag -0.05 -0.04 -0.03 -0.02 -0.01 0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 Autocorrelation Mean Autocorrelation Function 95% Autocorrelation Function Mean Confidence Intervals 95% Confidence Bands Figure 8: Autocorrelation function for trade signs gen- erated over 50 Preis et al. (2006) model simu- lations initialized with the parameter set pre- sented in Table 2 Therefore, ∆S does indeed exert some effect on the order ﬂow within the model, but a very wide range of possible values exists for ∆S that produces long memory dynamics. This is re- ﬂected in the effect of ∆S on the obtained price time series, which is itself reﬂected in the effect of ∆S on the objective function, leading to a large region where no unique minimum can be determined. While the simulated order ﬂow obtained through calibration is by no means identical to that observed in the data, likely due to model limitations, calibration has resulted in an attempt to capture these dynamics. In contrast to Cλ, λ0 and ∆S, parameters α, µ and δ relate to agent behaviors and thus do not directly affect the individual orders or order ﬂow within the model. The fact that al- tering these parameters did not affect the pres- ence of long memory in the simulated order ﬂow provides evidence of the second aspect of the preceding statement. This implies that these parameters do not directly relate to the two processes conjectured by Bouchaud et al. (2008) to be the driving forces behind prices in real markets and this seems to be mirrored in the realistic matching processes employed in intraday ABMs, where we observed that the ef- fect of these parameters on the simulated price time series was not well-deﬁned. We therefore conjecture that the encoun- tered parameter degeneracies emerge from the application of realistic matching processes within intraday ABMs. Parameters which exert well-deﬁned effects on either order ﬂow or indi- vidual orders themselves produce well-deﬁned effects on the obtained simulated price time series and are therefore amenable to calibra- tion. These parameters tend to be rooted in the microstructure of the market and the nature of the LOB. In contrast to this, parameters which relate more to agent behavior and do not tend to have a well-deﬁned or direct effect on in- dividual order dynamics or order ﬂow tend to produce poorly-deﬁned effects on the ob- tained price time series, resulting in calibration difﬁculties. This may explain why the calibration of closed-form, daily ABMs proved more success- ful in past experiments, such as those of Fab- retti (2013). In using a closed-form solution to determine market prices, one directly enforces a well-deﬁned, albeit simpliﬁed, relationship between parameter values and the obtained market price time series. In contrast to this, the realistic matching processes in intraday models seem to be instead driven by order ﬂow and the nature of individual orders, leading param- eters which do not directly determine these dynamics in a well-deﬁned way to produce haphazard dynamics. The recovery of trade sign autocorrelation through model calibration leads us to a dis- cussion of the latent order book. This is a key potential source of top-down causation (Wilcox and Gebbie 2014) that may render the type of ABM considered here as being fatally incom- plete. As suggested by Bonart (2015), the LOB itself only represents a fraction of the actual 12 liquidity in a particular market. In real ﬁnan- cial markets, liquidity providers attempt to hide their intentions and thus tend to avoid the placement of very large limit orders. This im- plies that liquidity takers attempting to acquire or liquidate large numbers of shares cannot do so through the placement of a single order and thus break a single parent order into a number of child orders, resulting in the observed trade sign autocorrelation (Tóth et al. 2011). The true intentions of liquidity providers and the true nature of supply and demand are therefore not captured in the order book itself, but rather in a ﬁctitious order book known as the latent order book. The purpose of trading that drives the latent liquidity can operate on very differ- ent, and possibly much longer, time scales than those inherent in the short term dynamics of the order book (Bouchaud et al. 2008). Therefore, it may be worthwhile to consider the calibration of reaction-diffusion models of the latent order book to similar data to that employed in this investigation in future work. Possible candidate models include the work of Mastromatteo et al. (2014a), Mastromatteo et al. (2014b) and Gao and Deng (2014). It is clear that the ABM considered, though not explicitly considering the latent order book, has been able to reproduce some of the features of ﬁnancial markets thought to originate from it, suggesting that there may be some hidden explanatory potential embedded within ABMs of continuous double auction markets with re- gard to the underlying microstructure of the market. The ability to uniquely determine the parameters associated with limit order price generation processes in both the Jacob Leal et al. (2015) and Preis et al. (2006) models pro- vides further evidence of this possibility. Therefore, while certain parameters could not be uniquely determined in our calibration experiments, this does not imply that such models do not possess an ability to probe mar- ket microstructure. If dynamics relating to possible sources of top-down causation (Wilcox and Gebbie 2014), such as those resulting from the latent order book (Bouchaud et al. 2008; Bonart 2015), were not readily recoverable through calibration, there would be concerns that a given model could not be used to faithfully represent the structure of the market being modeled. We have been able to provide an example of the use of calibration to determine parameters that recover reasonable order ﬂow autocorrelation without a priori parameter tuning. This does not resolve the concerns that the feedbacks between order ﬂow and the state of the LOB may be dominant features of real intraday markets and that the behaviors of dif- ferent agent classes cannot be robustly resolved through calibration. This leads to the conclu- sion that overly complex and mechanistic intra- day ABMs and market clearing speciﬁcations may be counterproductive in the search for par- simonious, yet useful model representations. The derivation of models from fundamen- tal assumptions about the intelligent behaviors of market participants often results in models that are difﬁcult to test (Ziliak and McCloskey 2004), since a large variety of auxiliary assump- tions are often necessary to make model esti- mation meaningful. These assumptions may enhance the formal acceptability of a particular method or approach, but often lead to little new insight into how best to model, explain or predict phenomenology arising from real mar- kets. This can be seen as resulting in a situation where a model seems to have passed a variety of tests but can still present model behaviors that can be recovered using alternative explana- tions (Farmer et al. 2005; Ziliak and McCloskey 2004). As stated in Farmer et al. (2005) and alluded to in Smith et al. (2003), it is conceivable to have a successful model that does not directly de- pend on the nuances of agent behaviors, even when it is known that the real agents engage in sophisticated behaviors. The fact that our cali- bration attempts point to a similar conclusion, though from a very different departure point, could be telling us something important about the relationship between rational effects and stochastic effects – particularly where institu- tions can strongly shape behavior (Farmer et al. 2005). This points to the widely held view 13 (Bouchaud et al. 2008) that it is indeed the com- bination of order-ﬂow and price speciﬁcation that drive prices in ﬁnancial markets. As stated in the Farmer et al. (2005), this does not answer why order ﬂow varies as it does but seems to point at the situation where ABMs of intraday double-auction markets can be sufﬁciently well described by a reduced set of parameters, pa- rameters that are directly related to order ﬂow and order price speciﬁcation, independently of complex agent behaviors. 6. R elevant Caveats It is important to note that our investigation does not claim to be deﬁnitive or exhaustive, but rather aims to encourage new lines of in- vestigation that further evaluate the rigor of current research paradigms, such as the exclu- sive use of stylized fact-centric validation and the continued increase of the mechanistic com- plexity of ﬁnancial ABMs without compelling model calibration. While a substantial part of this manuscript has been devoted to the discussion of possible ﬂaws relating to current approaches to intraday ﬁnancial ABM construction, it is also impor- tant to identify possible ﬂaws associated with the calibration methodology itself as a relevant caveat to this investigation, which we alluded to in Platt and Gebbie (2016). Although the method of Fabretti (2013) is well-motivated for the most part and based upon established literature, it does involve the inversion of near-singular matrices. We believe, however, that because we are able to obtain smooth objective function surfaces for certain parameters ( λ0, Cλ) in both our current and previous investigations (Platt and Gebbie 2016), any noisy effects observed in the constructed objective function surfaces most likely stem from model as opposed to calibration method- related concerns. In addition to this and as previously dis- cussed, the weight matrices in both our inves- tigation and that of Fabretti (2013) assign sig- niﬁcantly larger weights to errors on the mean and standard deviation in comparison to other moments. Given that characteristics such as kurtosis and the Hurst exponent are relatively important features of ﬁnancial return time se- ries and since there may be many different distributions that could be parameterized by the same mean and standard deviation, this is also an undesirable feature of the method. Therefore, it is recommended that future investigations involving the method of Fabretti (2013) or similar methods make attempts to ad- dress these particular problems to improve nu- merical stability and the veracity of any results obtained using such methods. In achieving such ends, one might also consider the replace- ment of the constructed objective function with an alternative benchmark, such as the informa- tion theoretic criterion introduced by Lamperti (2015). While we have identiﬁed a number of rele- vant methodological concerns, we believe that the identiﬁcation of relatively precise values for λ0 and Cλ as well as the ability of the method to ﬁnd parameter sets that recover or- der ﬂow correlations are sufﬁcient to argue that the method of Fabretti (2013) is able to provide valuable insights in this context. 7. C onclusion In both our current and previous investigations (Platt and Gebbie 2016), we have observed that there is some evidence indicating that intraday ABMs of continuous double auction markets employing realistic order matching procedures tend to produce price time series with dynam- ics predominantly driven by the processes or equations deﬁning order prices within them, with the remaining parameters and procedures tending to produce either relatively insignif- icant or poorly behaved effects on the same price time series. This is indicative of parame- ter degeneracies and is in spite of the fact that these models tend to reproduce the empirically- observed stylized facts of ﬁnancial return time series relatively well. We conjecture that this is likely due to the fact that like in real ﬁnancial markets, simu- lated market prices in intraday ABMs employ- 14 ing realistic matching processes are driven by responses to individual orders and the nature of order ﬂow and therefore only parameters associated with processes which affect these phenomena in well-deﬁned ways produce well- deﬁned and signiﬁcant effects on the market price time series. This suggests that parameters related to these phenomena, such as the nature of in- dividual orders in a market, can indeed be probed by intraday ABMs, but that parame- ters rooted in agent behavior are difﬁcult to calibrate due to the fact that they do not ex- ert well-behaved effects on the simulated price time series when it is generated using realistic matching processes. Traditional stylized fact-centric validation seems unable to detect these potential prob- lems, suggesting that such methods of valida- tion are simply not sufﬁcient for the validation of intraday ABMs employing realistic match- ing procedures. Therefore, simply increasing the mechanistic complexity of agents in intra- day ABMs such that empirically-observed re- turn time series stylized facts are reproduced may lead to ﬂawed insights, simply because the relationship between the simulated price time series and agent behaviors has to be well- deﬁned. We thus argue that calibration and stylized- fact replication should both be considered when developing such ABMs, in order to en- sure a replication of reasonable model behavior, while still ensuring that parameters produce the intended effect of the model designer on the simulated price time series. This move towards more rigorous valida- tion would be an important paradigm shift, since our existing calibration experiments have already shown evidence of dynamics, such as order ﬂow correlation, not being sufﬁciently well-captured in the models themselves, but emerging as important concerns when attempt- ing to calibrate such models to data. 8. A cknowledgements T.J. Gebbie acknowledges the ﬁnancial support of the National Research Foundation (NRF) of South Africa (grant number 87830). D.F. Platt acknowledges the ﬁnancial support of the University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg and NRF of South Africa. The conclusions herein are due to the authors and the NRF accepts no liability in this regard. References Barde S (2016) Direct calibration and comparison of agent-based herding models of ﬁnancial markets. J Econ Dyn Control 73:329-353 Bonart J (2015) Mathematical aspects of delayed market clearing in order driven markets and its applications to non-Markovian price impact and optimal execution. SSRN:2659092 Bookstaber R, Foley MD, Tivnan BF (2016) Toward an understanding of market resilience: market liquidity and heterogeneity in the investor decision cycle. J Econ Interact Coord 11:205-227 Bouchaud JP , Farmer JD, Lillo F (2008) How markets slowly digest changes in supply and demand. arXiv:0809.0822. Cartea A, Jaimungal S, Penalva J (2015) Algorithmic and High-Frequency Trading. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge Chiarella C, Iori G (2002) A simulation analysis of the microstructure of double auction markets. Quant Financ 2:346-353 Chiarella C, Iori G, Perello J (2009) The impact of heterogeneous trading rules on the limit order book and order ﬂows. J Econ Dyn Control 33:525-537 15 Cont R (2001) Empirical properties of asset returns: stylized facts and statistical issues. Quant Financ 1:223-236 Easley D, Lopez de Prado M, O’Hara M (2012) The Volume Clock: Insights into the High-Frequency Paradigm. J Portfolio Manage 39:19-29 Fabretti A (2013) On the problem of calibrating an agent-based model for ﬁnancial markets. J Econ Interact Coord 8:277-293 Farmer JD, Joshi S (2002) The price dynamics of common trading strategies. J Econ Behav Organ 49:149-171 Farmer JD, Patelli P , Zovko II (2005) The predictive power of zero intelligence in ﬁnancial markets. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102(6):2254-2259 Gao X, Deng SJ (2014) Hydrodynamic limit of order book dynamics. arXiv:1411.7502 Gilli M, Winker P (2003) A global optimization heuristic for estimating agent based models. Comput Stat Data Anal 42:299-312 Hamill L, Gilbert N (2016) Agent-Based Modelling in Economics. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester Harvey M, Hendricks D, Gebbie T, Wilcox D (2017) Deviations in expected price impact for small transaction volumes under fee restructuring. Physica A 471:416-426 Jacob Leal S, Napoletano M, Roventini A, Fagiolo G (2015) Rock Around the Clock: An Agent- Based Model of Low- and High-frequency Trading. J Evol Econ 25:1-25 Kirman A (1991) Epidemics of opinion and speculative bubbles in ﬁnancial markets. In: Taylor M (ed) Money and Financial Markets. Blackwell, Oxford, pp 354-368 Kukacka J, Barunik J (2016) Estimation of Financial Agent-Based Models with Simulated Maximum Likelihood. SSRN:2783663 Kuroda K, Maskawa J, Murai J (2011) Stock price process and long memory in trade signs. Adv Math Econ 14:69-92 Lamperti F (2015) An Information Theoretic Criterion for Empirical Validation of Time Series Models. LEM Papers Series, Laboratory of Economics and Management, Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies, 2-2015 LeBaron B (2005) Agent-based Computational Finance. In: Judd KL, Tesfatsion L (eds) The Handbook of Computational Economics, Vol. 2. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 1187-1233 Lee CMC, Ready MJ (1991) Inferring Trade Direction from Intraday Data. J Finance 46(2):733-746 Mandes A (2015) Order placement in a continuous double auction agent based model. Algorithmic Finance 4(3-4):105-125 Mastromatteo I, Tóth B, Bouchaud JP (2014a) Anomalous Impact in Reaction-Diffusion Financial Models. Phys Rev Lett 113:268701 Mastromatteo I, Tóth B, Bouchaud JP (2014b) Agent-based models for latent liquidity and concave price impact. Phys Rev E 89:042805 16 Panayi E, Harman M, Wetherilt A (2013) Agent-based modelling of stock markets using existing order book data. In: Giardini F, Amblard F (eds) Multi-Agent-Based Simulation XIII. Springer- Verlag, Berlin, pp 101-114 Platt DF, Gebbie TJ (2016) The Problem of Calibrating an Agent-Based Model of High-Frequency Trading. arXiv:1606.01495 Preis T, Golke S, Paul W, Schneider (2006) Multi-agent-based Order Book Model of ﬁnancial markets. Europhys Lett 75(3):510-516 Preis T, Golke S, Paul W, Schneider (2007) Statistical analysis of ﬁnancial returns for a multiagent order book model of asset trading. Phys Rev E 76:016108 Smith E, Farmer JD, Gillemot L, Krishnamurthy S (2003) Statistical theory of the continuous double auction. Quant Financ 3:481-514 Thomson Reuters (2016) Thomson Reuters Tick History. https://tickhistory.thomsonreuters.com. Accessed 23 May 2016 Tóth B, Lempérière Y, Deremble C, de Lataillade J, Kockelkoren J, Bouchaud JP (2011) Anomalous Price Impact and the Critical Nature of Liquidity in Financial Markets. Phys Rev X 1:021006 Wilcox D, Gebbie T (2014) Hierarchical causality in ﬁnancial economics. SSRN:2544327 Winker P , Gilli M, Jeleskovic V (2007) An Objective Function for Simulation Based Inference on Exchange Rate Data. SSRN:964131 Ziliak ST, McCloskey DN (2004) Size matters: the standard error of regressions in the American Economic Review. J Socio Econ 33(5):527-546 17