Regularities and Irregularities in Order Flow Data Martin Theissen, Sebastian M. Krause, and Thomas Guhr Faculty of Physics, University of Duisburg-Essen, Duisburg, Germany We identify and analyze statistical regularities and irregularities in the recent order ﬂow of diﬀerent NASDAQ stocks, focusing on the positions where orders are placed in the orderbook. This includes limit orders being placed outside of the spread, inside the spread and (eﬀective) market orders. We ﬁnd that limit order placement inside the spread is strongly determined by the dynamics of the spread size. Most orders, however, arrive outside of the spread. While for some stocks order placement on or next to the quotes is dominating, deeper price levels are more important for other stocks. As market orders are usually adjusted to the quote volume, the impact of market orders depends on the orderbook structure, which we ﬁnd to be quite diverse among the analyzed stocks as a result of the way limit order placement takes place. I. INTRODUCTION The progress in information technology always has a huge impact on stock markets and related systems. It aﬀects not only the trading process itself, but also the availability of data, the tools used for their analysis and the model building that follows. The accessibility of de- tailed order ﬂow data capturing order book dynamics is useful for researchers and practitioners. Apart from an understanding of ﬁnancial markets, long term research questions concern systemic issues, such as the usefulness of (de)regulations of ﬁnancial markets [1], and the con- sequences of high frequency trading for market stability [2–4]. Practitioners investigate the proﬁtability of trad- ing strategies [4]. From both viewpoints, systemic and practical, an improvement of agent based models [5–7] exploiting order ﬂow analysis is desirable. While stylized facts of price time series are entrenched for decades [8], comparable knowledge on the level of order book dynamics has not yet been established, for a comprehensive review see [9]. As the variability of results is at least partly due to the non-stationarity of markets, empirical ﬁndings have to be steadily reviewed with respect to their validity for contemporary data [10]. For example, in NASDAQ stocks in 2002 large portions of all limit orders are placed far from the quotes [11]. In contrast, later studies ﬁnd a dominating role of the quotes and suggest queue models for characterizing the execution sequence of limit orders [12]. If there are sub- stantial diﬀerences in the order ﬂow of diﬀerent stocks at the same time in the same market, this has implications for the description of the market on the systemic level. When analyzing stock interactions [13–17], one has to be aware of heterogeneous order ﬂow mechanisms for diﬀer- ent stocks. This aspect was not suﬃciently investigated so far, maybe partly because the movement of the mar- ket has been found to be dominated by collective eﬀects [18]. Here we analyze order ﬂow data of 96 NASDAQ stocks in early 2016. We focus on where orders are placed in the order book, and compare statistical regularities across stocks. We ﬁnd a rich variety of spread widths, order placement measures and price returns caused by single market orders. Further we search for a clustering of stocks, grouping together stocks with similar behavior. This study is organized as follows: In Sec. II we de- scribe the data. In Sec. III we reconstruct market or- ders from the data, and investigate the prices at which limit orders enter the order book. These prices help us to cluster the stocks into groups with similar behavior. The signiﬁcance of this grouping with respect to liquid- ity measures as the spread size, number of orders on the quotes, and share of market orders among all orders is investigated. We ﬁnd striking diﬀerences for the returns caused by single market orders for diﬀerent groups of stocks. Finally, in Sec. IV we summarize our results and give an outlook. II. DATA We analyze the data Historical TotalView-ITCH from NASDAQ US. We group the data into the order ﬂows of each stock on one speciﬁc day. For example 20160307 AAPL comprises of the orders for Apple shares (the ticker is AAPL) on the NASDAQ US on March, 7 2016 (a Monday). Our data comprise ﬁve days from March, 7 2016 to March, 11 2016. Out of the 100 stocks listed in the NASDAQ 100 in this period [19], four stocks are not available in [20], and therefore cannot be included in our analysis. The data contain information about limit orders being placed, deleted, partially canceled, partially traded and fully traded. Moreover, they contain infor- mation about trades against hidden orders. A detailed description of the data can be found in [21]. We analyze data from times between 10:00 am and 3:30 pm (New York time). These are the regular trad- ing times of the NASDAQ excluding the ﬁrst and last 30 minutes. We neglect these, because order ﬂow dynamics at the opening and closing of the market have diﬀerent statistical properties. All events have a time stamp in milliseconds. Events happening in the same millisecond have the same time stamp, although they may not have happened simultaneously. Chronological order is main- tained, as incoming orders are processed by the market in the same succession as in which they arrive. arXiv:1702.04289v1 [q-fin.TR] 14 Feb 2017 2 Our data reveal several characteristics of limit orders, order book dynamics and trades. However, the data only shows the net eﬀect of a trader’s action in terms of simple limit orders and trades. Exotic orders appear in a rich variety, making it impossible to fully reconstruct them from the order ﬂow [22]. The only exception are market orders. These will be reconstructed from successive trade events due to their high relevance for our research goal. This can of course only be done approximately. In our reconstruction, we can not distinguish real market orders from eﬀective market orders, i.e. limit orders crossing the spread. The data was tested to be free of internal contradictions, as also reported in other works [23, 24]. III. RESULTS In Sec. III A we perform the reconstruction of market orders, as one market order can trigger many consecu- tive trades, and this information is not provided in the data. Further we neglect market orders which are solely traded against hidden limit orders. The share of market orders among all orders is calculated separately for dif- ferent stocks, as well as similar measures characterizing limit orders. In Sec. III B we discuss statistical regular- ities of in-spread limit orders and use them to perform a clustering of stocks into groups with similar behavior. We test in how far the stocks within the same group also show similar properties according to order counts per day. In Sec. III C we see that the grouping of stocks accord- ing to in-spread limit orders is also relevant for oﬀ-spread limit orders. Finally, in Sec. III D, we analyze the impact of single market orders, again considering the grouping found for in-spread limit order placements. A. Market Order Reconstruction and General Statistics Our data do not explicitly include market orders, thus we have to reconstruct them from the trade events. Our reconstruction modiﬁes the approach of [25]. We trace subsequent trades to a single market order if all limit or- ders possibly traded against this market order are of the same type (for example sell). For trades against hidden limit orders, the type is unknown, so we include such trades in the market order reconstruction without dis- criminating sell or buy type. Apart from that we require that events of a diﬀerent type do not come in between the trades, as for example a limit order arrival or cancel- lation, and that partially traded limit orders can only be the last event. Finally we require that all trade events take place within a time window of ﬁxed length. Accord- ing to the market speciﬁcation [26], the order “execution time is less than one millisecond.” This statement sug- gests that a consolidation of trade events should be only taken into account as long as the time stamp diﬀerence between the ﬁrst and the last trade of a market order is at most one millisecond. We call the number of trades triggered by one market order “cluster size”. This termi- nology (“cluster” denoting a group of trades) discussed here has nothing to do with the clustering discussed in the upcoming chapters. 0 20 40 60 80 10-4 0.001 0.010 0.100 1 cluster size pdf FIG. 1. Distribution of the cluster size (number of trades consolidated to one market order) for 20160307 AAPL Figure 1 shows the distribution of these cluster sizes for 20160307 AAPL. We ﬁnd that 58% of all market orders result in only one single trade. However, there are also groups of up to more than 80 trades against one market order. We checked the robustness of our reconstruction with respect to the maximum time diﬀerence allowed be- tween the ﬁrst and the last trade of a market order. There are only minor changes in the number of market orders, even if we increase the maximum time window from one millisecond to half a second. The respective changes in the distribution of cluster sizes are barely visible com- pared to the distribution in Fig. 1. For that reason the distributions for other maximum time windows are not shown here. Moreover, for every group of N trade events possi- bly considered due to one market order, between one and N market orders might have triggered this series of events. This problem can not be unambiguously solved with help of our data. However, as we will see in the sequel, given that the number of potential market orders is much smaller than the number of limit order insertions and deletions, we may assume that two market orders ar- riving subsequently without being interrupted by a limit order placement or deletion is a very rare incident. Thus, if allowed by the other constraints, we cluster all multiple trade events to one market order. There are market orders that can not be assigned to either buy or sell type. This happens for trades exe- cuted exclusively against hidden orders. In the upcoming study, we have to dismiss these market orders. We calcu- late the frequency of undirected market orders among all market orders for the order ﬂow of one stock on one day, and repeat this for all 96 stocks on all ﬁve days, result- ing in a number of 480 relative frequencies. We ﬁnd that the proportion of undirected market orders among all 3 market orders is on average around 12%. The scattering                      MOU MO ACT SPRD 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8relative frequency FIG. 2. Box-Whisker-Plots for the relative frequencies of undirected market orders among all market orders (MOU), market orders among all orders (MO), active limit orders among all limit orders (ACT) and in-spread limit orders among all limit orders (SPRD). of this quantity over the diﬀerent data sets is presented with a Box-Whisker plot in Fig. 2 on the left (MOU). The white horizontal line in the gray box indicates the above mentioned average of 12%. The gray box indicates both centered quartiles, so we see that half of the data is concentrated within the range 6.6% to 16.1%. The anten- nas reach up to the largest (smallest) data point within 1.5 times the interquartile range added (subtracted) to the upper (lower) quartile. The additional dots outside of the antennas correspond to the outliers: There are a few data sets in which a certain stock had a particularly high frequency of undirected market orders on a certain day. Altogether we ﬁnd that for most of the data sets, meaningful information can be extracted from the mar- ket orders. The rejected undirected market orders only constitute a small fraction of all market orders. In the second Box-Whisker plot labeled with MO, we see that the relative frequency of market orders among all orders is rather small with an average of about 3 .7%. Here, the regularity along our data sets is much stronger than it was for the relative amount of undirected mar- ket orders (MOU). We checked that the volume stored in the order book does neither systematically increase nor decrease throughout the day. Thus, either order vol- umes or limit order deletions have to compensate that the number of orders providing liquidity, i.e. limit or- ders, is much higher than the number of orders taking liquidity, i.e. market orders. We ﬁnd that most limit orders are deleted. On average, only 4 .4% of all limit orders per data set are (at least partially) traded, cf. the Box-Whisker plot labeled as ACT. This means that the majority of limit orders is deleted without participating in the trading process. Trading is obviously not the pre- dominant factor that clears orders from the order book. This is also known from earlier studies [9]. The relative frequency of orders that end up being deleted among all incoming orders is one of the quantities that clearly re- ﬂect non-stationarity of markets, see for example [27], where only 10% of all limit orders are reported to be deleted (without at least partial execution) on the Paris stock exchange in 2002. Finally, we are interested in the relative frequency of in-spread limit orders among all limit orders. The mean relative frequency of in-spread limit orders is 8 .5%. The Box-Whiskers plot labeled SPRD shows that this relative frequency varies stronger within the data sets as com- pared to those frequencies discussed before. The most ob- vious reason to expect diﬀerences for this quantity among diﬀerent data sets is the fact that the spread does not al- ways allow in-spread limit orders. We will return to that point in Sec. III B. B. In-spread Limit Orders We analyze the aggressiveness of in-spread limit orders, i.e. how close they are placed to the opposing quote. Hence, we evaluate the distribution of the relative price ˜p = p− pq s , where pq denotes the price of the quote on the same side and s denotes the size of the spread, both at the time where the limit order is placed. For sell and buy limit orders, small ˜p implies a small aggressiveness of the order, moving the quote only slightly. We calculate for each of the 96 stocks the in-spread relative price distributions over all ﬁve days. Examples of such distributions are depicted in Fig. 3(ace) for three stocks. The distribution for Apple (AAPL) has a dominant sharp peak at ˜p = 1/2. As we will see below, this is because the spread mostly only opens for one tick, and this one tick is then the only possible choice for placing an in-spread limit order. The relative price distributions are very diverse for diﬀerent stocks. To ﬁnd groups of stocks with similar behavior, we com- pare relative price distributions for pairs of stocks. A robust way to deal with mixed distributions containing sharp peaks is to use the cumulative distribution. Cal- culating the maximum over all possible values of the dif- ference between two cumulative distributions, we obtain the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) distance measure. As a result of the stationarity of these distributions over the ﬁve days of our observations, we can use the average dis- tribution for each stock without loss of information. The KS distance is shown in Fig. 4 for all pairs of stocks. The ordering of stocks is carried out with a clustering of stocks using the relational k-means algorithm [28], with the KS distances as an input. The relational k-means algorithm partitions the stocks into k clusters, such that distances between stocks in the same cluster are small [28], and therefore stocks in the same cluster are simi- lar. As a consequence, a pair of stocks with a large KS distance is most likely separated into diﬀerent clusters. With help of the mean silhouette information criterion 4 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.00 20 40 60 80 100 relative price pdf (a) AAPL 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.00 20 40 60 80 100 relative price pdf (b) CERN 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.00 20 40 60 80 100 relative price pdf (c) GOOG 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.40 20 40 60 80 100 spread[$] pdf[1/$] (d) AAPL 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.40 20 40 60 80 100 spread[$] pdf[1/$] (e) CERN 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.40 20 40 60 80 100 spread[$] pdf[1/$] (f) GOOG FIG. 3. Distributions of relative prices of in-spread limit orders (abc) and spread sizes prior to in-spread limit orders (def) for three data sets in diﬀerent clusters. We choose to work with the data sets AAPL ((ad), cluster C1), CERN ((be), cluster C2) and GOOG ((cf), cluster C4) on the day 20160307. C1 C2 C3 C4 C1 C2 C3 C4 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 FIG. 4. Kolmogorov-Smirnov distance matrix of in-spread order relative price distributions of our 96 stocks. The stocks were rearranged so that the clustering structure is visible, with clusters denoted C1, C2, C3 and C4. [29], we ﬁnd that a number of four clusters is most ap- propriate to work with. The sizes of the clusters are as follows: 33% of the stocks belong to cluster C1, 21%, 26% and 20% of the data sets belong to the clusters C2, C3 and C4, respectively. Stocks in the same cluster have similar distributions of relative prices. In ﬁg. 3 we show distributions for repre- sentative stocks out of three of the clusters. As a result of the condition of times immediately before a limit order is placed in-spread, the minimum spread size observed is two ticks, although the spread size may equal only one tick for most of the time per day. As discussed above, the distribution shown in Fig. 3(a) is essentially a sharp peak at 0.5. In Fig. 3(d) we see that the spread is mostly only two ticks wide, before a new limit order arrives inside the spread. We adjusted the bin size to the tick size of one cent. By multiplying the density with the bin width we ﬁnd that the probability for having a spread of two ticks is 97%. In this case, the relative price can only be ˜p = 0.5. Stocks in our ﬁrst cluster typically have a small spread. Such stocks have also been described as large tick stocks [12, 30, 31], because the ticks are large compared to the spread size which liquidity providers are willing to oﬀer. Instead, there is a large queue of limit orders waiting on the quotes for being executed, and the order of execution (according to arrival times) is important for investment strategies [12]. To which extent this reﬂects in the order arrival outside of the spread in the diﬀerent clusters found here will be analyzed in Sec. III C. Cluster C4 also has a clear interpretation, see the dis- tribution of relative prices in Fig. 3(c). It has a maxi- mum at the relative price which corresponds to the sec- ond least aggressive price. The density is decreasing to- wards higher relative prices. The bin size is chosen bigger 5 than the discretization. The corresponding distribution of spread sizes Fig. 3(f) shows that the spread is usually so large that relative prices are almost not constrained by the spread size. Order placements with small aggres- siveness are favored. A reason could be that traders want to have execution priority for their limit orders, but they want to stay close to the current quotes, because under- cutting favors the liquidity taker. The behavior of stocks in the fourth cluster is closer to the market situation of older market studies [32, 33]. Interestingly, both types of market dynamics exist at the same time in the same mar- ket in 2016. The small tick stocks only comprise about 1/5 of all stocks for the data we analyze. Clusters C2 and C3 can be understood as originating from intermediate and varying spread sizes. The spreads of stocks in the intermediate clusters are located between the small spreads of stocks in cluster C1 with strong dis- cretization eﬀects, and the quasi continuous spreads of stocks in cluster C4. We consider cluster C2 as an ex- ample. The data set for CERN considered here is part of cluster C2, see Fig. 3(b). If the spread is only two ticks, the relative prices are 0 .5. However, sometimes the spread is larger, allowing for other relative prices. The fact that we mostly observe relative prices smaller or equal to 0 .5 shows that generally less aggressive limit order placement is favoured over a more aggressive one. In the literature, the distribution of relative prices in the spread is ﬁtted by some analytical probability density [33]. Although distribution ﬁtting might work well for the cluster C4, the distributions for the other three clusters might not be well described that way. Eventually, not only trader behavior but also conditions set by the spread size determine the distributions of relative prices, which makes a unifying characterization diﬃcult. ● ● ● ●● ● ●● ●● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ●●●● ● ●● ● ●● ●● ● ● ● ● ●● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ●● ●● ● ●● ● ● ●●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●●● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ●●● ●● ●●● ●● ●● ● ●● ●●● ● ● ● ●● ●● ● ●● ● ●● ●● ●● ● ●● ●● ● ● ● ●● ● ●● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ●●● ● ●● ●●● ● ● ● ● ●●● ●● ●●●● ● ●● ● ●● ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ ■■ ■■■■ ■ ■ ■ ■■■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ ■■ ■■ ■ ■■■■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ ■■ ■■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ ■■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ ■ ■■ ■■ ■■ ■■ ■ ■■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■■■■■ ■ ■ ■■■ ■■ ■ ■■ ◆ ◆◆ ◆◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆◆◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆◆ ◆◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆◆ ◆ ◆◆◆ ◆◆◆ ◆◆ ◆◆ ◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ 0 20 40 60 80 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 order count[10 4] rel. freq. MO FIG. 5. Scatter plot of daily order counts for each data set vs. the relative frequency of market order among all orders. The colors and symbols indicate the aﬃliation of a stock to one of the four clusters C1 (blue circles), C2 (yellow squares), C3 (green diamonds) or C4 (red triangles). Before we turn to the oﬀ-spread limit orders, we in- vestigate to which extent the diﬀerent characteristics re- late to the overall market activity for a stock. Figure 5 shows the relative frequency of market orders among all orders plotted against the daily order counts for each data set in a scatter plot. The colors and symbols corre- spond to the diﬀerent clusters. The following regularity emerges: In cluster C1 (blue circles), where the typical spread is small, total order counts tend to be high, while the relative frequency of market orders among all orders is rather small. This hints at a strong presence of algo- rithmic trading in these data sets, since the algorithms typically imply a high throughput of limit orders [34, 35]. In contrast, stocks in cluster C4 (red triangles) with large spreads come hand in hand with small order counts and comparably high relative frequencies of market orders. This might be due to a weaker presence of algorithmic traders. C. Oﬀ-spread Limit Orders ●●● ● ● ●●●● ● ● ● ●●●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ●●● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ●● ●● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ●● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■■■■■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■■■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ ■ ■■■■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■■■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■■■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ ■ ■ ■■■ ■ ■ ■■■■ ■■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ ◆ ◆ ◆◆ ◆◆ ◆◆◆ ◆ ◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆◆ ◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆◆ ◆ ◆◆ ◆◆ ◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆◆ ◆ ◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆◆◆ ◆◆ ◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆◆◆◆ ◆ ◆ ◆ ◆◆ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲▲ 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.00.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 relative frequency on ask side relative frequency on bid side FIG. 6. Scatter plot of relative frequencies buy and sell of limit orders placed on the quotes. The colors represent the cluster to which the relative price distribution of the respec- tive data set was assigned. Symbols and color coding as in Fig. 5. We give an overview of the diﬀerent characteristics of placements of oﬀ-spread limit orders by analyzing the rel- ative frequency of limit orders being placed on the quotes among all oﬀ-spread limit orders for each stock. It is known and consistently reported for about at least 20 years that this is where most of the incoming limit or- ders arrive [9, 36]. We compute the relative frequency for buy and sell orders on each of the 480 data sets sep- arately, see Fig. 6. All data points scatter along the line of equality, indicating a buy-sell symmetry for this quantity. Although the clustering is done with respect to the in-spread limit orders, it is reﬂected in these rela- tive frequencies for oﬀ-spread limit orders as well. High- est relative frequencies are seen for cluster C1 (blue cir- cles). Thus especially when the spread is narrow, there is a high probability for limit orders to be placed on the quotes. For these stocks, the order ﬂow dynamics is es- sentially conﬁned to the price levels around the quotes. At small relative frequencies, the stocks of cluster C4 are 6 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.50.001 0.010 0.100 1 10 100 price deviation[$] pdf[1/$] (a) AAPL 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.50.001 0.010 0.100 1 10 100 price deviation[$] pdf[1/$] (b) CERN 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.50.001 0.010 0.100 1 10 100 price deviation[$] pdf[1/$] (c) AMGN 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.50.001 0.010 0.100 1 10 100 price deviation[$] pdf[1/$] (d) GOOG FIG. 7. Distributions of absolute deviations of in-spread limit orders. The data sets shown in (a) to (d) belong to the clusters C1 to C4. found (red triangles). Apparently, when the spread is broad, limit orders are not so predominantly placed on the quotes. In Sec. III D, we show how this relates to the market order impacts. Once more, the two intermediate clusters C2 (yellow squares) and C3 (green diamonds) contain those stocks for which the relative frequencies are on an intermediate level. Since we are also interested in the distributions where limit orders are placed with respect to the quotes, we have to choose the right observable. We employ abso- lute deviations ˜d =|p− pq|, but relative deviations, ob- tained by additionally dividing by the quote price, may be used as well. In the literature, sometimes absolute deviations [27] and sometimes relative deviations [33] are considered. Both observables have their advantages and disadvantages. Especially close to the quotes, a compar- ison between diﬀerent data sets is most suited in terms of absolute deviations ˜d. This is so, because the tick size is constant for all data sets under investigation. On the other hand, the (pseudo)discretization for relative devi- ations is diﬀerent for each stock as a result of division by the quote prices, which vary by two orders of magni- tude along our data sets and are not constant themselves within one data set, either. As our previous results sug- gest that limit orders are placed dominantly on and pre- sumably close to the quotes, we prefer to use ˜d. Figure 7 displays the distributions of absolute price de- viations ˜d for four data sets. Three of those are the same ones for which we showed the relative prices of in-spread limit orders. We primarily discuss diﬀerences between AAPL and GOOG. The role of the ﬁrst bin was already discussed. It is equal to (up to a normalization factor of 100) the relative frequency for limit orders being placed on the quotes, roughly 56% for AAPL and decreases for higher cluster numbers. For GOOG of cluster C4 we have a relative frequency of around 6%. The level right next to the quotes contains roughly 14% of all limit orders for AAPL and around 2% of all limit orders for GOOG. For AAPL, 75% of all orders are found within the ﬁrst three levels, while less than 9% of all orders are found on these three levels for GOOG. For the latter, the distribution of absolute price deviations decreases very slowly. Hence, for the stocks of cluster C1, limit order arrival close to the quotes is dominant, while the depth of the order book ap- pears to be more important for the stocks of cluster C4. Cluster C2 and C3 again feature a transition between the two extreme scenarios. In previous studies, power-law behavior was reported quite consistently across diﬀerent markets and times studied [9, 11]. This could still be the case for stocks 7 with large spread, especially in cluster C4. Fitting a power law to our data does not provide convincing re- sults, maybe due to the short time window of ﬁve days. For stocks with small spreads, especially in cluster C1, the quotes and their ﬁrst few neighboring levels are so dominant, that discretization eﬀects might be too domi- nant for a universal power law behavior. Including data of a longer time window is beyond the scope of this study. Therefore, the characterization of oﬀ-spread limit order prices with appropriate ﬁtting functions is left for future work. D. Market Orders 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.00 10 20 30 40 relative volume pdf FIG. 8. Distributions of relative market order volumes for 20160307 AAPL We proceed as in [32], where gaps in the order book were found to generate high midpoint returns. The mech- anism is as follows: The shift of the midpoint after the arrival of a market order depends on the orders removed from the order book by that market order. A price shift occurs if the market order volume is at least as big as the volume on the corresponding quote. As market or- der volumes are usually chosen in a way such that only the volume on the quotes is executed, the price shift, and therefore the return, depends on the distance between the quote and the next occupied level behind the quote. We call the distance between occupied price levels in the or- der book gaps. The larger the gap behind the quotes, the larger the impact of a market order. The correspondence between the gap structure and the returns was not only found empirically, but was also reproduced by an agent based model [37]. We will test how these mechanisms apply to our data. We deﬁne the impact of market orders as r = pa− pp pp , (1) where pp is the midpoint price immediately prior to the market order, and pa is the midpoint price immediately after the market order. The authors of [32] studied data from the London Stock Exchange between 1999 and 2002 and found the volumes of market orders and volumes on the corresponding quotes to be correlated with a cor- relation coeﬃcient of 0 .86. However, this is only true if only those market orders are taken into account that change the midpoint. Otherwise, the correlation coef- ﬁcient drops below 0 .01. This is due to a majority of market orders having a volume below the quote volume. We ﬁnd an average correlation per data set of 0 .36 when taking into account all market orders, regardless of having a non-zero impact or not. We consider that a consequence resulting from a higher amount of mar- ket orders being adjusted to have a volume equal to the quote volume, in contrast to [32]. To understand that correlation in detail, we analyze the distribution of the relative volumes of market orders. These are deﬁned as the market orders volumes divided by the quote volume from which liquidity is removed as the market order is executed. Thus, a relative volume smaller than one cor- responds to a market order that does not change the midpoint, a relative volume equal to one corresponds to a market order that causes a return determined by the gap behind the quotes and a relative volume greater than one corresponds to an impact greater or equal to the gap behind the quote. Figure 8 shows such a distribution for the data set 20160307 AAPL. The market order volumes match the quote volume in roughly 40 .5% of all cases. Relative volumes smaller than one have a probability of 53 .1%. Hence, relative volumes larger than one have a probabil- ity of 6.4%. These results do not change considerably for other stocks in our data. This has two important impli- cations for returns created by single market orders: First, we expect a high probability of around 53 .1% of market orders to result in zero return. Second, we note that most of the non-zero returns indeed follow from the gap behind the quotes. The strong correspondence between quote volumes and market order volumes indicates that our market order reconstruction works quite accurately. Figure 9 shows the distributions of empirical returns according to Eq. (1) for our data sets. First, we observe a pseudo-discretization for all four data sets. The mere discretization is an eﬀect of the tick size of 0 .01$. The pseudo-discretization is due to the changing midpoint, by which we divide when computing the returns. The au- thors of [38] deal with this phenomenon in great detail. We choose our bin size such that the discretization is not blurred. The number of return levels that show up reﬂect the sparseness of the orderbook. We again ﬁnd qualita- tive diﬀerences with respect to the clusters we identiﬁed in Sec. III B. For AAPL, the order book is densely ﬁlled around the quotes, thus preventing large price jumps of more than a few ticks. Apparently, the more sparse price level occupation, we hypothesized to be present for stocks in cluster C4 like GOOG, results in a broader return dis- tribution. This distribution is so broad that tick size eﬀects play a smaller role. Qualitatively, this ﬁts to the results in [32]. Due to the dense level occupation, the 8 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 0.001 0.010 0.100 1 return[10 -4] pdf (a) AAPL -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 0.001 0.005 0.010 0.050 0.100 0.500 1 return[10 -4] pdf (b) CERN -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 0.001 0.010 0.100 1 return[10 -4] pdf (c) AMGN -4 -2 0 2 4 0.01 0.10 1 10 return[10 -4] pdf (d) GOOG FIG. 9. Distributions of returns generated by individual market orders for four stocks. The data sets shown in (a) to (d) belong to the clusters C1 to C4. individual impacts tend to shrink as we move to smaller cluster numbers. IV. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK We analyzed order ﬂow data of 96 NASDAQ stocks in early 2016 and found remarkable qualitative diﬀerences in the order ﬂow between diﬀerent stocks. We focused on where orders are placed in the order book, with three qualitatively diﬀerent placement positions for orders: in- spread, oﬀ-spread or crossing the spread. The latter we referred to as eﬀective market orders. We found that limit orders were submitted much more frequently than market orders, and oﬀ-spread limit orders were much more frequent than in-spread limit orders. However, most limit orders were deleted rather than traded. For some stocks the small relative frequencies of in-spread limit orders resulted because the spread usually was equal to the tick size, out-ruling in-spread limit orders. Further we found that when the spread tended to be narrow, oﬀ- spread limit orders tended to be placed close to or on the quotes. When spreads tended to be wider, less oﬀ-spread limit orders arrived near the quotes. Market order vol- umes were typically adjusted to the quote volume. Thus, the impact of individual market orders depended on the orderbook structure, i.e. the impact of a single market order resulted from the gap behind the spread. When there was a high occupation density, individual market order impacts were typically reduced to the tick size (if there was any impact at all), while when the occupation density was small, impacts tended to be higher. With help of the relational k-means clustering algo- rithm and based on the distributions of relative prices of in-spread limit orders, we were able to grasp the di- versity of order ﬂow for diﬀerent stocks. The diversity of the relative price distributions of in-spread limit or- ders could be traced back to the conditions set up by the spread. The diﬀerent observables we took into account portrayed a consistent picture of the diversity: There were stocks with a high activity in terms of order ar- rival, where the competition of strategies led to a narrow spread and densely occupied adjacent levels in the or- derbook. Therefore, the impact of individual orders was often constrained to the tick size. At the other end of the spectrum, spreads were typically large, order place- ment was not that strongly limited to the levels on and right next to the quotes, and individual impacts of mar- 9 ket orders varied more strongly, as a result of a sparse occupation of price levels next to the quotes. Future models, such as agent based models, have to account for that diversity. It may be doubted that one model with a ﬁxed set of mechanisms might be able to reproduce stylized facts for the diﬀerent kind of dynamics we observed. Finally, the diversity within a ﬁxed time window and within one market suggests that averages over a whole market should be considered carefully. [1] J Doyne Farmer and Duncan Foley, “The economy needs agent-based modelling,” Nature 460, 685–686 (2009). [2] Eun Jung Lee, Kyong Shik Eom, and Kyung Suh Park, “Microstructure-based manipulation: Strategic behavior and performance of spooﬁng traders,” Journal of Finan- cial Markets 16, 227–252 (2013). [3] Andrei A Kirilenko, Albert S Kyle, Mehrdad Samadi, and Tugkan Tuzun, “The ﬂash crash: The impact of high frequency trading on an electronic market,” Available at SSRN 1686004 (2015). [4] Jonathan Brogaard, “High frequency trading and its im- pact on market quality,” Northwestern University Kel- logg School of Management Working Paper 66 (2010). [5] Felix Patzelt and Klaus Pawelzik, “An inherent instabil- ity of eﬃcient markets,” Scientiﬁc reports 3 (2013). [6] Frederik Meudt, Thilo A Schmitt, Rudi Sch¨ afer, and Thomas Guhr, “Equilibrium pricing in an order book environment: Case study for a spin model,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 453, 228–235 (2016). [7] Sebastian M Krause and Stefan Bornholdt, “Spin mod- els as microfoundation of macroscopic market models,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 392, 4048–4054 (2013). [8] Rama Cont, “Empirical properties of asset returns: styl- ized facts and statistical issues,” (2001). [9] Martin D Gould, Mason A Porter, Stacy Williams, Mark McDonald, Daniel J Fenn, and Sam D Howison, “Limit order books,” Quantitative Finance 13, 1709– 1742 (2013). [10] Chakrabarti, Anindya S. and Lahkar, Ratul, “Absence of economic and social constants,” Eur. Phys. J. Special Topics 225 (2016), 10.1140/epjst/e2016-60176-3. [11] Marc Potters and Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, “More statis- tical properties of order books and price impact,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 324, 133– 140 (2003). [12] A Gareche, G Disdier, J Kockelkoren, and J-P Bouchaud, “Fokker-planck description for the queue dy- namics of large tick stocks,” Physical Review E 88, 032809 (2013). [13] Shanshan Wang, Rudi Sch¨ afer, and Thomas Guhr, “Average cross-responses in correlated ﬁnancial market,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.01586 (2016). [14] Joel Hasbrouck and Duane J Seppi, “Common factors in prices, order ﬂows, and liquidity,” Journal of ﬁnancial Economics 59, 383–411 (2001). [15] Alex Boulatov, Terrence Hendershott, and Dmitry Liv- dan, “Informed trading and portfolio returns,” The Re- view of Economic Studies 80, 35–72 (2013). [16] Paolo Pasquariello and Clara Vega, “Strategic cross- trading in the us stock market,” Review of Finance , rft055 (2013). [17] Tarun Chordia, Richard Roll, and Avanidhar Subrah- manyam, “Commonality in liquidity,” Journal of ﬁnan- cial economics 56, 3–28 (2000). [18] Yuriy Stepanov, Philip Rinn, Thomas Guhr, Joachim Peinke, and Rudi Sch¨ afer, “Stability and hierarchy of quasi-stationary states: ﬁnancial markets as an exam- ple,” Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Ex- periment 2015, P08011 (2015). [19] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NASDAQ 100, Accessed: September 28, 2016. [20] http://tradingphysics.com/, Accessed: September 14, 2016. [21] Ruihong Huang and Tomas Polak, “Lobster: Limit order book reconstruction system,” Available at SSRN 1977207 (2011). [22] http://www.nasdaqtrader.com/content/Products/ Services/Trading/OrderTypesG.pdf, Accessed: Novem- ber 21, 2016. [23] http://howtohft.blogspot.de/2012/07/tradingphysics- historical-totalview.html, Accessed: September 13, 2016. [24] http://quant.caltech.edu/historical-stock-data.html, Ac- cessed: September 13, 2016. [25] Nikolaus Hautsch and Ruihong Huang, “Limit order ﬂow, market impact and optimal order sizes: evidence from NASDAQ TotalView-ITCH data,” Market Impact and Optimal Order Sizes: Evidence from NASDAQ TotalView-ITCH Data (August 22, 2011) (2011). [26] http://www.nasdaq.com/services/homw.stm, Accessed: August 11, 2016. [27] Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, Marc M´ ezard, Marc Potters, et al., “Statistical properties of stock order books: empir- ical results and models,” Quantitative ﬁnance 2, 251–256 (2002). [28] Bal´ azs Szalkai, “An implementation of the relational k-means algorithm,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1304.6899 (2013). [29] Peter J Rousseeuw, “Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of cluster analysis,” Jour- nal of computational and applied mathematics 20, 53–65 (1987). [30] Zoltan Eisler, Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, and Julien Kockelkoren, “The price impact of order book events: market orders, limit orders and cancellations,” Quanti- tative Finance 12, 1395–1419 (2012). [31] Khalil Dayri and Mathieu Rosenbaum, “Large tick as- sets: implicit spread and optimal tick size,” Market Mi- crostructure and Liquidity 1, 1550003 (2015). [32] J Doyne Farmer, Laszlo Gillemot, Fabrizio Lillo, Szabolcs Mike, and Anindya Sen, “What really causes large price changes?” Quantitative ﬁnance 4, 383–397 (2004). [33] Szabolcs Mike and J Doyne Farmer, “An empirical be- havioral model of liquidity and volatility,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 32, 200–234 (2008). [34] Larry Harris, Trading and exchanges: Market mi- 10 crostructure for practitioners (Oxford University Press, USA, 2003). [35] Terrence Hendershott, Charles M Jones, and Albert J Menkveld, “Does algorithmic trading improve liquidity?” The Journal of Finance 66, 1–33 (2011). [36] Bruno Biais, Pierre Hillion, and Chester Spatt, “An em- pirical analysis of the limit order book and the order ﬂow in the paris bourse,” the Journal of Finance 50, 1655– 1689 (1995). [37] Thilo A Schmitt, Rudi Sch¨ afer, Michael C M¨ unnix, and Thomas Guhr, “Microscopic understanding of heavy- tailed return distributions in an agent-based model,” EPL (Europhysics Letters) 100, 38005 (2012). [38] Michael C M¨ unnix, Rudi Sch¨ afer, and Thomas Guhr, “Impact of the tick-size on ﬁnancial returns and correla- tions,” Physica A 389, 4828–4843 (2010).