arXiv:1706.10059v2 [q-fin.CP] 16 Jul 2017 Deep Portfolio Management A Deep Reinforcement Learning Framework for the Financial Portfolio Management Problem Zhengyao Jiang zhengyao.jiang15@student.xjtlu.edu.cn Dixing Xu dixing.xu15@student.xjtlu.edu.cn Department of Computer Sciences and Software Engineering Jinjun Liang jinjun.liang@xjtlu.edu.cn Department of Mathematical Sciences Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University Suzhou, SU 215123, P. R. China Editor: XZY ABCDE Abstract Financial portfolio management is the process of constant redistr ibution of a fund into dif- ferent ﬁnancial products. This paper presents a ﬁnancial-model- free Reinforcement Learn- ing framework to provide a deep machine learning solution to the port folio management problem. The framework consists of the Ensemble of Identical Ind ependent Evaluators (EIIE) topology, a Portfolio-Vector Memory (PVM), an Online Stoc hastic Batch Learning (OSBL) scheme, and a fully exploiting and explicit reward function. Th is framework is real- ized in three instants in this work with a Convolutional Neural Networ k (CNN), a basic Re- current Neural Network (RNN), and a Long Short-Term Memory ( LSTM). They are, along with a number of recently reviewed or published portfolio-selection s trategies, examined in three back-test experiments with a trading period of 30 minutes in a cryptocurrency mar- ket. Cryptocurrencies are electronic and decentralized alternat ives to government-issued money, with Bitcoin as the best-known example of a cryptocurrenc y. All three instances of the framework monopolize the top three positions in all experiments , outdistancing other compared trading algorithms. Although with a high commission rate of 0.25% in the back- tests, the framework is able to achieve at least 4-fold returns in 50 days. Keywords: Machine learning; Convolutional Neural Networks; Recurrent Neu ral Net- works; Long Short-Term Memory; Reinforcement learning; Deep L earning; Cryptocur- rency; Bitcoin; Algorithmic Trading; Portfolio Management; Quantit ative Finance 1. Introduction Portfolio management is the decision making process of cont inuously reallocating an amount of fund into a number of diﬀerent ﬁnancial investment product s, aiming to maximize the return while restraining the risk (Haugen, 1986; Markowitz , 1968). Traditional portfolio management methods can be classiﬁed into four categories, ” Follow-the-Winner”, ”Follow- the-Loser”, ”Pattern-Matching”, and ”Meta-Learning” (Li and Hoi, 2014). The ﬁrst two categories are based on prior-constructed ﬁnancial models , while they may also be assisted by some machine learning techniques for parameter determin ations (Li et al., 2012; Cover, 1996). The performance of these methods is dependent on the v alidity of the models on dif- ferent markets. ”Pattern-Matching” algorithms predict th e next market distribution based 1 Jiang, Xu and Liang on a sample of historical data and explicitly optimizes the p ortfolio based on the sampled distribution (Gy¨ orﬁ et al., 2006). The last class, ”Meta-L earning” method combine multi- ple strategies of other categories to attain more consisten t performance (Vovk and Watkins, 1998; Das and Banerjee, 2011). There are existing deep machine-learning approaches to ﬁna ncial market trading. How- ever, many of them try to predict price movements or trends (H eaton et al., 2016; Niaki and Hoseinzade, 2013; Freitas et al., 2009). With history prices of all asset s as its input, a neural network can output a predicted vector of asset prices for the next per iod. Then the trading agent can act upon this prediction. This idea is straightforward t o implement, because it is a supervised learning, or more speciﬁcally a regression prob lem. The performance of these price-prediction-based algorithms, however, highly depe nds on the degree of prediction ac- curacy, but it turns out that future market prices are diﬃcul t to predict. Furthermore, price predictions are not market actions, converting them i nto actions requires additional layer of logic. If this layer is a hand-coded, then the whole a pproach is not fully machine learning, and thus is not very extensible or adaptable. For e xample, it is diﬃcult for a prediction-based network to consider transaction cost as a risk factor. Previous successful attempts of model-free and fully machi ne-learning schemes to the algorithmic trading problem, without predicting future pr ices, are treating the problem as a Reinforcement Learning (RL) one. These include Moody and Sa ﬀell (2001), Dempster and Leemans (2006), Cumming (2015), and the recent deep RL utilization b y Deng et al. (2017). These RL algorithms output discrete trading signals on an asset. B eing limited to single-asset trading, they are not applicable to general portfolio manag ement problems, where trading agents manage multiple assets. Deep RL is lately drawing much attention due to its remarkabl e achievements in play- ing video games (Mnih et al., 2015) and board games (Silver et al., 2016). These are RL problems with discrete action spaces, and can not be directl y applied to portfolio selection problems, where actions are continuous. Although market ac tions can be discretized, dis- cretization is considered a major drawback, because discre te actions come with unknown risks. For instance, one extreme discrete action may be deﬁn ed as investing all the capital into one asset, without spreading the risk to the rest of the m arket. In addition, dis- cretization scales badly. Market factors, like number of to tal assets, vary from market to market. In order to take full advantage of adaptability of ma chine learning over diﬀerent markets, trading algorithms have to be scalable. A general- purpose continuous deep RL framework, the actor-critic Deterministic Policy Gradien t Algorithms, was recently intro- duced (Silver et al., 2014; Lillicrap et al., 2016). The cont inuous output in these actor-critic algorithms is achieved by a neural-network approximated ac tion policy function, and a sec- ond network is trained as the reward function estimator. Tra ining two neural networks, however, is found out to be diﬃcult, and sometimes even unsta ble. This paper proposes an RL framework specially designed for t he task of portfolio man- agement. The core of the framework is the Ensemble of Identic al Independent Evaluators (EIIE) topology. An IIE is a neural network whose job is to ins pect the history of an asset and evaluate its potential growth for the immediate future. The evaluation score of each asset is discounted by the size of its intentional weight cha nge for the asset in the portfolio and is presented to a softmax layer, whose outcome will be the new portfolio weights for the coming trading period. The portfolio weights deﬁne the m arket action of the RL agent. 2 Deep Portfolio Management An asset with an increased target weight will be bought in wit h additional amount, and that with decreased weight will be sold. Apart from the marke t history, portfolio weights from the previous trading period are also input to the EIIE. T his is for the RL agent to consider the eﬀect of transaction cost to its wealth. For this purpose, the portfolio weights of each period are recorded in a Portfolio Vector Memory (PVM ). The EIIE is trained in an Online Stochastic Batch Learning scheme (OSBL), which is co mpatible with both pre-trade training and online training during back-tests or online tr ading. The reward function of the RL framework is the explicit average of the periodic logarit hmic returns. Having an explicit reward function, the EIIE evolves, under training, along th e gradient ascending direction of the function. Three diﬀerent species of IIEs are tested in t his work, a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) (Fukushima, 1980; Krizhevsky et al., 2 012; Sermanet et al., 2012), a basic Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) (Werbos, 1988), and a Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997). Being a fully machine-learning approach, the framework is n ot restricted to any par- ticular markets. To examine its validity and proﬁtability, the framework is tested in a cryptocurrency (virtual money, Bitcoin as the most famous e xample) exchange market, Polonix.com. A set of coins are preselected by their ranking in trading-volume over a time interval just before an experiment. Three back-test experi ments of well separated time- spans are performed in a trading period of 30 minutes. The per formance of the three EIIEs are compared with some recently published or reviewed portfolio selection strategies (Li et al., 2015a; Li and Hoi, 2014). The EIIEs signiﬁcantly b eat all other strategies in all three experiments Cryptographic currencies, or simply cryptocurrencies, ar e electronic and decentralized alternatives to government-issued moneys (Nakamoto, 2008 ; Grinberg, 2012). While the best known example of a cryptocurrency is Bitcoin, there are more than 100 other tradable cryptocurrencies competing each other and with Bitcoin (Bo nneau et al., 2015). The motive behind this competition is that there are a number of design ﬂ aws in Bitcoin, and people are trying to invent new coins to overcome these defects hoping t heir inventions will eventually replace Bitcoin (Bentov et al., 2014; Duﬃeld and Hagan, 2014 ). There are, however, more and more cryptocurrencies being created without targeting to beat Bitcoin, but with the purposes of using the blockchain technology behind it to dev elop decentralized applications1. To June 2017, the total market capital of all cryptocurrenci es is 102 billions in USD, 41 of which is of Bitcoin. 2 Therefore, regardless of its design faults, Bitcoin is stil l the dominant cryptocurrency in markets. As a result, many other currenci es can not be bought with ﬁat currencies, but only be traded against Bitcoin. Two natures of cryptocurrencies diﬀerentiate them from trad itional ﬁnancial assets, making their market the best test-ground for algorithmic po rtfolio management experi- ments. These natures are decentralization and openness, an d the former implies the latter. Without a central regulating party, anyone can participate in cryptocurrency trading with low entrance requirements. One direct consequence is abund ance of small-volume curren- cies. Aﬀecting the prices of these penny-markets will requir e smaller amount of investment, compared to traditional markets. This will eventually allo w trading machines to learn and 1. For example, Ethereum is a decentralized platform that ru ns smart contracts, and Siacoin is the currency for buying and selling storage service on the decentralized cloud Sia. 2. Crypto-currency market capitalizations, http://coinm arketcap.com/, accessed: 2017-06-30. 3 Jiang, Xu and Liang take advantage of the impacts by their own market actions. Op enness also means the mar- kets are more accessible. Most cryptocurrency exchanges ha ve application programming interface for obtaining market data and carrying out tradin g actions, and most exchanges are open 24/7 without restricting frequency of tradings. Th ese non-stop markets are ideal for machines to learn in the real world in shorter time-frame s. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 deﬁnes the portf olio management problem that this project is aiming to solve. Section 3 introduces as set preselection and the reasoning behind it, the input price tensor, and a way to deal with missi ng data in the market history. The portfolio management problem is re-described in the language RL in Section 4. Section 5 presents the EIIE meta topology, the PVM, the OSBL s cheme. The results of the three experiments are staged in Section 6. 2. Problem Deﬁnition Portfolio management is the action of continuous reallocat ion of a capital into a number of ﬁnancial assets. For an automatic trading robot, these in vestment decisions and ac- tions are made periodically. This section provides a mathem atical setting of the portfolio management problem. 2.1 T rading Period In this work, trading algorithms are time-driven, where tim e is divided into periods of equal lengths T . At the beginning of each period, the trading agent realloca tes the fund among the assets. T = 30 minutes in all experiments of this paper. The price of an a sset goes up and down within a period, but four important price points charac terize the overall movement of a period, namely the opening, highest, lowest and closing prices (Rogers and Satchell, 1991). For continuous markets, the opening price of a ﬁnanci al instrument in a period is the closing price from the previous period. It is assumed in t he back-test experiments that at the beginning of each period assets can be bought or sold at the opening price of that period. The justiﬁcation of such an assumption is given in Se ction 2.4. 2.2 Mathematical F ormalism The portfolio consists of m assets. The closing prices of all assets comprise the price vector for Period t, vt. In other words, the ith element of vt, vi,t, is the closing price of the ith asset in the tth period. Similarly, v(hi) t and v(lo) t denote the highest and lowest prices of the period. The ﬁrst asset in the portfolio is special, that it is the quoted currency, referred to as the cash for the rest of the article. Since the prices of all assets are quoted in cash, the ﬁrst elements of vt, v(hi) t and v(lo) t are always one, that is v(hi) 0,t = v(lo) 0,t = v0,t = 1, ∀t. In the experiments of this paper, the cash is Bitcoin. For continuous markets, elements of vt are the opening prices for Period t + 1 as well as the closing prices for Period t. The price relative vector of the tth trading period, yt, is deﬁned as the element-wise division of vt by vt−1: yt := vt ⊘ vt−1 = ( 1, v1,t v1,t−1 , v2,t v2,t−1 , ..., vm,t vm,t−1 )⊺ . (1) 4 Deep Portfolio Management The elements of yt are the quotients of closing prices and opening prices for in dividual asset in the period. The price relative vector can be used to c alculate the change in total portfolio value in a period. If pt−1 is the portfolio value at the begining of Period t, ignoring transaction cost, pt = pt−1 yt · wt−1, (2) where wt−1 is the portfolio weight vector (referred to as the portfolio vector from now on) at the beginning of Period t, whose ith element, wt−1,i, is the proportion of asset i in the portfolio after capital reallocation. The elements of wt always sum up to one by deﬁnition,∑ i wt,i = 1, ∀t. The rate of return for Period t is then ρt := pt pt−1 − 1 = yt · wt−1 − 1, (3) and the corresponding logarithmic rate of return is rt := ln pt pt−1 = ln yt · wt−1. (4) In a typical portfolio management problem, the initial port folio weight vector w0 is chosen to be the ﬁrst basis vector in the Euclidean space, w0 = (1, 0, ..., 0)⊺, (5) indicating all the capital is in the trading currency before entering the market. If there is no transaction cost, the ﬁnal portfolio value will be pf = p0 exp (tf +1∑ t=1 rt ) = p0 tf +1∏ t=1 yt · wt−1, (6) where p0 is the initial investment amount. The job of a portfolio mana ger is to maximize pf for a given time frame. 2.3 T ransaction Cost In a real-world scenario, buying or selling assets in a marke t is not free. The cost is normally from commission fee. Assuming a constant commission rate, t his section will re-calculate the ﬁnal portfolio value in Equation (6), using a recursive f ormula extending a work by Ormos and Urb´ an (2013). The portfolio vector at the beginning of Period t is wt−1. Due to price movements in the market, at the end of the same period, the weights evolve i nto w′ t = yt ⊙ wt−1 yt · wt−1 , (7) where ⊙ is the element-wise multiplication. The mission of the port folio manager now at the end of Period t is to reallocate portfolio vector from w′ t to wt by selling and buying relevant assets. Paying all commission fees, this realloca tion action shrinks the portfolio value by a factor µt. µt ∈ (0, 1], and will be called the transaction remainder factor from 5 Jiang, Xu and Liang timet − 1 t t + 1Period t Period t + 1 wt−1 wt pt−1 pt w′ t+1 p′ t+1 w′ t p′ t µt buy sell yt yt+1 · · · · · · Figure 1: Illustration of the eﬀect of transaction remainder factor µt. The market movement during Period t, represented by the price-relative vector yt, drives the portfolio value and portfolio weights from pt−1 and wt−1 to p′ t and w′ t. The asset selling and purchasing action at time t redistributes the fund into wt. As a side-eﬀect, these transactions shrink the portfolio to pt by a factor of µt. The rate of return for Period t is calculated using portfolio values at the beginning of the two consecutive periods in Equation (9). now on. µt is to be determined below. Denoting pt−1 as the portfolio value at the beginning of Period t and p′ t at the end, pt = µtp′ t. (8) The rate of return (3) and logarithmic rate of return (4) are n ow ρt = pt pt−1 − 1 = µtp′ t pt−1 − 1 = µtyt · wt−1 − 1, (9) rt = ln pt pt−1 = ln (µtyt · wt−1) , (10) and the ﬁnal portfolio value in Equation (6) becomes pf = p0 exp (tf +1∑ t=1 rt ) = p0 tf +1∏ t=1 µtyt · wt−1. (11) Diﬀerent from Equation (4) and (2) where transaction cost is n ot considered, in Equa- tion (10) and (11), p′ t ⁄= pt and the diﬀerence between the two values is where the trans- action remainder factor comes into play. Figure 1 demonstra tes the relationship among portfolio vectors and values and their dynamic relationshi p on a time axis. The remaining problem is to determine this transaction rema inder factor µt. During the portfolio reallocation from w′ t to wt, some or all amount of asset i need to be sold, if p′ tw′ t,i > p twt,i or w′ t,i > µ twt,i. The total amount of cash obtained by all selling is (1 − cs)p′ t m∑ i=1 (w′ t,i − µtwt,i)+ (12) where 0 ⩽ cs < 1 is the commission rate for selling, and ( v)+ = ReLu(v) is the element-wise rectiﬁed linear function, ( x)+ = x if x > 0, (x)+ = 0 otherwise. This money and the original cash reserve p′ tw′ t,0 taken away the new reserve µtp′ twt,0 will be used to buy new assets, (1 − cp) [ w′ t,0 + (1 − cs) m∑ i=1 (w′ t,i − µtwt,i)+ − µtwt,0 ] = m∑ i=1 (µtwt,i − w′ t,i)+, (13) 6 Deep Portfolio Management where 0 ⩽ cp < 1 is the commission rate for purchasing, and p′ t has been canceled out on both sides. Using identity ( a − b)+ − (b − a)+ = a − b, and the fact that w′ t,0 + m∑ i=1 w′ t,i = 1 = wt,0 + m∑ i=1 wt,i, Equation (13) is simpliﬁed to µt = 1 1 − cpwt,0 [ 1 − cpw′ t,0 − (cs + cp − cscp) m∑ i=1 (w′ t,i − µtwt,i)+ ] . (14) The presence of µt inside a linear rectiﬁer means µt is not solvable analytically, but it can only be solved iteratively. Theorem 1 Denoting f (µ) := 1 1 − cpwt,0 [ 1 − cpw′ t,0 − (cs + cp − cscp) m∑ i=1 (w′ t,i − µwt,i)+ ] , the sequence { ˜µ(k) t } , deﬁned as { ˜µ(k) t ⏐⏐⏐˜µ(0) t = µ⊙ and ˜µ(k) t = f ( ˜µ(k−1) t ) , k ∈ N0 } (15) converges to µt, the solution to Equation (14), for any µ⊙ ∈ [0, 1]. While this convergence is not stated in Ormos and Urb´ an (201 3), its proof will be given in Appendix A. This theorem provides a way to approximate the transaction remainder factor µt to an arbitrary accuracy. The speed on the convergence depen ds on the error of the initial guest µ⊙. The smaller |µt − µ⊙| is, the quicker Sequence (15) converges to µt. When cp = cs = c, there is a practice (Moody et al., 1998) to approximate µt with c m∑ i=1 |w′ t,i − wt,i|. Therefore, in this work, µ⊙ will use this as the ﬁrst value for the sequence, that µ⊙ = c m∑ i=1 ⏐⏐w′ t,i − wt,i ⏐⏐ . (16) In the training of the neural networks, ˜ µ(k) t with a ﬁxed k in (15) is used. In the back- test experiments, a tolerant error δ dynamically determines k, that is the ﬁrst k, such that⏐⏐⏐˜µ(k) t − ˜µ(k−1) t ⏐⏐⏐ < δ , is used for ˜µ(k) t to approximate µt. In general, µt and its approximations are functions of portfolio vectors of two recent periods and the price relative vector, µt = µt(wt−1, wt, yt). (17) Throughout this work, a single constant commission rate for both selling and purchasing for all non-cash assets is used, cs = cp = 0.25%, the maximum rate at Poloniex. The purpose of the algorithmic agent is to generate a time-se quence of portfolio vec- tors {w1, w2, · · · , wt, · · · } in order to maximize the accumulative capital in (11), takin g transaction cost into account. 7 Jiang, Xu and Liang 2.4 Two Hypotheses In this work, back-test tradings are only considered, where the trading agent pretends to be back in time at a point in the market history, not knowing any ” future” market information, and does paper trading from then onward. As a requirement for the back-test experiments, the following two assumptions are imposed: 1. Zero slippage: The liquidity of all market assets is high e nough that, each trade can be carried out immediately at the last price when a order is pl aced. 2. Zero market impact: The capital invested by the software t rading agent is so insignif- icant that is has no inﬂuence on the market. In a real-world trading environment, if the trading volume i n a market is high enough, these two assumptions are near to reality. 3. Data Treatments The trading experiments are done in the exchange Poloniex, w here there are about 80 tradable cryptocurrency pairs with about 65 available cryp tocurrencies3. However, for the reasons given below, only a subset of coins is considered by t he trading robot in one period. Apart from coin selection scheme, this section also gives a d escription of the data structure that the neural networks take as their input, a normalizatio n pre-process, and a scheme to deal with missing data. 3.1 Asset Pre-Selection In the experiments of the paper, the 11 most-volumed non-cas h assets are preselected for the portfolio. Together with the cash, Bitcoin, the size of t he portfolio, m + 1, is 12. This number is chosen by experience and can be adjusted in future e xperiments. For markets with large volumes, like the foreign exchange market, m can be as big as the total number of available assets. One reason for selecting top-volumed cryptocurrencies (si mply called coins below) is that bigger volume implies better market liquidity of an ass et. In turn it means the market condition is closer to Hypothesis 1 set in Section 2.4. Highe r volumes also suggest that the investment can have less inﬂuence on the market, establishi ng an environment closer to the Hypothesis 2. Considering the relatively high trading freq uency (30 minutes) compared to some daily trading algorithms, liquidity and market size ar e particularly important in the current setting. In addition, the market of cryptocurrency is not stable. Some previously rarely- or popularly-traded coins can have sudden boost or d rop in volume in a short period of time. Therefore, the volume for asset preselection is of a longer time-frame, relative to the trading period. In these experiments, volumes of 30 days are used. However, using top volumes for coin selection in back-test e xperiments can give rise to a survival bias . The trading volume of an asset is correlated to its populari ty, which in turn is governed by its historic performance. Giving future volume rankings to a back- test, will inevitably and indirectly pass future price info rmation to the experiment, causing 3. as of May 23, 2017. 8 Deep Portfolio Management unreliable positive results. For this reason, volume infor mation just before the beginning of the back-tests is taken for preselection to avoid survival b ias. 3.2 Price T ensor Historic price data is fed into a neural network to generate t he output of a portfolio vector. This subsection describes the structure of the input tensor , its normalization scheme, and how missing data is dealt with. The input to the neural networks at the end of Period t is a tensor, Xt, of rank 3 with shape ( f, n, m), where m is the number of preselected non-cash assets, n is the number of input periods before t, and f = 3 is the feature number. Since prices further back in the history have much less correlation to the current moment tha n that of recent ones, n = 50 (a day and an hour) for the experiments. The criterion of choo sing the m assets were given in Section 3.1. Features for asset i on Period t are its closing, highest, and lowest prices in the interval. Using the notations from Section 2.2, these ar e vi,t, v(hi) i,t , and v(lo) i,t . However, these absolute price values are not directly fed to the netwo rks. Since only the changes in prices will determine the performance of the portfolio ma nagement (Equation (10)), all prices in the input tensor will be normalization by the lates t closing prices. Therefore, Xt is the stacking of the three normalized price matrices, Xt = V (lo) t V (hi) t Vt . (18) where Vt, V (hi) t , and V (lo) t are the normalized price matrices, Vt = [ vt−n+1 ⊘ vt ⏐⏐⏐vt−n+2 ⊘ vt ⏐⏐⏐ · · · ⏐⏐⏐vt−1 ⊘ vt ⏐⏐⏐1 ] , V (hi) t = [ v(hi) t−n+1 ⊘ vt ⏐⏐⏐v(hi) t−n+2 ⊘ vt ⏐⏐⏐ · · · ⏐⏐⏐v(hi) t−1 ⊘ vt ⏐⏐⏐v(hi) t ⊘ vt ] , V (lo) t = [ v(lo) t−n+1 ⊘ vt ⏐⏐⏐v(lo) t−n+2 ⊘ vt ⏐⏐⏐ · · · ⏐⏐⏐v(lo) t−1 ⊘ vt ⏐⏐⏐v(lo) t ⊘ vt ] , with 1 = (1, 1, · · · , 1)⊺, and ⊘ being the element-wise division operator. At the end of Period t, the portfolio manager comes up with a portfolio vector wt using merely the information from the price tensor Xt and the previous portfolio vector wt−1, according to some policy π. In other words, wt = π(Xt, wt−1). At the end of Period t + 1, the logarithmic rate of return for the period due to decis ion wt can be calculated with the additional information from the price change vecto r yt+1, using Equation (10), rt+1 = ln( µt+1yt+1 · wt). In the language of RL, rt+1 is the immediate reward to the portfolio management agent for its action wt under environment condition Xt. 9 Jiang, Xu and Liang 3.3 Filling Missing Data Some of the selected coins lack part of the history. This abse nce of data is due to the fact that these coins just appeared relatively recently. Data po ints before the existence of a coin are marked as Not A Numbers (NANs) from the exchange. NANs onl y appeared in the training set, because the coin selection criterion is the vo lume-ranking of the last 30 days before the back-tests, meaning all assets must have existed before that. As the input of a neural network must be real numbers, these NA Ns have to be replaced. In a previous work of the authors (Jiang and Liang, 2017), the missing data was ﬁlled with fake decreasing price series with a decay rate of 0.01, in ord er for the neural networks to avoid picking these absent assets in the training process. H owever, it turned out that the networks deeply remembered these particular assets, that t hey avoided them even when they were in very promising up-climbing trends in the back-test e xperiments. For this reason, in this current work, ﬂat fake price-movements (0 decay rate s) are used to ﬁll the missing data points. In addition, under the novel EIIE structure, th e new networks will not be able to reveal the identity of individual assets, preventing the m from making decision based on the long-past bad records of particular assets. 4. Reinforcement Learning With the problem deﬁned in Section 2 in mind, this section pre sents a reinforcement- learning (RL) solution framework using a deterministic pol icy gradient algorithm. The explicit reward function is also given under this framework . 4.1 The Environment and the Agent In the problem of algorithmic portfolio management, the age nt is the software portfolio manager performing trading-actions in the environment of a ﬁnancial market. This envi- ronment comprises of all available assets in the markets and the expectations of all market participants towards them. It is impossible for the agent to get total information of a st ate of such a large and complex environment. Nonetheless, all relevant informati on is believed, in the philosophy of technical traders (Charles et al., 2006; Lo et al., 2000), to be reﬂected in the prices of the assets, which are publicly available to the agent. Under thi s point of view, an environmental state can be roughly represented by the prices of all orders t hroughout the market’s history up to the moment where the state is at. Although full order his tory is in the public domain for many ﬁnancial markets, it is too huge a task for the softwa re agent to practically process this information. As a consequence, sub-sampling schemes f or the order-history information are employed to future simplify the state representation of the market environment. These schemes include asset preselection described in Section 3. 1, periodic feature extraction and history cut-oﬀ. Periodic feature extraction discretizes th e time into periods, and then extract the highest, lowest, and closing prices in each peri ods. History cut-oﬀ simply takes the price-features of only a recent number of periods to repr esent the current state of the environment. The resultant representation is the price ten sor Xt described in Section 3.2. Under Hypothesis 2 in Section 2.4, the trading action of the a gent will not inﬂuence the future price states of the market. However, the action made a t the beginning of Period t 10 Deep Portfolio Management will aﬀect the reward of Period t + 1, and as a result will aﬀect the decision of its action. The agent’s buying and selling transactions made at the begi nning of Period t + 1, aiming to redistribute the wealth among the assets, are determined by the diﬀerence between portfolio weights w′ t and wt. w′ t is deﬁned in term of wt−1 in Equation (7), which also plays a role in the action for the last period. Since wt−1 has already been determined in the last period the action of the agent at time t can be represented solely by the portfolio vector wt, at = wt. (19) Therefore a previous action does have inﬂuence on the decisi on of the current one through the dependency of rt+1 and µt+1 on wt (17). In the current framework, this inﬂuence is encapsulated by considering wt−1 as a part of the environment and inputting it to the agent’s action making policy, so the state at t is represented as the pair of Xt and wt−1, st = (Xt, wt−1), (20) where w0 is predetermined in (5). The state st consists of two parts, the external state represented by the price tensor, Xt, and the internal state represented by the portfolio vector from the last period, wt−1. Because under Hypothesis 2 of Section 2.4, the portfolio amount is negligible compared to the total trading volume of the market, pt is not included in the internal state. 4.2 F ull-Exploitation and the Reward F unction It is the job of the agent to maximize the ﬁnal portfolio value pf of Equation (11) at the end of the tf + 1 period. As the agent does not have control over the choices of the initial investment, p0, and the length of the whole portfolio management process, tf , this job is equivalent to maximizing the average logarithmic cumulate d return R, R(s1, a1, · · · , stf , atf , stf +1) := 1 tf ln pf p0 = 1 tf tf +1∑ t=1 ln (µtyt · wt−1) (21) = 1 tf tf +1∑ t=1 rt. (22) On the right-hand side of (21), wt−1 is given by action at−1, yt is part of price tensor Xt from state variable st, and µt is a function of wt−1, wt and yt as stated in (17). In the language of RL, R is the cumulated reward, and rt/tf is the immediate reward for an individual episode. Diﬀerent from a reward function using accumulated portfolio value (Moody et al., 1998), the denominator tf guarantees the fairness of the reward function between runs of diﬀerent lengths, enabling it to train the tra ding policy in mini-batches. With this reward function, the current framework has two imp ortant distinctions from many other RL problems. One is that both the episodic and cumu lated rewards are exactly expressed. In other words, the domain knowledge of the envir onment is well-mastered, and can be fully exploited by the agent. This exact expressivene ss is based upon Hypothesis 1 of Section 2.4 that an action has no inﬂuence on the external part of future states, the price tensor. This isolation of action and external environ ment also allows one to use the 11 Jiang, Xu and Liang same segment of market history to evaluate diﬀerence sequenc es of actions. This feature of the framework is considered a major advantage, because a com plete new trial in a trading game is both time-consuming and expansive. The second distinction is that all episodic rewards are equa lly important to the ﬁnal return. This distinction, together with the zero-market-i mpact assumption, allows rt/tf to be regarded as the action-value function of action wt with a discounted factor of 0, taking no consideration of future inﬂuence of the action. Having a d eﬁnite action-value function further justiﬁes the full-exploitation approach, since ex ploration in other RL problems is mainly for trying out diﬀerent classes of action-value funct ions. Without exploration, on the other hand, local optima can be a voided by random initial- isation of the policy parameters which will be discussed bel ow. 4.3 Deterministic Policy Gradient A policy is a mapping from the state space to the action space, π : S → A . With full exploitation in the current framework, an action is determi nistically produced by the policy from a state. The optimal policy is obtained using a gradient ascent algorithm. To achieve this, a policy is speciﬁed by a set of parameter θ, and at = πθ(st). The performance metric of πθ for time interval [0 , tf ] is deﬁned as the corresponding reward function (21) of the interval, J[0,tf ](πθ) = R (s1, πθ(s1), · · · , stf , πθ(stf ), stf +1) . (23) After random initialisation, the parameters are continuou sly updated along the gradient direction with a learning rate λ, θ − →θ + λ∇θJ[0,tf ](πθ). (24) To improve training eﬃciency and avoid machine-precision e rrors, θ will be updated upon mini-batches instead of the whole training market-history . If the time-range of a mini-batch is [ tb1, tb2 ], the updating rule for the batch is θ − →θ + λ∇θJ[tb1 ,tb2 ](πθ), (25) with the denominator in the corresponding R deﬁned in (21) replaced by tb2 − tb1. This mini-batch approach of gradient ascent also allows online l earning, which is important in online trading where new market history keep coming to the ag ent. Details of the online learning and mini-batch training will be discussed in Secti on 5.3 5. Policy Networks The policy functions πθ will be constructed using three diﬀerent deep neural network s. The neural networks in this paper diﬀer from a previous versio n (Jiang and Liang, 2017) with three important innovations, the mini-machine topolo gy invented to target the portfo- lio management problem, the portfolio-vector memory, and a stochastic mini-batch online learning scheme. 12 Deep Portfolio Management 5.1 Network T opologies The three incarnations of neural networks to build up the pol icy functions are a CNN, a basic RNN, and a LSTM. Figure 2 shows the topology of a CNN desi gned for solving the current portfolio management problem, while Figure 3 portr ays the structure of a basic RNN or LSTM network for the same problem. In all cases, the inp ut to the networks is the price tensor Xt deﬁned in (18), and the output is the portfolio vector wt. In both ﬁgures, an hypothetical example of output portfolio vector is used, while the dimension of the price tensor and thus the number of assets are actual values deploy ed in the experiments. The last hidden layers are the voting scores for all non-cash ass ets. The softmax outcomes of these scores and a cash bias become the actual corresponding portfolio weights. In order for the neural network to consider transaction cost, the portfo lio vector from the last period, wt−1, is inserted to the networks just before the voting-layer. T he actual mechanism of storing and retrieving portfolio vectors in a parallel mann er is presented in Section 5.2. A vital common feature in all three networks is that the netwo rks ﬂow independently for the m assets while network parameters are shared among these stre ams. These streams are like independent but identical networks of smaller scopes, separately observing and assessing individual non-cash assets. They only interconnect at the s oftmax function, just to make sure their outputting weights are non-negative and summing up to unity. We call these streams mini-machines or more formally Identical Independ ent Evaluators (IIE), and this topology feature Ensemble of IIE (EIIE) nicknamed mini-mac hine approach, to distinguish with the wholesome approach in an earlier attempt (Jiang and Liang, 2017). EIIE is realized diﬀerently in Figure 2 and 3. An IIE in Figure 2 is just a chain of convolution with kernels of height 1, while in Figure 3 it is either a LSTM or a Basic RNN t aking the price history of a single asset as input. EIIE greatly improves the performance of the portfolio mana gement. Remembering the historic performance of individual assets, an integrated n etwork in the previous version is more reluctant to invest money to a historically unfavorabl e asset, even if the asset has a much more promising future. On the other hand, without bein g designed to reveal the identity of the assigned asset, an IIE is able to judge its pot ential rise and fall merely based on more recent events. From a practical point of view, EIIE has three other crucial a dvantages over an in- tegrated network. The ﬁrst is scalability in asset number. H aving the mini-machines all identical with shared parameters, the training time of an en semble scales roughly linearly with m. The second advantage is data-usage eﬃciency. For an interv al of price history, a mini-machine can be trained m times across diﬀerent assets. Asset assessing experience of the IIEs is then shared and accumulated in both time and ass et dimensions. The ﬁnal advantage is plasticity to asset collection. Since an IIE’s asset assessing ability is universal without being restricted to any particular assets, an EIIE c an update its choice of assets and/or the size of the portfolio in real-time, without havin g to train the network again from ground zero. 5.2 Portfolio-V ector Memory In order for the portfolio management agent to minimize tran saction cost by restraining itself from large changes between consecutive portfolio vectors, the output of portfolio weights 13 Jiang, Xu and Liang portfolio vector +1=12 elements 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 3 features =11×50 price history as input 2 feature maps of size 11×48 20+1 feature maps of size 11×1 1 feature map of size 11×1 1×3 convolution 1×48 convolution 1×1 convolution ReLU ReLU ... cash bias softmax from last period Figure 2: CNN Implementation of the EIIE: This is a realizati on the Ensemble of Identical Independent Evaluators (EIIE), a fully convolutional netw ork. The ﬁrst dimen- sions of all the local receptive ﬁelds in all feature maps are 1, making all rows isolated from each other until the softmax activation. Apar t from weight-sharing among receptive ﬁelds in a feature map, which is a usual CNN ch aracteristic, parameters are also shared between rows in an EIIE conﬁgurat ion. Each row of the entire network is assigned with a particular asset, and i s responsible to submit a voting score to the softmax on the growing potential of the a sset in the coming trading period. The input to the network is a 3 × m × n price tensor, comprising the highest, closing, and lowest prices of m non-cash assets over the past n peri- ods. The outputs are the new portfolio weights. The previous portfolio weights are inserted as an extra feature map before the scoring layer , for the agent to minimize transaction cost. from the previous trading period is input to the networks. On e way to achieve this is to rely on the remembering ability of RNN, but with this approac h the price normalization scheme proposed in (18) has to be abandoned. This normalizat ion scheme is empirically better performing than others. Another possible solution i s Direct Reinforcement (RR) introduced by Moody and Saﬀell (2001). However, both RR and RN N memory suﬀer from the gradient vanishing problem. More importantly, RR and RN N require serialization of the training process, unable to utilize parallel training w ithin mini-batches. In this work, inspired by the idea of experience replay memor y (Mnih et al., 2016), a dedicated Portfolio-Vector Memory (PVM), is introduced to store the network outputs. As shown in Figure 4, the PVM is a stack of portfolio vectors in ch ronological order. Before any network training, the PVM is initialized with uniform we ights. In each training step, a policy network loads the portfolio vector of the previous pe riod from the memory location at t − 1, and overwrites the memory at t with its output. As the parameters of the policy networks converge through many training epochs, the values in the memory also converge. Sharing a single memory stack allows a network to be trained s imultaneously against data points within a mini-batches, enormously improving tr aining eﬃciency. In the case of 14 Deep Portfolio Management portfolio vector +1=12 elements 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 3 features =11×50 price history as input RNN (unrolling) 20 units 50 steps 20+1 feature maps of size 11×1 1 features map of size 11×1 1×1 convolution ... cash bias softmax A A A. . . from last period Figure 3: RNN (Basic RNN or LSTM) Implementation of the EIIE: This is a recurrent realization the Ensemble of Identical Independent Evaluat ors (EIIE). In this ver- sion, the price inputs of individual assets are taken by smal l recurrent subnets. These subnets are identical LSTMs or Basic RNNs. The structu re of the ensem- ble network after the recurrent subnets is the same as the sec ond half of the CNN in Figure 2. network read rewrite time time time memory before rewriting memory after rewriting price history input period (a) Mini-Batch Viewpoint portfolio vector +1 elements 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 convolution or RNN unrolling +1 feature maps of size ×1 1 feature map of size ×1 1×1 convolution . . . cash bias softmax portfolio vectors (excluding cash) memory write read time (b) Network Viewpoint Figure 4: A Read/Write Cycle of the Portfolio-Vector Memory : In both graphs, a small vertical strip on the time axis represents a portion of the me mory containing the portfolio weights at the beginning of a period. Red memories are being read to the policy network, while blue ones are being overwritten by the network. The two colored rectangles in (a) consisting of four strips are exam ple of two consecutive mini-batches. While (a) exhibits a complete read and write c ircle for a mini- batch, (b) shows a circle within a network (omitting the CNN o r RNN part of the network). 15 Jiang, Xu and Liang RNN versions of the networks, inserting last outputs after t he recurrent blocks (Figure 3) avoids passing the gradients back to the deep RNN structures , circumventing the gradient vanishing problem. 5.3 Online Stochastic Batch Learning With the introduction of the network output-memory, mini-b atch training becomes plausi- ble, although the learning framework requires sequential i nputs. However, unlike supervised learning, where data points are unordered and mini-batches are random disjoint subsets of the training sample space, in this training scheme the data p oints within a batch have to be in their time-order. In addition, since data sets are time se ries, mini-batches starting with diﬀerent periods are considered valid and distinctive, even if they have a signiﬁcantly over- lapping interval. For example, if the uniform batch size is nb, data sets covering [ tb, tb + nb) and [ tb + 1, tb + nb + 1) are two validly diﬀerent batches. The ever-ongoing nature of ﬁnancial markets means new data k eeps pouring into the agent, and as a consequence the size of the of training sample explodes indeﬁnitely. For- tunately, it is believed that the correlation between two ma rket price events decades expo- nentially with the temporal distance between them (Holt, 20 04; Charles et al., 2006). With this belief, here an Online Stochastic Batch Learning (OSBL ) scheme is proposed. At the end of the tth period, the price movement of this period will be added to t he training set. After the agent has completed its orders for pe riod t + 1, the policy network will be trained against Nb randomly chosen mini-batches from this set. A batch startin g with period tb ⩽ t − nb is picked with a geometrically distributed probability Pβ(tb), Pβ(tb) = β(1 − β)t−tb−nb, (26) where β ∈ (0, 1) is the probability-decaying rate determining the shape o f the probability distribution and how important are recent market events, an d nb is the number of periods in a mini-batch. 6. Experiments The tools has been developed to this point of the article are e xamined in three back-test experiments of diﬀerent time frames with all three policy net works on the crypto-currency exchange Poloniex. Results are compared with many well-est ablished and recently published portfolio-selection strategies. The main compared ﬁnanci al metric is the portfolio value as well as maximum drawdown and the Sharpe ratio. 6.1 T est Ranges Details of the time-ranges for the back-test experiments an d their corresponding training sets are presented in Table 1. A cross validation set is used f or determination of the hyper- parameters, whose range is also listed. All time in the table are in Coordinated Universal Time (UTC). All training sets start at 0 o’clock. For example , the training set for Back-Test 1 is from 00:00 on November 1st 2014. All price data is accesse d with Poloniex’s oﬃcial Application Programming Interface (API) 4. 4. https://poloniex.com/support/api/ 16 Deep Portfolio Management Data Purpose Data Range Training Data Set CV 2016-05-07 04:00 to 2016-06-27 08:00 2014-07-01 to 2016-05-07 04:00 Back-Test 1 2016-09-07 04:00 to 2016-10-28 08:00 2014-11-01 to 2016-09-07 04:00 Back-Test 2 2016-12-08 04:00 to 2017-01-28 08:00 2015-02-01 to 2016-12-08 04:00 Back-Test 3 2017-03-07 04:00 to 2017-04-27 08:00 2015-05-01 to 2017-03-07 04:00 Table 1: Price data ranges for hyperparameter-selection (c ross-validation, CV) and back- test experiments. Prices are accessed in periods of 30 minut es. Closing prices are used for cross validation and back-tests, while highest, lo west, and closing prices in the periods are used for training. The hours of the starting p oints for the training sets are not given, since they begin at midnight of the days. A ll times are in UTC. 6.2 Performance Measures Diﬀerent metrics are used to measure the performance of a part icular portfolio selection strategy. The most direct measurement of how successful is a portfolio management over a timespan is the accumulative portfolio value (APV), pt. It is unfair, however, to compare the PVs of two management starting of diﬀerent initial values . Therefore, APVs here are measured in the unit of their initial values, or equivalentl y p0 = 1 and thus pt = pt/p0. (27) In this unit, APV is then closely related to the accumulated r eturn, and in fact it only diﬀers from the latter by 1. Under the same unit, the ﬁnal APV (f APV) is the APV at the end of a back-test experiment, pf = pf /p0 = ptf +1/p0. A major disadvantage of APV is that it does not measure the ris k factors, since it merely sums up all the periodic returns without considering ﬂuctua tion in these returns. A second metric, the Sharpe ratio (SR) (Sharpe, 1964, 1994), is used t o take risk into account. The ratio is a risk adjusted mean return, deﬁned as the average of the risk-free return by its deviation, S = Et[ρt − ρF]√ var t (ρt − ρF) , (28) where ρt are periodic returns deﬁned in (9), and ρF is the rate of return of a risk-free asset. In these experiments the risk-free asset is Bitcoin. Becaus e the quoted currency is also Bitcoin, the risk-free return is zero, ρF = 0, here. Although the SR considers volatility of the portfolio value s, but it equally treats upwards and downwards movements. In reality upwards volatility con tributes to positive returns, but downwards to loss. In order to highlight the downwards devia tion, Maximum Drawdown (MDD) (Magdon-Ismail and Atiya, 2004) is also considered. M DD is the biggest loss from a peak to a trough, and mathematically D = max τ >t t pt − pτ pt . (29) 17 Jiang, Xu and Liang 2016-09-07 to 2016-10-28 2016-12-08 to 2017-01-28 2017-03-07 to 2017-04-27 Algorithm MDD fAPV SR MDD fAPV SR MDD fAPV SR CNN 0.224 29.695 0.087 0.216 8.026 0.059 0.406 31.747 0.076 bRNN 0.241 13.348 0.074 0.262 4.623 0.043 0.393 47.148 0.082 LSTM 0.280 6.692 0.053 0.319 4.073 0.038 0.487 21.173 0.060 iCNN 0.221 4.542 0.053 0.265 1.573 0.022 0.204 3.958 0.044 Best Stock 0.654 1.223 0.012 0.236 1.401 0.018 0.668 4.594 0.033 UCRP 0.265 0.867 -0.014 0.185 1.101 0.010 0.162 2.412 0.049 UBAH 0.324 0.821 -0.015 0.224 1.029 0.004 0.274 2.230 0.036 Anticor 0.265 0.867 -0.014 0.185 1.101 0.010 0.162 2.412 0.049 OLMAR 0.913 0.142 -0.039 0.897 0.123 -0.038 0.733 4.582 0.034 PAMR 0.997 0.003 -0.137 0.998 0.003 -0.121 0.981 0.021 -0.055 WMAMR 0.682 0.742 -0.0008 0.519 0.895 0.005 0.673 6.692 0.042 CWMR 0.999 0.001 -0.148 0.999 0.002 -0.127 0.987 0.013 -0.061 RMR 0.900 0.127 -0.043 0.929 0.090 -0.045 0.698 7.008 0.041 ONS 0.233 0.923 -0.006 0.295 1.188 0.012 0.170 1.609 0.027 UP 0.269 0.864 -0.014 0.188 1.094 0.009 0.165 2.407 0.049 EG 0.268 0.865 -0.014 0.187 1.097 0.010 0.163 2.412 0.049 BK 0.436 0.758 -0.013 0.336 0.770 -0.012 0.390 2.070 0.027 CORN 0.999 0.001 -0.129 1.000 0.0001 -0.179 0.999 0.001 -0.125 M0 0.335 0.933 -0.001 0.308 1.106 0.008 0.180 2.729 0.044 Table 2: Performances of the three EIIE (Ensemble of Identic al Independent Evaluators) neural networks, an integrated network, and some tradition al portfolio selection strategies in three diﬀerent back-test experiments (in UTC, detailed time-ranges listed in Table 1) on the cryptocurrency exchange Poloniex. The performance metrics are Maximum Drawdown (MDD), the ﬁnal Accumulated Po rtfolio Value (fAPV) in the unit of initial portfolio amount ( pf /p0), and the Sharpe ratio (SR). The bold algorithms are the EIIE networks introduced in this paper, named af- ter the underlining structures of their IIEs. For example, b RNN is the EIIE of Figure 3 using basic RNN evaluators. Three benchmarks (ital ic), the integrated CNN (iCNN) previous proposed by the authors (Jiang and Liang , 2017), and some recently reviewed a strategies (Li et al., 2015a; Li and Hoi, 2014) are also teste d. The algorithms in the table are divided into ﬁve categories, the model-free neural network, the benchmarks, follow-the-loser strategies, fo llow-the-winner strategies, and pattern-matching or other strategies. The best perform ance in each column is highlighted with boldface. All three EIIEs signiﬁcantly outperform all other algorithms in the fAPV and SR columns, showing the proﬁtabil ity and reliability of the EIIE machine-learning solution to the portfolio mana gement problem. a. The exceptions are RMR of Huang et al. (2013) and WMAMR of Ga o and Zhang (2013). 6.3 Results The performances of all three EIIE policy networks proposed in the current paper will be compared to that of the integrated CNN (iCNN) (Jiang and Lian g, 2017), several well- known or recently published model-based strategies, and th ree benchmarks. 18 Deep Portfolio Management The three benchmarks are the Best Stock, the asset with the mo st fAPV over the back-test interval, the Uniform Buy and Hold (UBAH), a portf olio management approach simply equally spreading the total fund into the preselecte d assets and holding them without making any purchases or selling until the end (Li and Hoi, 201 4), and Uniform Constant Rebalanced Portfolios (UCRP) (Kelly, 1956; Cover, 1991). Most of the strategies to be compared in this work were survey ed by Li and Hoi (2014), including Aniticor (Borodin et al., 2004), Online Moving Av erage Reversion (OLMAR) (Li et al., 2015b), Passive Aggressive Mean Reversion (PAMR ) (Li et al., 2012), Conﬁ- dence Weighted Mean Reversion (CWMR) (Li et al., 2013), Onli ne Newton Step (ONS) (Agarwal et al., 2006), Universal Portfolios (UP) (Cover, 1 991), Exponential Gradient (EG) (Helmbold et al., 1998), Nonparametric Kernel Based Log Opt imal Strategy (BK) (Gy¨ orﬁ et al., 2006), Correlation-driven Nonparametric Learning Strate gy (CORN) (Li et al., 2011), and M0 (Borodin et al., 2000), except Weighted Moving Average Me an Reversion (WMAMR) (Gao and Zhang, 2013) and Robust Median Reversion (RMR) (Hua ng et al., 2013). Table 2 shows the performance scores fAPV, SR, and MDD of the E IIE policy networks as well as of the compared strategies for the three back-test intervals listed in Table 1. In term of fAPV or SR, the best performing algorithm in Back-Tes t 1 and 2 is the CNN EIIE whose ﬁnal wealth is more than twice of the runner-up in the ﬁr st experiment. Top three winners in these two measures in all back-tests are occupied by the three EIIE networks, losing only the MDD measure. This result demonstrates the po werful proﬁtability and consistency of the current EIIE machine-learning framewor k. When only considering fAPV, all three EIIEs outperform the b est assets in all three back-tests, while the only model-based algorithm does that is RMR on the only occasion of Back-Test 3. Because of the high commission rate of 0 .25% and the relatively high half- hourly trading frequency, many traditional strategies hav e bad performances. Especially in Back-Test 1, all model-based strategies have negative re turns, with fAPV less than 1 or equivalently negative SRs. On the other hand, the EIIEs are a ble to achieve at least 4-fold returns in 20 days in diﬀerent market conditions. Figures 5, 6 and 7 plot the APV against time in the three back-t ests respectively for the CNN and bRNN EIIE networks, two selected benchmarks and two m odel-based strategies. The benchmarks Best Stock and UCRP are two good representati ves of the market. In all three experiments, both CNN and bRNN EIIEs beat the market th roughout the entirety of the back-tests, while traditional strategies are only able to achieve that in the second half of Back-Test 3 and very brieﬂy elsewhere. 7. Conclusion This article proposed an extensible reinforcement-learni ng framework solving the general ﬁnancial portfolio management problem. Being invented to c ope with multi-channel market inputs and directly output portfolio weights as the market a ctions, the framework can be ﬁt in with diﬀerent deep neural networks, and is linearly scal able with the portfolio size. This scalability and extensibility are the results of the EI IE meta topology, which is able to accommodate many types of weight-sharing neural-net str uctures in the lower level. To take transaction cost into account when training the poli cy networks, the framework includes a portfolio-weight memory, the PVM, allowing the p ortfolio-management agent to 19 Jiang, Xu and Liang Figure 5: Back-Test 1: 2016-09-07-4:00 to 2016-10-28-8:00 (UTC). Accumulated portfolio values (APV, pt/p0) over the interval of Back-Test 1 for the CNN and basic RNN EIIEs, the Best Stock, the UCRP, RMR, and the ONS are plotted i n log-10 scale here. The two EIIEs are leading throughout the entire t ime-span, growing consistently only with a few drawdown incidents. learn restraining from oversized adjustments between cons ecutive actions, while avoiding the gradient vanishing problem faced by many recurrent netw orks. The PVM also allow parallel training within batching, beating recurrent appr oaches in learning eﬃciency to the transaction cost problem. Moreover, the OSBL scheme gov erns the online learning process, so that the agent can continuously digest constant incoming market information while trading. Finally, the agent was trained using a fully e xploiting deterministic policy gradient method, aiming to maximize the accumulated wealth as the reinforcement reward function. The proﬁtability of the framework surpasses all surveyed tr aditional portfolio-selection methods, as demonstrated in the paper by the outcomes of thre e back-test experiments over diﬀerent periods in a cryptocurrency market. In these ex periments, the framework was realized using three diﬀerent underlining networks, a CN N, a basic RNN and a LSTM. All three versions better performed in ﬁnal accumulated por tfolio value than other trading algorithms in comparison. The EIIE networks also monopoliz ed the top three positions in the risk-adjusted score in all three tests, indicating the c onsistency of the framework in its performances. Another deep reinforcement learning soluti on, previously introduced by the authors, was assessed and compared as well under the same set tings, losing too to the EIIE networks, proving that the EIIE framework is a major improve ment over its more primitive cousin. 20 Deep Portfolio Management Figure 6: Back-Test 2: 2016-12-08-4:00 to 2017-01-28-8:00 (UTC), log-scale accumulated weath. This is the worst experiment amung the three back-tes ts for the EIIEs. However, they are able to steadily climb up till the end of the test. Among the three EIIE networks, LSTM had much lower scores tha n the CNN and the basic RNN. The signiﬁcant gap in performance between the two RNN species under the same framework might be an indicator to the well-known secre t in ﬁnancial markets, that history repeats itself. Not being designed to forget its inp ut history, a vanilla RNN is more able than a LSTM to exploit repetitive patterns in price move ment for higher yields. The gap might also be due to lack of ﬁne-tuning in hyper-paramete rs for the LSTM. In the experiments, same set of structural hyper-parameters were used for both basic RNN and LSTM. Despite the success of the EIIE framework in the back-tests, there is room for improve- ment in future works. The main weakness of the current work is the assumptions of zero market impact and zero slippage. In order to consider market impact and slippage, large amount of well-documented real-world trading examples wil l be needed as training data. Some protocol will have to be invented for documenting trade actions and market reactions. If that is accomplished, live trading experiments of the aut o-trading agent in its current version can be recorded, for its future version to learn the p rinciples behind market impacts and slippages from this recorded history. Another shortcom ing of the work is that the framework has only been tested in one market. To test its adap tability, the current and later versions will need to be examined in back-tests and liv e trading in a more traditional ﬁnancial market. In addition, the current award function wi ll have to be amended, if not abandoned, for the reinforcement-learning agent to includ e awareness of longer-term mar- ket reactions. This may be achieved by a critic network. Howe ver, the backbone of the 21 Jiang, Xu and Liang Figure 7: Back Test 3: 2017-03-07-4:00 to 2017-04-27-8:00 ( UTC), log-scale accumulated weath. All algorithms struggle and consolidate at the begin ning of this experi- ment, and both of the EIIEs experience two major dips on March 15 and April 9. This diving contributes to their high Maximum Drawdown in th e text (Table 2). Nevertheless, this is the best month for both EIIEs in term of ﬁnal wealth. current framework, including the EIIE meta topology, the PV M, and the OSBL scheme, will continue to take important roles in future versions. Appendix A. Proof of Theorem 1 In order to prove Theorem 1, it is handy to have the following ﬁ ve lemmas. Lemma A.1 The function f (µ) in Theorem 1 is monotonically increasing. In other words, f (µ2) /greaterorequalslant f (µ1) if µ2 > µ 1. Proof Recall that from Section 2.3, f (µ) := 1 1 − cpwt,0 [ 1 − cpw′ t,0 − (cs + cp − cscp) m∑ i=1 (w′ t,i − µwt,i)+ ] , The fact that the linear rectiﬁer ( x)+ ((x)+ = x if x > 0, ( x)+ = 0 otherwise ) is monoton- ically increasing readily implies that f (µ) is also monotonically increasing. Lemma A.2 f (0) > 0. 22 Deep Portfolio Management Proof Using the fact that wt,0, w′ t,0 ∈ [0, 1], f (0) = 1 1 − cpwt,0 [ 1 − cpw′ t,0 − (cs + cp − cscp) m∑ i=1 (w′ t,i)+ ] = 1 1 − cpwt,0 [ 1 − cpw′ t,0 − (cs + cp − cscp)(1 − w′ t,0) ] /greaterorequalslant 1 − 2cp − cs + cscp > 0, for cp, cs < 38%. For a commission rate, 38% is impractically high. There fore, f (0) > 0 always holds. Lemma A.3 f (1) ⩽ 1. Proof The proof is split into two cases. The fact that cp, cp ∈ [0, 1) implies (cs+cp−cscp) /greaterorequalslant 0 will be used in Case 1. Case 1: w′ t,0 /greaterorequalslant wt,0. Since 1 − cpwt,0 > 0, f (1) = 1 − cpw′ t,0 1 − cpwt,0 − 1 1 − cpwt,0 (cs + cp − cscp) m∑ i=1 (w′ t,i − wt,i)+ ⩽ 1 − 1 1 − cpwt,0 (cs + cp − cscp) m∑ i=1 (w′ t,i − wt,i)+ ⩽ 1 Case 2: w′ t,0 < w t,0. This will be proved by contradiction. By assuming f (1) > 1, 1 − cpw′ t,0 − (cs + cp − cscp) m∑ i=1 (w′ t,i − wt,i)+ > 1 − cpwt,0. Bringing the two w0’s together, cp(wt,0 − w′ t,0) > (cs + cp − cscp) m∑ i=1 (w′ t,i − wt,i)+. (A.1) Noting that w′ t,0 + m∑ i=1 w′ t,i = 1 = wt,0 + m∑ i=1 wt,i, wt,0 − w′ t,0 = 1 − m∑ i=1 wt,i − ( 1 − m∑ i=1 w′ t,i ) = m∑ i=1 ( w′ t,i − wt,i ) . Using identity ( a − b)+ − (b − a)+ = a − b, (A.1) becomes cp [ m∑ i=1 (w′ t,i − wt,i)+ − m∑ i=1 (wt,i − w′ t,i)+ ] > (cs + cp − cscp) m∑ i=1 (w′ t,i − wt,i)+. 23 Jiang, Xu and Liang Moving the ( w′ t,i − wt,i)+ terms to the right-hand side, −cp m∑ i=1 (wt,i − w′ t,i)+ > c s(1 − cp) m∑ i=1 (w′ t,i − wt,i)+. (A.2) The left-hand side of (A.2) is a non-positive number, and the right-hand side is a non- negative number. The former is greater than the latter, arri ving at a contradiction. Therefore, f (1) ⩽ 1 in both cases. Lemma A.4 the sequence { ˜µ(k) t } , deﬁned as { ˜µ(k) t ⏐⏐⏐˜µ(0) t = 0 and ˜µ(k) t = f ( ˜µ(k−1) t ) , k ∈ N0 } converges to µt. Proof This is a special case of the ﬁnal goal Theorem 1 when µ⊙ = 0. This convergence is proved by the Monotone Convergence Theorem (MCT) (Rudin, 1976, Chapter 5). The monotonicity of f by Lemma A.1 with Mathematical Induction establishes an upp er bound for { ˜µ(k) t } . ˜µ(0) t = 0 < µ t, If ˜µ(k−1) t ⩽ µt, ˜µ(k) t = f ( ˜µ(k−1) t ) ⩽ f (µt) = µt } =⇒ ˜µ(k) t ⩽ µt, ∀k. Note that by deﬁnition µt is the transaction remainder factor, and 0 < µ t ⩽ 1. The monotonicity of sequence { ˜µ(k) t } itself can be also proved by Mathematical Induction and Lemma A.2. ˜µ(1) t = f (0) > 0 = ˜µ(0) t , If ˜µ(k−1) t /greaterorequalslant ˜µ(k−2) t , ˜µ(k) t = f ( ˜µ(k−1) t ) /greaterorequalslant f ( ˜µ(k−2) t ) = ˜µ(k−1) t } =⇒ ˜µ(k) t /greaterorequalslant ˜µ(k−1) t , ∀k. If ˜µ(k) t = ˜µ(k−1) t , then ˜µ(k) t is the solution of Equation (14), and the proof ends here. Oth - erwise, the sequence { ˜µ(k) t } is strictly increasing and bounded above by µt. In that case, by MCT, lim k→∞ ˜µ(k) t = µ∗, where µ∗ is the Least Upper Bound of { ˜µ(k) t } . As a result, 0 = lim k→∞ ( ˜µ(k+1) t − ˜µ(k) t ) = lim k→∞ ( f ( ˜µ(k) t ) − ˜µ(k−1) t ) = f (µ∗) − µ∗. Therefore, µ∗ is the solution to Equation (14), and hence lim k→∞ ˜µ(k) t = µt. Lemma A.5 the sequence { ˜µ(k) t } , deﬁned as { ˜µ(k) t ⏐⏐⏐˜µ(0) t = 1 and ˜µ(k) t = f ( ˜µ(k−1) t ) , k ∈ N0 } converges to µt. 24 Deep Portfolio Management Proof The proof is similar to that of Lemma A.4 using Mathematical I nduction and MCT. The sequence is monotonically decreasing and bounded below by µt. The monotonically is a result of Lemma A.3, and the boundedness is by Lemma A.1. With the previous two Lemmas, it is in a good position to prove the general convergence theorem. Recall Theorem 1 from Section 2.3: Theorem 1 Denoting f (µ) := 1 1 − cpwt,0 [ 1 − cpw′ t,0 − (cs + cp − cscp) m∑ i=1 (w′ t,i − µwt,i)+ ] , the sequence { ˜µ(k) t } , deﬁned as { ˜µ(k) t ⏐⏐⏐˜µ(0) t = µ⊙ and ˜µ(k) t = f ( ˜µ(k−1) t ) , k ∈ N0 } (15) converges to µt, the solution to Equation (14), for any µ⊙ ∈ [0, 1]. Proof It is proved in three cases: Case 1: µ⊙ = µt, 0, or 1. This case is trivial, as when µ⊙ = µt it is the solution of µ = f (µ), and the sequence will obviously converge. The convergenc e to µt for the other two values of µ⊙ is guaranteed by Lemma A.4 and A.5 Case 2: 0 < µ ⊙ < µ t. Constructing a sequence { ˆµ(k) t } using µ⊙ = 0, { ˆµ(k) t ⏐⏐⏐ˆµ(0) t = 0 and ˆµ(k) t = f ( ˆµ(k−1) t ) , k ∈ N0 } . By the proof of Lemma A.4, { ˆµ(k) t } is strictly increasing and bounded above by µt, so there is a j ∈ N0 such that ˆµ(j) ⩽ µ⊙ ⩽ ˆµ(j+1). If any of the above equality holds, the two sequences coincid e from j + 1 onward, converging to µt, and the proof ends here. Otherwise, ˆµ(j) < µ ⊙ <ˆµ(j+1). Using the monotonicity of f (µ) by Lemma A.1, these inequalities become ˆµ(j+1) = f (ˆµ(j)) ⩽ ˜µ(1) = µ⊙ ⩽ f (ˆµ(j+1)) = ˆµ(j+2). Again, if one of the equality holds, the proof ends here. This chain can go on indeﬁ- nitely if no equality holds, ˆµ(j+k+1) < ˜µ(k) <ˆµ(j+k+2). By the Squeeze Theorem (Leithold, 1996), lim k→∞ ˜µ(k) = lim k→∞ ˆµ(k) = µt. 25 Jiang, Xu and Liang Case 3: 1 > µ ⊙ > µ t. This case is proved in a similar way to Case 2, by constructing a sequence with µ⊙ = 1 and making use of Lemma A.5. In conclusion, for any initial value µ⊙ ∈ [0, 1], the sequence ˜µ(k) converges to µt. Appendix B. Hyper-Parameters hyper-parameters value description batch size 50 Size of mini-batch during training. (Section 3.1) window size 50 Number of the columns (number of the trading periods) in each input price matrix. (Section 3.2) number of assets 12 Total number of preselected assets (including the cash, Bitcoin). (Section 3.1) trading period (second) 1800 Time interval between two portfolio redistributions. (Section 2.1) total steps 2 × 106 Total number of steps for pre-training in the training set. regularization coeﬃcient 10−8 The L2 regularization coeﬃcient applied to network training. learning rate 3 × 10−5 Parameter α (i.e. the step size) of the Adam optimization (Kingma and Ba, 2014). volume observation (day) 30 The length of time during which trading volumes are used to preselect the portfolio assets. (Section 3.1) commission rate 0.25% Rate of commission fee applied to each transaction. (Section 2.3) rolling steps 30 Number of online training steps for each period during cross-validation and back-tests. sample bias 5 × 10−5 Parameter of geometric distribution when selecting online training sample batches. (The β in Equation 26 of Section 5.3) Table B.1: Hyper-parameters of the reinforcement-learnin g framework. They are chosen based on the networks’ scores in the cross-validation set de scribed in Table 1 of Section 6.1. Although these are the values used in the experi ments of the paper, they are all adjustable in the framework. The hyper-parameters and their values used in the back-test experiments of the paper are listed in Table B.1. These numbers are selected to maximi ze the network scores in the cross-validation time-range (see Section 6.1). In orde r to avoid over-ﬁtting, the cross- validation range and the back-tests do not overlap. Diﬀerent topologies of the IIEs were also tried in the cross-v alidation set, and it turned out that deeper network structures than those presented in F igure 2 and 3 did not improve scores on the set. 26 Deep Portfolio Management Bibliography Amit Agarwal, Elad Hazan, Satyen Kale, and Robert E Schapire . Algorithms for portfolio management based on the newton method. In Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine learning , pages 9–16. ACM, 2006. Iddo Bentov, Charles Lee, Alex Mizrahi, and Meni Rosenfeld. Proof of activity: Extending bitcoin’s proof of work via proof of stake [extended abstrac t] y. ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review , 42(3):34–37, 2014. Joseph Bonneau, Andrew Miller, Jeremy Clark, Arvind Naraya nan, Joshua A Kroll, and Edward W Felten. Sok: Research perspectives and challenges for bitcoin and cryptocur- rencies. In 2015 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy , pages 104–121. IEEE, 2015. Allan Borodin, Ran El-Yaniv, and Vincent Gogan. On the compe titive theory and practice of portfolio selection. In Latin American Symposium on Theoretical Informatics , pages 173–196. Springer, 2000. Allan Borodin, Ran El-Yaniv, and Vincent Gogan. Can we learn to beat the best stock. J. Artif. Intell. Res.(JAIR) , 21:579–594, 2004. D Charles, II Kirkpatrick, and Julie R Dahlquist. Technical analysis: The complete resource for ﬁnancial market technician. ISBN-13, pages 978–0137059447, 2006. Thomas M Cover. Universal portfolios. Mathematical ﬁnance, 1(1):1–29, 1991. Thomas M Cover. Universal data compression and portfolio se lection. In Foundations of Computer Science, 1996. Proceedings., 37th Annual Symposium on, pages 534–538. IEEE, 1996. James Cumming. An investigation into the use of reinforceme nt learn- ing techniques within the algorithmic trading domain. Mast er’s thesis, Imperial College London, United Kiongdoms, 2015. U RL http://www.doc.ic.ac.uk/teaching/distinguished-proj ects/2015/j.cumming.pdf. Puja Das and Arindam Banerjee. Meta optimization and its app lication to portfolio se- lection. Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD international conference o n Knowledge discovery and data mining - KDD ’11 , page 1163, 2011. doi: 10.1145/2020408.2020588. URL http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2020408.2020588. M.A.H. Dempster and V. Leemans. An automated fx trading syst em using adap- tive reinforcement learning. Expert Systems with Applications , 30(3):543 – 552, 2006. ISSN 0957-4174. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j. eswa.2005.10.012. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957417405003015. Intelli- gent Information Systems for Financial Engineering. Yue Deng, Feng Bao, Youyong Kong, Zhiquan Ren, and Qionghai D ai. Deep direct rein- forcement learning for ﬁnancial signal representation and trading. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems , 28(3):653–664, 2017. 27 Jiang, Xu and Liang Evan Duﬃeld and Kyle Hagan. Darkcoin: Peer to peer cryptocur rency with anonymous blockchain transactions and an improved proofofwork syste m. bitpaper.info, 2014. Fabio D Freitas, Alberto F De Souza, and Ailson R de Almeida. P rediction-based portfolio optimization model using neural networks. Neurocomputing, 72(10):2155–2170, 2009. Kunihiko Fukushima. Neocognitron: A self-organizing neur al network model for a mecha- nism of pattern recognition unaﬀected by shift in position. Biological cybernetics, 36(4): 193–202, 1980. Li Gao and Weiguo Zhang. Weighted moving average passive agg ressive algorithm for online portfolio selection. In Intelligent Human-Machine Systems and Cybernetics (IHMSC), 2013 5th International Conference on , volume 1, pages 327–330. IEEE, 2013. Reuben Grinberg. Bitcoin: An innovative alternative digit al currency. Hastings Sci. & Tech. LJ, 4:159, 2012. L´ aszl´ o Gy¨ orﬁ, G´ abor Lugosi, and Frederic Udina. Nonparametric kernel-based sequential investment strategies. Mathematical Finance, 16(2):337–357, 2006. Robert A Haugen. Modern investment theory . Prentice Hall, 1986. J. B. Heaton, N. G. Polson, and Jan Hendrik Witte. Deep learni ng for ﬁnance: deep portfolios. Applied Stochastic Models in Business and Industry , 2016. ISSN 1526-4025. doi: 10.1002/ASMB.2209. URL http://www.ssrn.com/abstract=2838013. David P Helmbold, Robert E Schapire, Yoram Singer, and Manfr ed K Warmuth. On-line portfolio selection using multiplicative updates. Mathematical Finance , 8(4):325–347, 1998. Sepp Hochreiter and J¨ urgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term m emory. Neural computation, 9(8):1735–1780, 1997. Charles C Holt. Forecasting seasonals and trends by exponen tially weighted moving aver- ages. International journal of forecasting , 20(1):5–10, 2004. Dingjiang Huang, Junlong Zhou, Bin Li, Steven CH Hoi, and Shu igeng Zhou. Robust median reversion strategy for on-line portfolio selection . In IJCAI, pages 2006–2012, 2013. Zhengyao Jiang and Jinjun Liang. Cryptocurrency portfolio management with deep rein- forcement learning. In Proceedings of 2017 Intelligent Systems Conference . SAI Confer- ences, 2017. Preprint: arXiv:1612.01277 [cs.LG]. J. L. Kelly. A new interpretation of information rate. The Bell System Technical Journal , 35(4):917–926, July 1956. ISSN 0005-8580. doi: 10.1002/j. 1538-7305.1956.tb03809.x. Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic O ptimization. In- ternational Conference on Learning Representations , pages 1–13, dec 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980. 28 Deep Portfolio Management Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoﬀrey E Hinton. Image net classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 1097–1105, 2012. Louis Leithold. The calculus 7 . HarperCollins College Publishing, 1996. B Li, D Sahoo, and SCH Hoi. Olps: A toolbox for online portfoli o selection. Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR) , 2015a. Bin Li and Steven CH Hoi. Online portfolio selection: A surve y. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 46(3):35, 2014. Bin Li, Steven CH Hoi, and Vivekanand Gopalkrishnan. Corn: C orrelation-driven non- parametric learning approach for portfolio selection. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST) , 2(3):21, 2011. Bin Li, Peilin Zhao, Steven C. H. Hoi, and Vivekanand Gopalkr ishnan. PAMR: Pas- sive aggressive mean reversion strategy for portfolio sele ction. Machine Learning , 87(2):221–258, may 2012. ISSN 08856125. doi: 10.1007/s109 94-012-5281-z. URL http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s10994-012-5281-z . Bin Li, Steven CH Hoi, Peilin Zhao, and Vivekanand Gopalkris hnan. Conﬁdence weighted mean reversion strategy for online portfolio selection. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD) , 7(1):4, 2013. Bin Li, Steven CH Hoi, Doyen Sahoo, and Zhi-Yong Liu. Moving a verage reversion strategy for on-line portfolio selection. Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 222:104–123, 2015b. Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jonathan J. Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa, David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous Control with Deep Reinforcement Learning. arXiv, 2016. ISSN 1935-8237. doi: 10.1561/2200000006. Andrew W Lo, Harry Mamaysky, and Jiang Wang. Foundations of t echnical analysis: Com- putational algorithms, statistical inference, and empiri cal implementation. The journal of ﬁnance , 55(4):1705–1770, 2000. Malik Magdon-Ismail and Amir F Atiya. Maximum drawdown. Risk Magazine , 17(1): 99–102, 2004. Harry M Markowitz. Portfolio selection: eﬃcient diversiﬁcation of investmen ts, volume 16. Yale university press, 1968. Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K. Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen, Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioa nnis Antonoglou, He- len King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wierstra, Shane Legg, and D emis Hass- abis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement lear ning. Nature, 518 (7540):529–533, feb 2015. ISSN 0028-0836. doi: 10.1038/na ture14236. URL http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/nature14236http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature14236. 29 Jiang, Xu and Liang Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Ale x Graves, Timothy Lill- icrap, Tim Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asy nchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1928–1937, 2016. J. Moody and M. Saﬀell. Learning to trade via direct reinforce ment. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks , 12(4):875–889, Jul 2001. ISSN 1045-9227. doi: 10.1109/72 .935097. John Moody, Lizhong Wu, Yuansong Liao, and Matthew Saﬀell. Pe rformance functions and reinforcement learning for trading systems and portfolios . Journal of Forecasting, 17(56): 441–470, 1998. Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system, 2008. Seyed Taghi Akhavan Niaki and Saeid Hoseinzade. Forecastin g S&P 500 index using artiﬁcial neural networks and design of experiments. Journal of Industrial Engineer- ing International , 9(1):1, 2013. ISSN 2251-712X. doi: 10.1186/2251-712X-9- 1. URL http://www.jiei-tsb.com/content/9/1/1. Mih´ aly Ormos and Andr´ as Urb´ an. Performance analysis of log-optimal portfolio strategies with transaction costs. Quantitative Finance , 13(10):1587–1597, 2013. L Christopher G Rogers and Stephen E Satchell. Estimating va riance from high, low and closing prices. The Annals of Applied Probability , pages 504–512, 1991. Walter Rudin. Principles of mathematical analysis . McGraw-Hill New York, 3 edition, 1976. ISBN 9780070856134. Pierre Sermanet, Soumith Chintala, and Yann LeCun. Convolu tional neural networks ap- plied to house numbers digit classiﬁcation. In Pattern Recognition (ICPR), 2012 21st International Conference on , pages 3288–3291. IEEE, 2012. William F Sharpe. Capital asset prices: A theory of market eq uilibrium under conditions of risk. The journal of ﬁnance , 19(3):425–442, 1964. William F Sharpe. The sharpe ratio. The journal of portfolio management , 21(1):49–58, 1994. David Silver, Guy Lever, Nicolas Heess, Thomas Degris, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Ried- miller. Deterministic Policy Gradient Algorithms. Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-14) , pages 387–395, 2014. David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laur ent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering the game of go with deep neural netw orks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016. Volodya Vovk and Chris Watkins. Universal portfolio select ion. In Proceedings of the eleventh annual conference on Computational learning theor y, pages 12–23. ACM, 1998. 30 Deep Portfolio Management Paul J Werbos. Generalization of backpropagation with appl ication to a recurrent gas market model. Neural networks, 1(4):339–356, 1988. 31