arXiv:1708.07047v1 [q-fin.TR] 8 Aug 2017 Behind the price: on the role of agent’s reﬂexivity in ﬁnancial market microstructure ∗ Paolo Barucca 1 and Fabrizio Lillo 2 1. Department of Banking and Finance, University of Zurich, S witzerland 2. Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa, Pisa, Italy August 24, 2017 Abstract In this chapter we review some recent results on the dynamics of price formation in ﬁnancial markets and its relations with the eﬃc ient market hypothesis. Speciﬁcally, we present the limit order book me chanism for markets and we introduce the concepts of market impact and or der ﬂow, presenting their recently discovered empirical propertie s and discussing some possible interpretation in terms of agent’s strategie s. Our analysis conﬁrms that quantitative analysis of data is crucial to val idate qualitative hypothesis on investors’ behavior in the regulated environ ment of order placement and to connect these micro-structural behaviors to the proper- ties of the collective dynamics of the system as a whole, such for instance market eﬃciency. Finally we discuss the relation between so me of the described properties and the theory of reﬂexivity proposin g that in the process of price formation positive and negative feedback l oops between the cognitive and manipulative function of agents are prese nt. ∗Authors acknowledge partial support by the grant SNS13LILL B ”Systemic risk in ﬁnancial markets across time scales”. 1 Introduction Understanding price movements, both their origin and their proper ties, is one of the most important challenges in economics. In Finance this proble m has a long history which has seen two antagonist schools of thought conf ronting in the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century. On one side there were the fun damentalists who posited that the price of an asset is the discounted value of its ” intrinsic” or ”fundamental” value and equals the discounted cash ﬂow which th at security gives title to. On the other side there were the econometricians, wh o, apply- ing statistical analyses to empirical time series of prices discovered that stock prices develop patterns that look like those of a random walk. The lat ter is the time series that can be obtained, for example, by tossing a coin and m oving up (down) the price by one unit when the outcome is head (tail). The e rratic and random behavior of prices seemed to clash with the fundamenta list view and seemed to give support to those believing that stock market is e ssentially a casino. By using the words of LeRoy ”If stock prices were pattern less, was there any point to fundamental analysis?”. It is well known that the solut ion to this problem was given by the seminal 1965 paper by Paul Samuelson ”Pro of that Properly Anticipated Prices Fluctuate Randomly” (even if Bachelier 1 900 and Cowles 1933 arrived to somewhat similar conclusions). Samuelson sho wed that in an informationally eﬃcient market, i.e. a market which fully incorpora tes the expectations and information of all market participants, price changes must be unforecastable. This is the celebrated Eﬃcient Market Hypothe sis (EMH), a cornerstone of modern Finance, which reconciles the fundamenta list and econo- metrician view. However the details of how information is impounded into price are still a matter of debate, as well as the question of whether markets ar e truly eﬃ- cient. Market microstructure is devoted to the empirical and theo retical study of how information (private or public) is incorporated into price and h ow price is formed through the action of many interacting agents. Given the importance of the problem (even outside Finance, think for example to the new m arkets for advertisement on search engines in the Internet), the increasing availability of high resolution data, and the signiﬁcant changes observed in the or ganization of markets, market microstructure has experienced a large deve lopment in the last ﬁfteen years. In this paper we review the problem of price form ation from a microstructure point of view focusing on how strategies are slowly translated into orders in the market. We do not aim to be exhaustive, but to high light the main elements which have recently emerged in the ﬁeld, trying to a void as much as possible technicalities and the use of mathematical forma lism. In the last part of the paper we will discuss about possible analogies and relations between the newly discovered properties of price formation and th e theory of social reﬂexivity, proposed, among others, by George Soros. The contribution is divided in four sections. In the ﬁrst section we pr esent the eﬃcient market hypothesis, the concept of market impact, an d we describe a widespread market mechanism, namely the limit order book. In the s econd section we present the order ﬂow and describe one important prop erties, its long 2 memory, which allows us to understand the strategy of order splitt ing followed by large investors. In this section we also discuss how the long memor y of order ﬂow can be reconciled with eﬃcient market hypothesis. In the third s ection we review Soros’ theory of social reﬂexivity and ﬁnally in the last sectio n we outline our interpretation of empirical results in the context of social reﬂ exivity. 1 Market impact and the limit order book The market is where supply and demand meet, that is where buyers a nd sellers exchange goods. The eﬃcient-market hypothesis (EMH) states [1 , 2] that stock market eﬃciency implies existing share prices to always incorporate a nd reﬂect all relevant information. According to EMH, any information in the ha nd of an investor on the future value of an assets should thus be instant aneously incorporated into the price. This occurs through the choice of the strategy the investor chooses to trade the asset. The trading strategy can b e seen as the medium that translate information into price changes. Loosely spea king market impact refers to the correlation between an incoming order or strategy ( to buy or to sell) and the subsequent price change. The strategy can be c oded in the series of orders to buy or to sell, which are sent to the market. The order ﬂow is the aggregation of the orders of all the agents (or a subset of t hem). However, the causal relation between trading strategies (or ord er ﬂow) and price changes is far from trivial and at least three explanations for this correla- tion (i.e. the existence of market impact) can be given • Agents successfully forecast short term price movements and tr ade ac- cordingly. This does result in measurable correlation between trade s and price changes, even if the trades by themselves have absolutely no eﬀect on prices at all. If an agent correctly forecasts price movements a nd if the price is about to rise, the agent is likely to buy in anticipation of it. According to this explanation, trades with no information content h ave no price impact. • The impact of trades reveals some private information. The arrival of new private information causes trades, which cause other agents to u pdate their valuations, leading to a price change. But if trades are anonymous a nd there is no easy way to distinguish informed traders from non inform ed traders, then all trades must impact the price since other agents believe that at least of fraction of these trades contains some private inf ormation, but cannot decide which ones. • Impact is a purely statistical eﬀect. Imagine for example a complete ly random order ﬂow process, that leads to a certain order book dyn amics. Conditional to an extra buy order, the price will on average move up if everything else is kept constant. Fluctuations in supply and deman d may be completely random, unrelated to information, but a well deﬁn ed 3 Figure 1.1: The typical structure of an order book. [3] notion of price impact still emerges. In this case impact is a completely mechanical - or better, statistical - phenomenon. The distinction between these three scenarios is not fully understo od. In order to discriminate among these alternatives, it is useful to spec ialize into a concrete case, since markets have diﬀerent structures and rule s. In other words, one way to address this problem in a quantitative fashion is through d ynamical models of market microstructure, which are based on a speciﬁc, ’int ernalist’, knowledge of what kind of orders can be placed by investors and wha t is their dynamics. Here we will focus on the limit order book, a very common mechanism adopted in most electronic markets. In a limit order book market, an agent (or an intermediary acting on her behalf) can place two types of orders 1, namely limit and market orders: • Limit orders are orders to buy or sell a given volume of shares at a sp eciﬁed price or better. • Market orders are orders placed to buy or sell an investment immed iately at the best available current price. The best buy and sell order on the market are called ask and bid resp ectively and their diﬀerence is the bid-ask spread. Buy (sell) limit orders with a pric e lower (higher) than the ask (bid) do not initiate a transaction and are sto red, visible to other market participants, waiting for the price moving in their dir ection. An agent can decide to cancel a limit order at any time. Figure 1 shows a s napshot of a real order book. Orders are not typically placed directly by individual investors, mutu al funds or hedge funds: all these economic agents need to ask intermediar ies to place 1Even though various ﬁnancial markets may have more kinds of s lightly diﬀerent orders, these are the two main types- 4 orders of given volumes of various stocks on their behalf. Other su bjects that can place orders in the market are market makers who act as interm ediaries for the market as a whole: they continuously place orders in the ord er book so to provide ’liquidity’ to the market, that is to give investors the chan ce to buy and sell anytime at their will. Market makers take risks by buying and s elling countercurrent but make proﬁt through the bid-ask spread. Market impact arises for two reasons. The ﬁrst is purely mechanica l. A market order with a volume larger than or equal the volume at the op posite best (the bid for a sell market order and the ask for a buy market o rder) will move mechanically the price, increasing the spread and therefore t he mid price 2. Notice that even an uninformed trade moves mechanically the price a nd there is no relation between information of the trade and price movement (s ee the third explanation in the bulleted list above). This is even reinforced by the f act that electronic markets are typically anonymous and there is no way of kn owing the identity of the counterpart. The second possible origin of market impact is due to the reaction of t he rest of the market to the trade. Even if the market order does not mov e mechanically the price, the other agents might react to the observation of the trade, revising the price of their limit orders and thus moving the price. As we will see b elow, the induced market impact plays an important role. In general, the m ore liquid is the market, i.e. the more limit orders are present in the order book then the lower is the market impact and the less a single investor can induce larg e price changes. A number of empirical studies [5, 12, 13] has established that mark et impact, both mechanical and induced, is statistically diﬀerent from zero (de spite being quite noisy). This means that buy (sell) market orders move on aver age the price upward (downward). Generically it is found that the larger the volume of the trade the larger on average the price change and the depende nce between these two quantities is strongly concave. In simple words this means that if the volume of a market order is doubled, the price impact is signiﬁcantly les s than doubled. The fact that even uninformed trades can change the pr ice (again, also because it is almost impossible that the market understands quic kly if the trader is informed or not) raises several interesting questions on the relation between information and price changes and therefore on the Eﬃcie nt Market Hypothesis. Anticipating the discussion we will do later in this paper, it suggests the presence of positive feedback loops, where an uninformed tra de transiently impacts price, but the other market participants, being unable to d iscern if the trade is informed or not, revise their valuation of the asset and tra de concur- rently, creating more price change in the direction of the random init iator trade. This ampliﬁcation mechanism resembles the reﬂexivity hypothesis (se e below for more details). 2Note also that if market order volume is smaller than or equal to the volume at the opposite best, the order is executed at the best price; on the other hand if its volume exceeds the volume of the opposite best in the order book, then it pene trates the book and reaches the second best price or more. In this case the price is a weigh ted average over the various limit orders that are needed to execute the market order. 5 Note that all the above analysis is static, i.e. it refers to the contem poraneous relation between trades and price changes. An important aspect t o elucidate better the process with which markets understand if a trade is info rmed or not and how the information (or the lack thereof) is incorporated into p rice requires an inter-temporal analysis, investigating how the orders arrive to the market sequentially in time and how they impact the price. Next Section discus ses some recent ﬁndings in this direction. 2 The long memory of the market In the last ten years there have been major eﬀorts to understan d investors behaviors through detailed modeling and data-analysis. A signiﬁcant amount of the literature has been devoted to analyze data on order books of real ﬁnancial markets, [4, 5]. In particular we review here the empirical propertie s of order ﬂow and its consequences for the modeling and understanding of ma rket impact. Understanding the inter-temporal properties of the order ﬂow is quite chal- lenging. This is due to the intrinsic multi dimensional structure (each type of order is a diﬀerent variable) whose properties depend on the curre nt state of the book, which in turn is the result of the past order ﬂow. The orde r ﬂow and limit order book modeling is still an open problem and new models and empirical results are continuously proposed. Here we focus on a small but important subset of the order ﬂow. Sp eciﬁ- cally we shall consider the ﬂow of market orders (hence the orders triggering a transaction) and we discard the information on the volume of the or der, focus- ing only on its sign. The sign ǫ(t) of the t-th trade is equal to +1 for a buy order and − 1 for a sell order. Thus the binary time series of +1 and − 1 is the simplest encoding of the dynamics of supply and demand for a given as set. One important question is what are the time autocorrelation properties of such time series. Technically speaking the autocorrelation function of the sig ns ǫ(t) is the expectation (or the mean) of the product of two transaction sign s separated by τ transactions. For a totally random sequence (for example the one obtained by tossing a coin), this function is equal to zero for all τ s because the occurrence of a head now does not give any information about the likelihood that a he ad or a tail will occur τ tosses in the future. The autocorrelation function is therefore related to the predictability of trade signs. A series of papers in the last ten years have shown [6, 7, 8] that in th e vast majority of ﬁnancial markets the autocorrelation function of the order ﬂow is a slowly decaying function of the lag τ , well described by a form τ − γ, where γ is an exponent empirically found to be between 0 and 1. These kind of pr ocesses are called long memory processes because it can be shown that they lack a typical time scale beyond which the process appears to be random. In other words the present state of the system is determined by the whole p ast history of the process. The exponent γ measures the memory of the process, which is slowly decaying for large τ . It is possible to quantify this slowness from the empirical order ﬂow auto-covariance: the smaller the exponents, the slower the 6 decay. This slowness is commonly interpreted and quantiﬁed throug h the Hurst exponent H. In the case of random diﬀusion, where no memory is present and order signs are drawn randomly with equal probability at each time-s tep, the Hurst exponent is 1 /2. For long-memory processes H is larger than 1 /2, as it is for the the order ﬂow so that the it can be regarded as a super-diﬀ usive process, where ﬂuctuations grows with time through an exponent larger tha n 1 /2. The result is very robust and it has been checked independently by d iﬀerent research groups and with diﬀerent statistical methods. The obse rved values of H vary across markets but they alway remain larger than 1 /2. Long-memory processes have been observed also in the dynamic behavior of othe r ﬁnancial variables: volatility of prices and trading volume have been recognize d as long- memory processes [10]. The observation of long memory of order ﬂow raises two interesting ques- tions: (i) what is the behavioral origin for the sign persistence in the order ﬂow and (ii) how is it possible to reconcile the predictable order ﬂows with ma rket eﬃciency (i.e. unpredictability of price changes). The present explanations for long-memory fall into two classes: th e ﬁrst is that the long memory of the order ﬂow holds for each investor and it links the persistence in the order ﬂow with the presence of large meta-o rders that are splitted in subsequent small orders of the same sign; the secon d class of explanations calls into question collective behaviors of investors imita ting each other [11]. Evidence gathered so far seems to favor the ﬁrst class of explanations, in particular data show that large investors do split and execute the ir orders. Furthermore predictions concerning the relation between trade v olumes, market impact and order ﬂow are in agreement with the ﬁrst type of explana tions [9]. The presence of meta-orders is indeed a simple and clear explanation for long-memory in the order book. Let us consider an investor that ha s to execute a large trade and who does not want to inﬂuence the price abruptly. Instead of placing directly a big market order that would penetrate the orde r book and reach limit order at strongly unfavorable prices, the investor pref ers to split the meta-order and both gain the chance not to inﬂuence the market a nd to get better prices if on average other investors are not following the sa me strategy. The other important question is how the long memory of order ﬂow is c on- sistent with EMH. Since a buy (sell) trade moves the price upward (do wnward) a persistent order ﬂow sign time series would induce a persistent pric e change time series. This means that by observing that recent past price ch anges were, for example, typically positive one could predict that in the near futu re the price will move up. This (hypothetical) predictability would allow to make easy proﬁts and is inconsistent with EMH and with empirical observation. A possible solution of this apparent paradox is the asymmetric liquidity mechanism [9]. According to it the price impact of a trade depends on t he pre- dictability of its sign. For example, if past trades were typically buys, implying that the next trade is more likely a buy than a sell, the asymmetric liquid ity postulates that if the more predictable event (the buy) actually oc curs, it will impact the price less than if the less likely event (the sell) occurs. In o ther words the price change is not ﬁxed, but it is history dependent and adapts itself to the 7 level of predictability of its source (the order ﬂow). The asymmetric liquidity mechanism has been veriﬁed empirically [9] and its microscopic origin has been explored and elucidated in [18]. In this las t paper it has been shown that agents executing incrementally a large order by splitting it in a large number of trades adjust the size of these trade s in order to minimize their impact on price. This adjustment becomes stronger an d stronger as the execution proceeds. In other words investors decide their strategy exactly because they are conscious of their impact on price. Finally, it has be en shown that this mechanism is able to reconcile the long memory of the order ﬂ ow with the uncorrelated price change time series. In conclusion, the splitting of metaorders and its detection from th e rest of the market is critical to understand the dynamics of price in ﬁnancia l markets. From a strategic point of view, the origin of splitting has been explaine d and motivated theoretically in the seminal work of Kyle [15]: the optimal st rategy for an investor with private information about the future price of a n asset is to trade incrementally through time. This strategy allows earlier exe cutions to be made at better prices and minimizes execution cost. Moreover th is strategy minimizes the information leakage, i.e. it allows the trader to hide her int ention (and information). This strategy can be seen as a diﬀerent form of reﬂexivity. In fact the purpose of splitting is to modify, with the action of tradin g and the impact it generates, the beliefs of the other market participants. Diﬀerently from the impact case described in the previous section, here this form of interaction between action and beliefs creates a negative feedback. In the ne xt two Sections we discuss in more detail the relations between these empirical fact s and the theory of reﬂexivity. 3 Theory of social reﬂexivity In social systems agents do not merely observe but also actively pa rticipate in the system themselves, this is the simple observation leading to reﬂ exivity theory in social sciences. Soros ﬁrst exposed his theory in his book The Alchemy of Finance in 1987 where he builds his conceptual framework on two principles. The ﬁrst one is the principle of fallibility: in social systems the participa nts’ views and consequently their perspectives are always biased, incon sistent, or both. Human beings are utterly familiar with the principle of fallibility that af- fects all aspects of human life, from perception to action. Fallibility is strictly connected to the world complexity; social facts are so complex that cannot be perceived and understood completely and thus they require a simpliﬁ cation that introduces biases and inconsistencies in our understanding. But fa llibility is not just about perception. If we interpret fallibility as the inability of a human being to elaborate an optimal response in a given social situation then we can distinguish diﬀerent causes of fallibility: (i) A subjective cognition fallibility: we are unable to act in the best possible way because we perceive our situation in a subject ive and in- 8 complete fashion; (ii) a general cognition fallibility: we perceive the sit uation of all the other social agents in a subjective and incomplete fashion; ( iii) a manip- ulative fallibility: even assuming a perfect perception of the system s ituation, we can act in a wrong way. The second is the principle of reﬂexivity: the imperfect views of part icipants can inﬂuence the situation to which they relate through their action s. In par- ticular Soros gives [16] this speciﬁc example: ”if investors believe tha t markets are eﬃcient then that belief will change the way they invest, which in t urn will change the nature of the markets in which they are participating (t hough not necessarily making them more eﬃcient).” The role of reﬂexivity can be described with a circle of social actions, all aﬀected by fallibility: the social agent perceives a given situation, fo rmulates an interpretation, decides a strategy, and ﬁnally acts but by actin g she changes the situation so that the act might no longer have the same eﬀect th at was hypothesized at ﬁrst. This circle can generate two kinds of feedback loops, negative or po sitive. Negative feedback loops of participants’ actions can stabilize the s ystem, in the sense that the situation of the system becomes more and more similar to the participants’ perceptions thanks to their actions, thus helpin g to reach an equilibrium. Conversely positive feedback loops destabilize the system, since pa rticipants’ perceptions and the real situation of the system diﬀer bringing the system far from equilibrium towards an eventual sudden change, e.g. the case of bubbles and crashes in ﬁnancial markets. Indeed ﬁnancial markets are excellent and proﬁtable laboratories to test reﬂexivity theory, and cases of positive feedback loops are invest igated in [5]. In the next section we will discuss some of the previously described p roperties of the price formation mechanism, market impact in the order book a nd order splitting, as examples of reﬂexivity where positive and negative feed back loops might play a major role. 4 Discussion on reﬂexivity and price formation In the ﬁrst two sections we have given a general introduction and a speciﬁc description of the intriguing phenomenology of price formation in ﬁna ncial mar- kets, limit order books, market impact, and order ﬂow. We have disc ussed the possible origin of market impact, and the still open issue of its cause. We have also presented the properties of order ﬂow, i.e. the dynamics of su pply and de- mand arriving into the market. We have presented the long-memory property of order ﬂow and explained it as a consequence of the splitting of met a-orders by investors. Furthermore we have shown how the dependence of market im- pact from trade predictability can explain the coexistence of long-m emory in the order ﬂow and the fast decay of autocorrelation of price changes . Even if the description is by necessity short and synthetic, we hope that we co nvinced the readers that the process of price formation is interesting and still not fully under- 9 stood. It is obviously at the heart of many economic (and not neces sarily only ﬁnancial) phenomena and has a signiﬁcant number of practical cons equences. In the text we have also proposed some analogies between the some elements of price formation and the theory of social reﬂexivity (reviewed in S ection 3). The decisions of investors in ﬁnancial markets depend on their belief s on the traded assets and clearly price plays an important role of signal in th is cognitive activity of agents. However price is aﬀected, via market impact, by the decision of the investors and this creates the simultaneous presence of th e manipulative and the cognitive function of humans, a key condition, according to Soros, for social reﬂexivity [16, 9]. We therefore believe that (ﬁnancial) marke t microstruc- ture is a perfect playground for studying reﬂexivity and understa nding feedback loops between these two functions. More in detail, in this chapter we have sketched two possible mechanis ms for reﬂexivity in price formation. The ﬁrst is at the core of microstr ucture, since it concerns the origin of market impact. In fact, price moves in response to informed trades, but, at least on the short term, it moves also m echanically as a consequence of trading orders. Since other market participa nts cannot discern informed trades, also uninformed trades are able to move t he price. This manipulative function modiﬁes the cognitive activity of the other market participants, who revise their valuation of the asset as a conseque nce of the impact of a (possibly uninformed) trade. This process creates a po sitive feedback loop where small price ﬂuctuations, even when generated by uninfo rmed trades, can be ampliﬁed by the activity of reﬂexive agents, and this process can create price bubbles or short term large price ﬂuctuations. The second mechanism for reﬂexivity is related to the activity of ord er split- ting. We have seen that, in consequence of the small liquidity presen t in ﬁnancial markets and of the existence of market impact, investors who wan t to trade large quantities split their orders in small pieces and trade them increment ally over periods of time ranging from few minutes to several days. Other ag ents con- tinuously monitor the ﬂow of orders arriving to the market with the o bjective of identifying such splitting activities. This is because (i) the splitting a ctivity of a large investor can signal her information on the future value of the price and (ii) knowing that a large investor is unloading an order gives the op portu- nity of front loading the investor, i.e. trading quickly with the hope to be the counterpart of the large investor in the future (and realizing a pro ﬁt). Also in this case there are several interactions between the cognitive an d manipulative functions of the agents. The large investor has a belief on the futu re price of an asset and through her trading moves the price in that direction. The other agents monitor the price and the order ﬂow, learning the presence of a large investor and her belief on the price. Through their trading activity t hey modify the price pattern which in turn can modify the beliefs of other agent s (and even of the splitting strategy of the large trader). The two mechanisms presented here are clearly not exhaustive of t he possi- ble role of reﬂexivity in price formation and market microstructure. One of the lessons that can be learnt from this type of analysis is that the know ledge and modeling of the detailed mechanism through which agents interact is c ritical to 10 understand some of the most important processes in economics an d interaction of social agents. The second is that quantitative analysis of data is fundamen- tal to validate qualitative hypothesis on investors’ behavior in the m arket, to connect these micro-structural behaviors to market eﬃciency, and to formulate new hypotheses about the founding features of social systems. References [1] Fama, Eugene F. Market eﬃciency, long-term returns, and beh avioral ﬁ- nance. Journal of ﬁnancial economics 49, no. 3 (1998): 283-306 . [2] Fama, Eugene F. Eﬃcient capital markets: A review of theory an d empir- ical work*. The journal of Finance 25, no. 2 (1970): 383-417. [3] London Stock Exchange Group website [http://www.lseg.com]. [4] Bouchaud, Jean-Philippe, Yuval Gefen, Marc Potters, and Mat thieu Wyart. Fluctuations and response in ﬁnancial markets: the subtle nature of ‘random’price changes. Quantitative Finance 4, no. 2 (2004): 17 6-190. [5] Farmer, J. Doyne, Austin Gerig, Fabrizio Lillo, and Henri Waelbroe ck. How eﬃciency shapes market impact. Quantitative Finance 13, no. 11 (2 013): 1743-1758. [6] Farmer, J. Doyne, and Fabrizio Lillo. On the origin of power-law tails in price ﬂuctuations. Quantitative Finance 4, no. 1 (2004): 7-11. [7] Lillo, Fabrizio, Szabolcs Mike, and J. Doyne Farmer. Theory for lon g mem- ory in supply and demand. Physical Review E 71, no. 6 (2005): 06612 2. [8] Bouchaud, Jean-Philippe, J. Doyne Farmer, and Fabrizio Lillo. How mar- kets slowly digest changes in supply and demand. Fabrizio, How Marke ts Slowly Digest Changes in Supply and Demand (September 11, 2008) (2 008). [9] Lillo, Fabrizio, and J. Doyne Farmer. The long memory of the eﬃcien t market. Studies in nonlinear dynamics & econometrics 8, no. 3 (2004 ). [10] Cont, Rama. Empirical properties of asset returns: stylized f acts and sta- tistical issues. (2001): 223-236. [11] LeBaron, Blake, and Ryuichi Yamamoto. Long-memory in an ord er-driven market. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 383, n o. 1 (2007): 85-89. [12] Zarinelli, Elia, Michele Treccani, J. Doyne Farmer, Fabrizio Lillo, Bey ond the square root: Evidence for logarithmic dependence of market im pact on size and participation rate, Market Microstructure and Liquidity 1, 1550004 (2015) 11 [13] Toth, Bence, Yves Lemperiere, Cyril Deremble, Joachim De Lat aillade, Julien Kockelkoren, and J-P. Bouchaud. Anomalous price impact and the critical nature of liquidity in ﬁnancial markets. Physical Review X 1, n o. 2 (2011): 021006. [14] Farmer, J. Doyne, Paolo Patelli, and Ilija I. Zovko. The predictiv e power of zero intelligence in ﬁnancial markets. Proceedings of the National A cademy of Sciences of the United States of America 102, no. 6 (2005): 225 4-2259. [15] A S. Kyle, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometric a, pp. 1315-1335, 1985. [16] Soros, George. Fallibility, reﬂexivity, and the human uncertaint y principle. Journal of Economic Methodology 20, no. 4 (2013): 309-329. [17] Soros, George. The alchemy of ﬁnance. John Wiley & Sons, 2003 . [18] Taranto, Damian Eduardo, Giacomo Bormetti and Fabrizio Lillo, T he adaptive nature of liquidity taking in limit order books. Journal of Sta - tistical Mechanics P06002 (2014). 12