Nonlinear price impact from linear models Felix Patzelt 1, 2,∗ and Jean-Philippe Bouchaud 1 1Capital Fund Management, 23 rue de l’Universit´ e, 75007, Paris, France 2Supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft The impact of trades on asset prices is a crucial aspect of market dynamics for academics, regula- tors and practitioners alike. Recently, universal and highly nonlinear master curves were observed for price impacts aggregated on all intra-day scales [1]. Here we investigate how well these curves, their scaling, and the underlying return dynamics are captured by linear “propagator” models. We ﬁnd that the classiﬁcation of trades as price-changing versus non-price-changing can explain the price impact nonlinearities and short-term return dynamics to a very high degree. The explanatory power provided by the change indicator in addition to the order sign history increases with increas- ing tick size. To obtain these results, several long-standing technical issues for model calibration and -testing are addressed. We present new spectral estimators for two- and three-point cross- correlations, removing the need for previously used approximations. We also show when calibration is unbiased and how to accurately reveal previously overlooked biases. Therefore, our results con- tribute signiﬁcantly to understanding both recent empirical results and the properties of a popular class of impact models. CONTENTS I. Introduction 1 II. The Data 2 III. The Models 3 IV. Calibration results 4 A. Time series inspection 4 B. Systematic performance comparison 4 C. Explaining impact scaling functions 5 D. Diﬀusivity and Signature Plots 5 V. Discussion 7 Acknowledgments 9 References 9 Appendices 9 A. Propagator model calibration 9 B. Spectral estimation of two- and three-point cross-correlations 10 1. Proof of the triple cross-correlation estimator 10 2. Averaging and zero-padding ﬁnite discrete-time signals 11 C. Kernels and Responses 11 D. Model impact curves for 30 instruments 12 ∗ felix@neuro.uni-bremen.de I. INTRODUCTION According to economic theory, prices should reﬂect in- formation. In practice, price formation takes place during trading, which presumably contributes to incorporating said information into the price [2–4]. Empirically, buying or selling an asset tends to push prices up or down [5, 6]. For active market participants like large institutions, this price impact contributes signiﬁcantly to total transaction costs. Despite its importance, however, price impact is not yet fully understood. In modern electronic markets, prices are formed in a continuous double auction via a Limit-Order Book (LOB). Traders can either submit limit orders to buy or sell a certain volume at a ﬁxed price or market or- ders that get executed immediately at the best available price. Limit orders provide liquidity by ﬁlling the book with oﬀers that are executed at a later point in time. Market orders take liquidity by triggering transactions that remove existing oﬀers from the book. Because the immediately available liquidity at a cer- tain price is limited, trades with large volumes are typ- ically fragmented. Such a sequence of incrementally ex- ecuted transactions following a single decision to trade a large volume is called a metaorder. It has been sug- gested that the execution of metaorders is responsible for a peculiar observation: the signs of market orders (buy: ϵ = +1, sell: ϵ =−1) are positively correlated over long periods of time [6]. Here, we investigate four models, three of which were originally introduced to rec- oncile these long-ranged order sign correlations with price returns being almost diﬀusive (ﬁrst-order uncorrelated). Our main objective, however, is to test their consistency with some very recent empirical ﬁndings. In [1], we revisited the question how N subsequent trades impact the price. We found a universal sigmoidal shape for the expected return conditioned on the volume imbalance. That is, the diﬀerence between the volumes of all buy- and all sell-market-orders. These master curves arXiv:1708.02411v1 [q-fin.TR] 8 Aug 2017 2 were recovered by ﬁnding the proper rescaling with N, close to the Hurst exponents for the returns and order- signs. Moreover, the aggregate sign impact was found to have an sinusoidal shape: when the order ﬂow is strongly polarised in one direction, the expected return is close to zero [1]. This eﬀect was traced back to prices being pinned to a level where liquidity provision completely oﬀsets the extreme bias of the arriving market orders. In fact, the probability that a market order changes the mid-price was found to be a decreasing function of the magnitude of the order-sign bias. These results correct previous reports [6] that the highly concave single-trade impact became more linear on aggregation. Hence aggre- gate impact joins the well-known square-root impact of metaorders (see e.g. [7] and the references therein) as a challenge to linear impact models like the classical Kyle model [2]. In the present paper, we investigate the capability of four closely related models to reproduce these eﬀects. They received recent attention in the literature and be- long to a model class that is popular among practitioners. We consider the real (market-) order ﬂow as an exter- nal input and model its eﬀect on future returns. More precisely, we consider each trade t an event and char- acterise it by the sign ϵ(t) of the corresponding market order and a label π(t) indicating its event-type: price- changing (π(t) = c) or non-price-changing ( π(t) = n). The generation of synthetic order ﬂows is left for future work. As stated above, the original aim of three of the con- sidered models was to remove the strong correlations in- jected by the order ﬂow from the models’ output returns (see e.g. [8–10]). The underlying insight is that this would be impossible if the impact of a trade were per- manent and time-invariant. This led to the classiﬁcation as either Transient Impact Models (TIMs) or History De- pendent Impact Models (HDIMs). As we will see in their full deﬁnition in section III, however, all models express the return at timet as a linear combination of past order- signs ϵ(t′) by means of a convolution with one or several “propagator” kernels. The formal diﬀerences, which lie exclusively in the way the labelsπ(t′) inﬂuence each mod- els output, are actually more important for the purpose of this paper than their conventional interpretations. We furthermore introduce a Constant Impact Model (CIM), which only depends on the current state, as a limiting case. It can also be seen as a reduction of the Constant Gap Model [8] to two event types in trade time. Our main result is that the labelsπ are most important to model price impact. In fact, the HDIM2 reproduces all observations very well.1 This includes the detailed shape of the sigmoidal and sinusoidal impact functions and the signature plot, which quantiﬁes price diﬀusion for diﬀer- ent lags. This agreement is made possible thanks to a 1 The suﬃx “2” indicates that this model uses two input signals new, exact calibration procedure that requires the esti- mation of 3-point correlation functions. In contrast, pre- vious work on HDIMs used an approximation involving 2-point correlations, which may lead to spurious conclu- sions. The CIM2 performs almost as well as the HDIM2 for some observables, but exhibits long-term superdiﬀusive prices especially for small-tick instruments. The TIMs, on the other hand, fare quite well for small-tick sizes, but exhibit severe problems when the tick size is increased. Analysing how the models’ performances depend on the available information allows us to develop a detailed un- derstanding of the factors determining aggregate price impact. II. THE DATA We used the same data set as in [1]: • 12 technology stocks on the US primary NASDAQ market, for the years 2011 to 2016. This includes some of the most traded stocks in the world like Apple (AAPL) and Microsoft (MSFT). • the 13 highest turnover stocks on NASDAQ OMX NORDIC (called just OMX in the following), which covers the Nordic markets Stockholm, Helsinki, and Copenhagen for October 2011 until end of Septem- ber 2015. OMX is the primary market for the se- lected stocks. • 6 futures on EUREX EBS (BOBL, BUND, DAX, EUROSTOXX, SCHATZ, SMI) for October 2014 until the end of 2015. and the same code for preprocessing and cleaning. The main features are summarised below; see [1] for further discussion. The sample oﬀers a wide range of structural diver- sity. We found that particularly the eﬀects of price- discretisation play an important role which can be quan- tiﬁed by the microstructural parameter [11, 12]: η := Nc 2Na (1) where Nc is the number of subsequent price movements in same direction (continuations) and Na the number of price-movements in alternating directions. It measures the eﬀect of discretisation of a diﬀusion process. η >0.5 corresponds to small-tick instruments and η < 0.5 to large-tick instruments. Prices on NASDAQ are discretised with a ﬁxed tick size of $0.01, which can be considered very small ( η = 0.73) to medium ( η = 0 .49) for the analysed stocks. Up to roughly one third of the transactions were executed against hidden liquidity. Orders are automatically routed to a diﬀerent market within the US when a better oﬀer 3 is available. On OMX, market fragmentation is typi- cally lower. Tick sizes vary with price and are eﬀectively larger (0.24≤ η≤ 0.50) than for NASDAQ. Here, hid- den liquidity represents a vanishingly small fraction of all traded volume. Finally, the EUREX futures are not traded on other platforms. Tick sizes vary between mod- erately large (η = 0.44) and extremely large (η = 0.03). We calculate price-returns r(t) = log m(t + 1)− logm(t) from the mid-prices m deﬁned as the average of the bid price and the ask price just before each trade. Order-signs were reconstructed by by labelling all trades above the mid-price as ϵ = +1 and all trades below as ϵ =−1. Trades exactly at the mid-price were discarded, as were obviously irregular entries such as transactions la- belled as irregular by the exchange or provider or entries with non-ﬁnite prices (including bid and ask). Transac- tions with the same sign and millisecond timestamp were merged. Finally, we constructed the event-type labels π(t) = { n if m(t + 1) =m(t) c else (2) to indicate whether a trade changed the mid-price. For each trading day, we analysed only trades be- tween 30 minutes after opening and before closing. Days with shortened trading-hours were discarded. Since we limited our study to intra-day data, ignoring overnight price changes, we calculated all statistics on a day-by- day basis and then averaged. Maximum lengths for bins, correlation- and kernel lags were chosen as the length of the shortest day for the respective instrument and time period. We used overlapping bins for the daily es- timates on longer days to avoid unnecessarily discard- ing data. We also simulated the models for each day separately, such that no information from the previ- ous day “spilled over”. Nevertheless, we also tested– where possible–calibration and simulation while treating all days as a single time series. We found only minor quantitative diﬀerences. III. THE MODELS Propagator models express the mid-price returnr(t) at timet as a linear combination of the previous order-signs ϵ(t′) at t′≤t, weighted by kernels that possibly depend on the corresponding event type π. The simplest case with only one kernel is the TIM1 [13] with rTIM1(t) := ∑ j≥0 g(j)ϵ(t−j) (3) where we call g the (diﬀerential) kernel or “propagator”. The TIM2 expresses returns as the sum of two convo- lutions: one with kernel gc for signs of price-changing events and another one with kernel gn for non-price- changing events: rTIM2(t) := ∑ π′ ∑ j≥0 gπ′(j) δπ(t−j)π′ ϵ(t−j) (4) where δ is the Kronecker delta and the ﬁrst sum runs over all considered event types π′ ∈{ n,c}. Note that non-zero rTIM2(t) are likely even when π(t) = n, since the decay of past events is always aﬀecting the price in this model. The HDIM2 mends this inconsistency by switching be- tween four kernels κπ′π′′ based also on the label of the latest event: rHDIM2(t) := ∑ π′′ δπ(t)π′′ ∑ π′ ∑ j≥0 κπ′π′′(j)δπ(t−j)π′ ϵ(t−j) (5) where κπ′π′′(j) := κπ′(j)δπ′′c ensures consistency with Eq. 2. In other words, zero returns for accordingly la- belled events are enforced by deﬁnition, eﬀectively allow- ing for only two kernels with ﬁnite coeﬃcients. Note that κπ′π′′(0) is only ever is used for π′ =π′′. Finally, we also consider the extreme simpliﬁcation rCIM2(t) := ∆cδπ(t)cϵ(t) (6) where ∆c is a constant. CIM2 stands for Constant Im- pact Model using two state variables. Note that the CIM2 is a limiting case of the HDIM2 where κπ′π′′(j)≡ ∆cδπ′′cδj 0. It can also be seen as a limiting case of the TIM2, but in contrast to the latter it is always consistent with the labels π. Furthermore, the TIM2 is recovered from the HDIM2 letting κπ′π′′≡ gπ′, dropping the sum over π′′. TIM1 is obtained from TIM2 for gπ′ = g. Therefore, TIM1 could alternatively be called HDIM1 since the TIM and HDIM “families” have the same one-kernel limit. Models with more than two kernels are discussed e.g. in [8]. Despite this formal similarity, transient and history- dependent impact models were previously interpreted quite diﬀerently. The conventional view of the TIMs is that Gπ(𝓁) = ∑𝓁 𝓁′=0gπ(𝓁′) is a transient response to a single trade that decays over time. It exactly counter- balances the order-sign correlations described in the in- troduction, such that returns become uncorrelated. The kernels κππ ′ in HDIMs, on the other hand, were seen as a means to a constant price impact of each trade that depends on the past order-ﬂow. In any case, all of the above models are, technically speaking, linear processes adapted to a ﬁltration of the order ﬂow. Therefore, without loss of generality, calling all model returns “predictions” seems appropriate in the context of this paper. 2 Each propagator model can be calibrated by solving a linear system of equations expressing the diﬀerential price response as the product of a correlation matrix and the desired kernel. The details are explained in appendix A. Previously, however, HDIMs were only ap- proximately calibrated by factorising three-point cross- correlations in terms of two-point cross-correlations. In 2 The inclusion of ex post facto labels might appear a bit strange at ﬁrst, but a clear interpretation is given in the discussion. 4 this work, we introduce a new method which is an extension of the convolution theorem: the full three- point cross-correlations are obtained by performing an inverse two-dimensional Fourier transform on the cross- bispectrum. A self-consistent description is found in ap- pendix B 1. We also calibrated the TIMs using highly eﬃ- cient spectral estimates for the correlations and response functions. We used a variation of Welch’s method by averaging over the cross-correlations calculated indepen- dently for each day as described in appendix B 2. Split- ting the time series is actually necessary for the HDIM2 for performance reasons, and also favourable for TIMs to improve the signal-to-noise ratio. In addition, it allows us to perform an out-of-sample analysis by using mod- els calibrated on odd days to predict the returns on even days and vice versa. Therefore, we can rule out deceptive results due to overﬁtting, which was not guaranteed in previous works. Furthermore, the TIM2 cannot be cali- brated without bias using standard methods, as we show in appendix C. We therefore adapt our analyses below to faithfully reveal these biases for the ﬁrst time. The CIM2 only has a single parameter ∆ c, which can even be omitted for all analyses of relative scales. Nev- ertheless, a useful estimate is ∆c = ⟨ |r(t)| ⏐⏐π(t) =c ⟩ , (7) which is very close to a half-tick except for very small- tick instruments. The purpose of CIM2 is to test how well price movements can be explained from the instantaneous state (ϵt,π (t)) alone. IV. CALIBRATION RESULTS A. Time series inspection In [1], the probability that an order changes the price was identiﬁed as a primordial component of aggregate impact. In particular, episodes of extreme order-sign im- balance with prices pinned to a particular level were ob- served frequently. Fig. 1 shows a short example of a real order ﬂow for a small tick stock, the corresponding 50-trade return (grey line), and the output of two very diﬀerent models. In this small-tick example ( η = 0.7), the TIM2 (blue line) performs quite well except for a pronounced overshoot when the order-ﬂow becomes very biased. As discussed above, TIM2 is inconsistent with the deﬁnition of the label π =n, since some price move- ments are predicted in this case. This problem is by con- struction absent for CIM2 (red line). During episodes of balanced order-ﬂows, the CIM2 performs very similar to the TIM2. Returns from TIM1 are almost identical to TIM2 and HDIM2 combines the best of all models (not shown). An example for the dynamics of a very large-tick in- strument (η = 0.03) is shown in Fig. 2. Here, price changes are rare. In consequence, TIM2 tracks poorly and CIM2 very well. −1 0 1 ¯ϵ(n = 50) 0 300 600 900 Trades −12 0 12 r(n = 50) [bp] FIG. 1. Top: A short excerpt of the order ﬂow for AAPL in 2013, for which η = 0.7. Solid grey line: mean order signs ¯ϵ in bins of N = 50 trades (causal). Markers: positions of the trades for each sign. Bottom: grey line starting with a triangle: the true 50-trade return in basis points. Blue line starting with a rhombus: returns predicted by the TIM2 based the real order ﬂow. The model was calibrated to the whole year. Red line starting with a star: the prediction of the CIM2. Markers are spread out for visibility and connect to the time series, which start att = 0. Cross-correlation with the true returns: 0 .77 for TIM2 and 0 .74 for CIM2 (relative estimation errors≈ 0.05%, quarterly variation≈ 2%). −1 0 1 ¯ϵ(n = 50) 0 500 1000 1500 Trades −1.2 0.0 1.2 r(n = 50) [bp] FIG. 2. A short excerpt of the order ﬂow (top) and returns (bottom) for SCHATZ in 2013, for which η = 0.03. Methods identical to Fig. 1. Cross-correlation with the true returns: 0.51 for TIM2 and 0 .94 for CIM2 (relative estimation errors ≈ 0.05%, quarterly variation≈ 1%). B. Systematic performance comparison To compare the models’ short-term performances more systematically, the correlation coeﬃcient between real and predicted aggregated returns for N = 50 successive 5 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Microstructural parameter η 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00xcorr(r, ∗) TIM1 TIM2 HDIM2 CIM2 FIG. 3. The cross-correlation between the empirical N-trade returns (N = 50) and model predictions based on the true order ﬂow for all instruments in the sample plotted against the corresponding microstructural parameter (see Eq. 1). For each model one point corresponds to one instrument. Model- ﬁts and cross-correlations where calculated for all available 1-year periods in the sample and then averaged if more than one year was available. trades is shown in Fig 3. All instruments in our data set are shown, sorted by their microstructural parameter η (see section II). HDIM2 leads to the best result for all values of η. On average, HDIM2 represents a 2% im- provement over CIM2, which is 13% better than TIM2, which is itself 82% better than TIM1. Note, however, that for large-tick instruments CIM2 and HDIM2 mod- els perform almost perfectly while the TIMs are clearly underperforming. For the smallest tick sizes, all models meet at roughly 60% correlation. The qualitative results are robust with respect to changes of the bin-size N, but cross-correlations slowly decline with increasingN for all models. C. Explaining impact scaling functions We now focus on the main quantity considered in [1], namely the conditional aggregate impact RN(X) := ⟨ logm(t +N)− logm(t) ⏐⏐⏐X = N−1∑ i=0 xt+i ⟩ , (8) where x = q, the signed volume of single trade, or x = ϵ, the sign of the order. The corresponding aggregate quantity is X =Q or X =E, respectively.3 3 Q is normalised by total daily volume, which only has a minor quantitative eﬀect. Fig. 4 showsRN(Q) andRN(E) for N = 50 and for a medium tick size stock (η = 0.61). The sigmoidal shape ofRN(Q) is reasonably well reproduced by all models, but HDIM2 and CIM2 are superior to the TIMs. The sinusoidal shape of RN(E) is, on the other hand, com- pletely missed by TIM1, which leads to an almost linear function. TIM2 fares better, while the HDIM2 and CIM2 reproduce the empirical curve almost perfectly. These re- sults depend on the considered instrument; see also ap- pendix D. For small ticks, all models except TIM1 repro- duce the data well. For very large-tick instruments, even TIM2 yields a linear sign-impact function. In order to compare quantitatively the models’ abili- ties to reproduce the shape of the aggregate-sign impact curves, we quantify the curvature measure of a curvef(x) on the interval x∈ [−a,a ] as: χ(f) := 1 3− 1 2   ∫ 0 −a/2f(x)dx ∫−a/2 −a f(x)dx + ∫a/2 0 f(x)dx∫a a/2f(x)dx  . (9) The intuition behind this indicator is that the area under a straight line passing through the origin between 0 and a/2 is one third of the area between a/2 and a, in which case χ = 0. For a perfect sine function, or for a tent shaped function, χ =−2/3. Being a relative measure based on integration, it performs quite robustly even with noisy data.4 Results for χ averaged over all instruments are shown in the left-hand panel of Fig. 5. As reported from [1], empirically sign-impact curvesRN(E) have a strong neg- ative curvature,⟨χ⟩≈− 0.35, while χ is essentially zero for TIM1 and only slightly negative for TIM2. HDIM2 and CIM2, on the other hand, reproduce not only the average curvature but also the standard deviation of the distribution of curvatures across instruments. The right-hand panel of Fig. 5 shows the correlations between the predicted and true curvatures of RN(E), across all instruments. As expected, HDIM2 and CIM2 yield the highest cross-correlations, close to 90 % for HDIM2.5 D. Diﬀusivity and Signature Plots Another ﬁnding in [1] is that the x-axis and y-axis scal- ings of the aggregate impact curves are by and large con- sistent with the Hurst-exponents H of, respectively, the order-sign time series and the return time series. Since we use the former as an input of the model, the only 4 We used linear interpolation as an intermediate processing step to be able to integrate over the four intervals despite the irregu- larly spaced data points. 5 Note that the square of the cross-correlation can also be inter- preted as the coeﬃcient of determinationR2 of a linear regression with intercept. 6 −0.005 0.000 0.005 0.010 Volume Imbalance Q −5 0 5 10 Aggregate impact R50 [bp] True TIM1 TIM2 HDIM2 CIM2 −30 0 30 Sign Imbalance E −20 −10 0 10 20 FIG. 4. Expected return RN conditioned on the aggregate-volume imbalance Q (left) and on the aggregate-sign imbalance E (right) in bins of N = 50 trades. Q is measured as a fraction of the total daily volume and quartile binned. Impact in basis points. Crosses: measurement for MSFT in 2015-2016. Coloured lines: aggregate impacts for returns predicted by diﬀerent models given the same order-ﬂow. The curves for the HDIM2 and the CIM2 are almost identical. True TIM1 TIM2 HDIM2 CIM2 −0.60 −0.45 −0.30 −0.15 0.00 Curvature ±std TIM1 TIM2 HDIM2 CIM2 0.30 0.45 0.60 0.75 0.90xcorr ± se FIG. 5. Statistics of the curvature χ (Eq. 9) of the sign-impact curves RN(E) for N = 50, for all instruments. Left: mean curvatures (dots) and dispersion (lines). Right: cross-correlations of the curvatures between model and true impact curves. Error bars: standard errors. possible discrepancy between models and data can stem from the scaling properties of the output returns. Previous works studied a very precise measure of de- viation from diﬀusivity, the “signature plot” D(𝓁) = 1 𝓁⟨(logm(t +𝓁)− logm(t))2⟩, (10) which is independent of 𝓁 for perfect diﬀusion (H = 0.5), decaying with 𝓁 for subdiﬀusion (H <0.5) and growing with 𝓁 for superdiﬀusion (H >0.5). Here, we follow the literature by subtracting a low-frequency diﬀusion con- stant DLF since we are interested only in the deviation relative to perfectly diﬀusive behaviour. We obtained D(𝓁) by simulating the calibrated models as dynamical systems with the out-of-sample real order-ﬂows as inputs (previous work used closed-form expressions for D(𝓁) in terms of in-sample kernels and correlation matrices). Some examples are shown in Fig. 6. All propagator models tend to behave similarly for small-tick instru- ments and show more diﬀerences for large ticks. For short lags, TIM1 generally exhibits some superdiﬀusion while TIM2 is strongly subdiﬀusive for large ticks. CIM2 7 100 101 102 103 Lag l [trades] −0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 Diffusion anomaly D(l) − DLF [bp2] CIM2 HDIM2 HDIM2* TIM2 TIM1 True 100 101 102 103 Lag l [trades] −0.4 −0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 Diffusion anomaly D(l) − DLF [bp2] FIG. 6. Signature plot for AAPL (top) and MSFT (bottom) in 2015-2016. Crosses: true returns. Coloured lines: aggre- gate impacts for returns predicted by diﬀerent models given the same order-ﬂow. For HDIM2* the same two-point ap- proximation as in e.g. [9] was used. shows, as expected, superdiﬀusion for long lags, which is a direct consequence of the long-memory of order sign. As explained in the introduction, this is the reason why propagator models were introduced in the ﬁrst place. HDIM2 best reproduces the detailed shape of D(𝓁), both for small ticks and for large ticks. This is interesting since previous work, using an approximate calibration of HDIMs based on a two-point factorisation of three-point correlations, reported disappointing results for HDIM2 in the case of small ticks [8–10]. The same eﬀect is seen in Fig. 6, where we show the result of an approximate calibration of HDIM2, that we call HDIM2*. We now see that an exact calibration of HDIM2 resolves this issue, and is able to reproduce accurately both the signature plot and the full response functions, much better than TIM2 (see appendix C). A more systematic comparison of the scaling exponents is shown in Fig. 7. The top-left panel shows the distribu- tion across instruments of the scaling exponent κ of the slope of the impact curves close to the origin, which be- haves as N−κ. HDIM2 again performs best. TIMs tend to overestimate κ, while CIM2 underestimates it. 6 See appendix D for the full rescaled impact curves for the HDIM2. The corresponding global Hurst exponents of the re- turn time series’ are shown in the bottom-left panel of the same ﬁgure. The true returns are slightly subdiﬀu- sive (as measured by H), while TIM2 and HDIM2 are almost diﬀusive. The CIM2 is clearly superdiﬀusive, as expected from the signature plot and the long memory of trade signs, particularly for small-tick instruments. Note, however, that a unique Hurst exponent is unable to de- scribe the full behaviour of the signature plot, see Fig. 6. The right hand column of Fig. 7 shows the cross- correlations of the slope scaling exponent and the Hurst exponents of the model returns with the real ones. The variations across instruments are almost perfectly repro- duced by the HDIM2, for both measures. The CIM2 fares a bit worse in this respect but the TIMs fail completely. Even though their average values (left-hand column) are similar to the true ones, the relative variation across in- struments of their long-term diﬀusivity often moves con- trary to the same measures for the true returns. V. DISCUSSION The main objective of this work was to test whether basal impact models suﬃce to reproduce the strongly nonlinear, concave shape of aggregate impact functions recently reported in [1]. In particular, non-price-changing market orders were hypothesised to play a crucial role, which we tested by comparing models that incorporate them in diﬀerent ways, or not at all. Empirically, price- changes become less likely for more biased order-ﬂows. In consequence, aggregate impact vanishes when the or- der ﬂow is strongly polarised in one direction [1]. This apparently counter-intuitive result seems to reﬂect mar- ket conditions where liquidity-takers and -providers se- lectively act more biased because they cancel out each others impacts. We revisited several “propagator” models proposed in the literature and found that the History Dependent Im- pact Model HDIM2 is able to accurately reproduce all considered aspects of the dynamics of prices, from the aggregate impact functions to the diﬀusion properties of the prices. The HDIM2 expresses the next price change as a linear combination of the preceding order signs with weights depending on the respective order-type label– price changing vs. non price changing. Other models performed worse, particularly the Tran- sient Impact Models. The TIM2 receives the same input 6 The diﬀerences appear to be less pronounced for the aggregate sign impact (not shown) 8 0.00 0.15 0.30 0.45 0.60 Scaling exponent κ −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 xcorr with true κ True TIM1 TIM2 HDIM2 CIM2 0.40 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 Hurst exponent Hr TIM1 TIM2 HDIM2 CIM2 −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 xcorr with true Hr FIG. 7. Top left: scaling exponent κ for the dependence of the impact curve slope ∂RN(Q)/∂Q|Q=0∝N−κ on the bin size N. Markers: means over all instruments for either the true returns (leftmost marker) or the ones predicted by the four models from the true order-ﬂow. Vertical lines: respective standard deviations. Top right: the cross-correlation across instruments of the real κ with the model’s respective predictions (markers). Error bars indicate standard errors. Bottom left: The Hurst exponents Hr for the same actual and predicted returns used in the upper panel. Means and standard deviation were again calculated across instruments. Bottom right: the cross-correlations across instruments of the real Hr with the models’ respective predictions. Error bars: standard errors.. as the HDIM2, but it incorporates the diﬀerent impacts of the two order types only on average, and not consis- tently for each event. The TIM1 does not distinguish between order types and only considers past order-signs. These results led us to investigate how well the var- ious observations can be reproduced just based on the order sign and the consistent distinction between price- changing and non-price-changing orders at each point in time, without incorporating the preceding order-ﬂow. To this end, we introduced the Constant Impact Model CIM2, where a price-changing event has a constant nonzero impact in the direction of the order-sign while a non price-changing event has zero impact. Although this model has drawbacks–like long-term superdiﬀusive prices due to the long memory of market order signs–it repro- duces the concavity of the aggregate impact functions almost as well as the HDIM2. Furthermore, the assump- tion that non-price-changing orders have little impact is validated by the weak amplitude of the corresponding kernels (see Fig. 8). This shows that non-price-changing orders, which can be caused by taking less liquidity than available and by stimulated reﬁll, are indeed the main cause of the vanish- ing aggregate-sign impact for biased order ﬂows–simply because long sequences of predominantly buy (or sell) market orders are also long sequences of non-price chang- ing events. It also shows that the nonlinear impact curves are reproduced the HDIM2, which is generally considered a linear model [10], because the crucial nonlinearity lies in the distinction of whether an order will change the price at all. In this sense, it is a linear model with pre- classiﬁed inputs. Our results were obtained thanks to more rigorous techniques for model calibration and out-of-sample test- ing than in previous works. For example, we developed a new eﬃcient method to calibrate multi-event HDIMs because HDIM2* calibrated using existing methods from the literature sometimes performs worse than its mem- oryless limit CIM2 (e.g. in Fig. 3, and further data not shown), and than its inconsistent limit TIM2 (see Fig. 6; similar problems were reported before [9]). Furthermore, we tested the models by actually running them as dynam- ical systems and then analysing their output exactly like the true returns. This made our tests more sensitive than the commonly used closed-form expressions. The latter can sometimes conceal model diﬀerences because they fail to show calibration biases for inconsistent models like the TIM2. As shown in appendix C, bias-free calibration is not always guaranteed, but it can be veriﬁed by measur- ing the cross-correlation between the model input and 9 its prediction-error. Taken together, our methodological improvements also solved the long-standing question why HDIM models were previously found to often underper- form the theoretically less well-founded and sometimes inconsistent TIM models [8–10]). Several problems are left for future work. The gen- eration of artiﬁcial order-ﬂows was not touched by this paper. This includes the the prediction of non-changing prices, without using this information as an input (see [14] as a recent attempt). The most important problem, however, might be closing the loop such that order-ﬂow and liquidity dynamics emerge from a recurrent dynam- ical process. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank M. Benzaquen, G. Bormetti, Z. Eisler, S. Hardiman, C.A. Lehalle, I. Mastromatteo, D. Taranto, and B. Toth for inspiring discussions. We also thank G. Bolton and J. Lafaye for support during data prepara- tion. [1] Felix Patzelt and Jean-Philippe Bouchaud. Universal scaling and nonlinearity of aggregate price impact in ﬁ- nancial markets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.04163 [q- ﬁn.TR], 2017. [2] Albert S Kyle. Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica, 53(6):1315–1335, 1985. [3] Eugene Fama. Eﬃcient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work. The Journal of Finance , 25(2):383–417, 1970. [4] Richard K. Lyons. The Microstructure Approach to Ex- change Rates, chapter 1. MIT Press Cambridge, 2000. [5] Carl Hopman. Do supply and demand drive stock prices? Quantitative Finance, 7(1):37–53, 2007. [6] Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, J. Doyne Farmer, and Fabrizio Lillo. How markets slowly digest changes in supply and demand. In Thorsten Hens and Klaus Reiner Schenk- Hoppe, editors, Handbook of Financial Markets: Dynam- ics and Evolution . North-Holland, Elsevier, 2009. [7] Bence T´ oth, Yves Lemperiere, Cyril Deremble, Joachim De Lataillade, Julien Kockelkoren, and J-P Bouchaud. Anomalous price impact and the critical nature of liquid- ity in ﬁnancial markets. Physical Review X, 1(2):021006, 2011. [8] Zolt´ an Eisler, Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, and Julien Kock- elkoren. Models for the impact of all order book events. In F. Abergel, J.P. Bouchaud, T. Foucault, C. Lehalle, and M. Rosenbaum, editors, Market Microstructure: Con- fronting Many Viewpoints, pages 113–135. Wiley Online Library, 2012. [9] Zoltan Eisler, Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, and Julien Kock- elkoren. The price impact of order book events: market orders, limit orders and cancellations. Quantitative Fi- nance, 12(9):1395–1419, 2012. [10] Damian Eduardo Taranto, Giacomo Bormetti, Jean- Philippe Bouchaud, Fabrizio Lillo, and Bence Toth. Lin- ear models for the impact of order ﬂow on prices i. prop- agators: Transient vs. history dependent impact. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.02735 [q-ﬁn.TR] , 2016. [11] Khalil Dayri and Mathieu Rosenbaum. Large tick assets: implicit spread and optimal tick size. Market Microstruc- ture and Liquidity , 1(01):1550003, 2015. [12] Weibing Huang, Charles-Albert Lehalle, and Mathieu Rosenbaum. How to predict the consequences of a tick value change? evidence from the tokyo stock exchange pi- lot program. Market Microstructure and Liquidity , page 1750001, 2015. [13] Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, Yuval Gefen, Marc Potters, and Matthieu Wyart. Fluctuations and response in ﬁnan- cial markets: the subtle nature of ‘random’price changes. Quantitative ﬁnance, 4(2):176–190, 2004. [14] Damian Eduardo Taranto, Giacomo Bormetti, Jean- Philippe Bouchaud, Fabrizio Lillo, and Bence Toth. Lin- ear models for the impact of order ﬂow on prices ii. the mixture transition distribution model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.07556 [q-ﬁn.TR], 2016. APPENDICES Appendix A: Propagator model calibration Calibrating the TIM and HDIM models to data re- quires estimating the respective propagator kernels. This amounts to solving a linear system of equations. To see this, consider the (conditioned) diﬀerential responses Sπ,π ′(𝓁) :=⟨δπ(t)π′r(t) δπ(t−𝓁)πϵ(t−𝓁)⟩ (A1) Sπ(𝓁) := ∑ π′ Sπ,π ′(𝓁) (A2) S(𝓁) := ∑ π Sπ(𝓁) (A3) whereS(𝓁) is the expected return one-trade return r at time t +𝓁 given any trade at time t. For the HDIM2, combining Eq. 5 with Eq. A2 and introducing the error term ν(t) :=r(t)−rHDIM2(t) (A4) yields Sπ(𝓁) :=⟨r(t) δπ(t−𝓁)πϵ(t−𝓁)⟩ (A5) =⟨(rhdim2(t) +ν(t))δπ(t−𝓁)πϵ(t−𝓁)⟩ (A6) ≈⟨rhdim2(t) δπ(t−𝓁)πϵ(t−𝓁)⟩ (A7) = ∑ π′′, π′, j≥0 [ κπ′π′′(j) ... ⟨ δπ(t)π′′δπ(t−j)π′ϵ(t−j)δπ(t−𝓁)πϵ(t−𝓁) ⟩ | {z } =:Cππ′ π′′ (𝓁,j) ] (A8) 10 with the shorthand notation for the triple cross- correlationCππ ′π′′(𝓁,j ) := Cfgh (𝓁,j ) with f = δπ(t)π′′, g =δπ(t−𝓁)πϵ(t−𝓁), and h =δπ(t−j)π′ ϵ(t−j). The error ν vanishes and eq. A7 holds exactly if and only if the calibration bias ⟨ν(t) δπ(t−𝓁)πϵ(t−𝓁)⟩ = 0. (A9) We can expect that a properly calibrated and consistent linear model has no linear correlations between its input and prediction error. Henceν should be very close to zero for well-formed models. We discuss when this is true and when problems emerge in section C. In previous works, Cππ ′π′′(𝓁,j ) was approxi- mated by the two-point cross-correlation Cππ ′(j) := ⟨δπ(t)πϵ(t) δπ(t−j)π′ϵ(t− j)⟩ to simplify calibration. Here we use a new method to calculate the full three point cross-correlation introduced in appendix B 1. 7 Eq. A8 is a linear system of equations that can be solved for k sinceS andC are observable. In practice, it is useful to rewrite it the form S = Ck⇔ (A10)[ Snc Scc ] = [ Cnnc Ccnc Cncc Cccc ][ knc kcc ] (A11) with the block matrix elements Sππ ′ 𝓁 =Sππ ′(𝓁) (A12) Cππ ′π′′ 𝓁j =Cππ ′π′′(𝓁,j ) (A13) kππ ′ j =κππ ′(j). (A14) We omitted the zero blocks Sπn and kπn. Since κnc(0) is never used andSnc(0) never observed; their values are arbitrary. The condition κnc(0) ! = 0 can be expressed by letting S0 := 0, C0j :=δj0. k can then be obtained using standard numerical solvers. Removing the respectively unnecessary conditionings, we obtain the analogous system for TIM2 [ Snc Scc ] = [ Cnn Ccn Cnc Ccc ][ gnc gcc ] (A15) with Cππ ′ 𝓁j =Cππ ′(𝓁,j ) and gπ′ j =gπ′(j). Finally, the system for TIM1 reduces to S = Cg with Sl = S(𝓁), gj = g(j), and the standard correlation ma- trix C𝓁j =⟨r(t)ϵ(t+𝓁−j)⟩. Since the latter is a Toeplitz matrix, more optimised numerical solvers are available than for the other models. In rare cases, we found the estimated kernels too noisy at long lags. This lead to the HDIM2 underperforming 7 The ordering of the indices is diﬀerent for C and C to be consis- tent with the existing literature. Note that in time series analysis, the cross-correlation is often understood to be normalised by the signals’ variances and C would be called a cross covariance. the CIM2, e.g. in Fig. 3. We therefore smoothed the estimated kernels without imposing a particular type of decay using logarithmically spaced multiquadratic radial basis functions for lags larger than 10. This improved results signiﬁcantly such that the HDIM2 never under- performs the CIM2. Appendix B: Spectral estimation of two- and three-point cross-correlations 1. Proof of the triple cross-correlation estimator The cross-correlation Cfg (𝓁) between two functions f and g at lag 𝓁 is often calculated using the convolution theorem: Cfg (𝓁) := ∞∫ −∞ ¯f(t)g(t +𝓁)dt (B1) = F−1 ν [ ¯F (ν)G(ν) ] (𝓁), (B2) where F denotes the Fourier transform, F−1 the inverse Fourier transform,F := F[f],G := F[g], and ¯f denotes the complex conjugate of f. Analogously, we obtain the triple cross-correlation be- tween three time-domain functions f(t), g(t + 𝓁), and h(t +j) as Cfgh (𝓁,j ) := +∞∫ −∞ dt ¯f(t)g(t +𝓁)h(t +j) = +∞∫ −∞ dt   +∞∫ −∞ dν ¯F (ν)e−2πiνt ... +∞∫ −∞ dν′G(ν′)e2πiν ′(t+𝓁) ... +∞∫ −∞ dν′′H(ν′′)e2πiν ′′(t+j)   = +∞∫∫∫ −∞ dνdν′dν′′   ¯F (ν)G(ν′)H(ν′′) ... +∞∫ −∞ dte 2πit(ν′+ν′′−ν) | {z } =:δ(ν−(ν′+ν′′)) e2πi(𝓁ν′+jν ′′)   = +∞∫∫ −∞ dν′dν′′   ¯F (ν′ +ν′′)G(ν′)H(ν′′) ... e2πi(𝓁ν′+jν ′′)   11 = F−1 ν′ν′′ [ Bfgh (ν′,ν′′) ] (𝓁,j ), (B3) where H := F[h] and Bfgh (ν′,ν′′) = ¯F (ν′ +ν′′)G(ν′)H(ν′′) (B4) is the cross-bispectrum. 2. Averaging and zero-padding ﬁnite discrete-time signals In practice, C(𝓁), 𝓁 = −T + 1,...,T − 1, must be estimated from a ﬁnite sample of T observations. For the two-point cross-correlation, this leads to ˆCfg (𝓁) := 1 T−|𝓁| T−1−sup{0,l}∑ t=sup{0,−l} ¯f(t)g(t +𝓁) (B5) = iFFTν [ F (ν)G(ν) ] (𝓁) (B6) where ˆC =⟨C⟩ if f and g are jointly wide sense sta- tionary. F and G are the zero-padded and FFTed sig- nals f and g. In the following, we always denote cross- correlation estimates by C to simplify notation. The normalisation before the above sum depends on the lag 𝓁 because the number of summands decreases with 𝓁. This eﬀect might be negligible for 𝓁≪ T , al- lowing the use of a biased estimator in many situations. If we average over short segments, however, 𝓁 can be- come of the same order as T . For the same reason, we are padding the signals with T zeros since the output of an unpadded FFT only contains frequencies and phases for T/2 positive and negative frequencies, respectively. There are some subtleties with respect to the ordering of the frequencies in the output array and the handling of odd / even T , which we don’t discuss here since they depend on the particular FFT implementation used. Now consider the triple cross-correlations. Since both Bfgh (ν,ν′) and Cfgh (𝓁,j ) are T×T matrices, it is nec- essary to apply a variant of Welch’s method for long sig- nals. That is, to calculate the average over several shorter time-windows. For each segment of length T , we ﬁnd Cfgh (𝓁,j ) = 1 T− sup(|𝓁|,|j|) iFFTν′ν′′[Bfgh (ν′,ν′′)](𝓁,j ), (B7) where B is calculated according to Eq. B4 using zero- padded FFT to calculate the Fourier-transformed signals F ,G, andH. In the authors implementation, the matrix product in Eq. B4 and the inverse 2D FFT in Eq. B7 are the dominating factors for computational complexity. The iFFT can be performed after averaging all bispectra in some scenarios, such that it becomes negligible for the total performance. In the notation above, it was attempted to balance precision, readability, and brevity. For the present study, since we calculated the daily correlations for a given in- strument before averaging, several complications arose. We chose the number of events on the shortest full trad- ing day (minus one) as the longest lag L considered. For this day, we calculated all transforms after padding with L zeros. The length of each segment to be Fourier transformed was therefore T = 2L. For the other days with L′≤T events, we padded with T−L′ zeros. This leads to a straightforward modiﬁcation of the bias correc- tion discussed above according to the resulting number of nonzero summands. 8 For each day with more than T events, we calculated the average correlations over the set of segments of length T covering that day with the smallest possible overlap. Finally, we averaged over the results for each day. Therefore, each day has the same weight in the ﬁnal result, but the contribution of each individual event is lower on very active days. The intu- ition here is that otherwise, singular days with extreme activities might dominate the result. Appendix C: Kernels and Responses Fig. 8 shows the integrated kernels for the diﬀerent propagator models. See eq. 3 ﬀ. and the following expla- nations, as well as appendices A and B for more details. Similar comparisons were done in the past [8–10], but but this is the ﬁrst time that an HDIM model was cali- brated without approximations. The nonzero kernels for the HDIM2 for both calibrations are shown in the lower row of Fig. 8. The approximate kernels (pink lines) are more similar to the TIM2 (blue lines, upper row) than to the full calibration (purple lines). Particularly the impact of non price-changing events (dashed lines) is strongly overestimated for the approximate calibration. The consistency of an impact model can be checked by considering is the price response R(𝓁) :=⟨(m(t +𝓁)−m(t))ϵ(t)⟩ (C1) or the conditioned responses Rπ(𝓁) =    ∑𝓁−1 𝓁′=0Sπ(𝓁′) if l> 0 ∑𝓁+1 𝓁′=0Sπ(𝓁′) if l< 0 0 if l = 0 (C2) whereS(𝓁),Sπ(𝓁) are deﬁned according to eqns. A2 ﬀ. andR(𝓁) = ∑ πRπ(𝓁). Previously, closed form expres- sions based on the kernels and correlations were the pre- ferred method to calculate price responses (and signature plots) for propagator models (e.g. [8–10]). However, be- cause the true empirical response for positive lags and the correlation functions were used to obtain the kernels, the 8 Zero-padding also creates a “blind spot” in each of the oﬀ- diagonal quadrants of Cfgh (𝓁, j) where|𝓁− j| > L. Fortunately, these values are not needed for the application in this paper. 12 model responses calculated like this are trivially identical to the measured ones for positive lags. In [10], the con- sistency for negative lags was investigated. In the latest revision available as of this writing, however, an approxi- mation was used that actually only involved one element of the kernel for this consistency check. The predicted responses using the theoretical closed- form predictions based on the full kernels are shown in the upper row in Fig. 9. By deﬁnition, empirical- and model responses are identical for positive lags. The results are therefore potentially deceptive and we only include them because this method (and its the even more ﬂawed variation discussed above) was used pre- dominantly in the literature. For AAPL (left column), all models reproduce also the negative-lag response quite well. Only TIM1 exhibits a noticeably larger discrepancy with too steeply rising (falling) prices before buy (sell) trades. For the larger-tick MSFT (right column), this problem becomes much more pronounced, as discussed in [10], and aﬀects all models to some degree. The HDIM2 provides the best overall ﬁt, while the approximately cal- ibrated HDIM2* performs much worse. Actually simulating the models using the real order- ﬂow as an input and then calculating the response func- tions from the predicted returns produces diﬀerent re- sults. As we explained before, the calibration bias in eq. A7 only disappears if there are no correlations be- tween the input and the prediction error of the model. We can expect this to be the case for the TIM1 and HDIM2 since a proper calibration will remove all errors that can be expressed as a linear combination of past inputs. As shown in the lower row of Fig. 9, responses from simulated TIM1- and HDIM2 predictions are indeed almost identical to the the previous method. The TIM2, however, deviates signiﬁcantly from the true responses for positive lags. This is consistent with the overshoot and subsequent reversion observed in Figs. 1 and 6. The cause for this ﬁnite calibration bias is the inherent inconsistency of the TIM2: Its output dis- respects the event type labels in the input and therefore cannot remove all correlations. We measured the bias according the left-hand side of eq. A9 and found that, as expected, it is close to zero for the HDIM2 but not for the TIM2 (not shown). In fact, we found empirically that the diﬀerence between the two rows in Fig. 9 is exactly explained by this bias (also not shown). Unfortunately, the bias can only be calculated after actually simulating the calibrated model. It therefore allows to verify that a calibration was unbiased a posteriori, but not to remove the bias a priori . The HDIM2* model also exhibits a number of anoma- lies. For AAPL, it performs slightly worse using this method and is slightly superdiﬀusive for positive lags. For MSFT, it exhibits a similar positive-lag overshoot as the TIM2 model. For negative lags, it surprisingly seems to ﬁt the data better, but this is a chance result. It of- ten generates shallower negative-lag responses than pre- dicted using the closed-form method and also compared to other models when they are simulated. Consequently, it occasionally also overshoots the true negative impact signiﬁcantly for other instruments or time periods (not shown). The CIM2 shows the typical anomaly for negative lags, and some signs of superdiﬀusion for positive lags. For large ticks, however, it performs expectedly quite similar to the HDIM2, especially for lags 𝓁∈ [−100, 100]. Finally, Fig. 10 shows the conditioned responses ob- tained by simulating the respective models. The over- shoot of the TIM2 model for short lags is mostly con- ﬁned to non-price-changing events (upper row). This is consistent with the TIM2 generating price-changes even for non-price-changing events, and compensating for this movement afterwards. For the TIM1, the responses are expectedly far oﬀ from the real curve since it doesn’t distinguish between the diﬀerent event labels. The fully calibrated HDIM2 is so close to the true response that it is diﬃcult to see except for 𝓁< −100. Appendix D: Model impact curves for 30 instruments Figures 11 and 12 show the aggregate-volume and aggregate-sign impact curves, respectively, calculated from the output of the HDIM2 model for all intra-day scales. Visually, they are extremely close to the curves shown in the appendix of [1] for the true returns. Not shown: the aggregate volume impact curves are quite well reproduced by all models. Also not shown but quantiﬁed in Fig. 5: aggregate sign curves for the CIM2 model are almost identical to the ones shown here. The ones for the TIM2 are more linear, even perfectly linear for small-tick instruments. For the TIM1, they are always linear. 13 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8TIM-Kernels [bp] AAPL 0.0 0.6 1.2 1.8 MSFT G Gn Gc 100 101 102 103 lag [trades] 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8HDIM-Kernels [bp] 100 101 102 103 lag [trades] 0.0 0.6 1.2 1.8 Kn Kc K ∗ n K ∗ c FIG. 8. Integrated propagator kernels calibrated to AAPL (left column) and MSFT (right column) for 2015-2016. Top row: “Bare response” G for the TIM1, and the conditioned ones Gπ(𝓁) for the TIM2 for π = n (non-price-changing events) and π = c (price-changing events), respectively. Bottom row: integrated kernels for the HDIM2 calibrated using the two-point approximationK∗ π(𝓁) and the new complete three-point calibration Kπ(𝓁)≡Kπc(𝓁) := ∑𝓁 𝓁′=0κπc(l′). 14 −1.5 −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 Theo. Response [bp] AAPL MSFT -1000 -100 -10 0 10 100 1000 Lag [trades] −1.5 −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 Response R [bp] -1000 -100 -10 0 10 100 1000 Lag [trades] True TIM1 TIM2 HDIM2* HDIM2 CIM2 FIG. 9. Measured (true) price responses R and model predictions for AAPL (left column) and MSFT (right column) for 2015-2016. Upper row: model responses calculated from the respective system of equations S = Ck or S = Cg according to appendix A. This method is commonly used in the literature. Lower row: “measured” model responses by running each model as a dynamical system with the real order-ﬂow as an input. Only this method reveals calibration biases for positive lags. 15 −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 Rn [bp] AAPL MSFT -1000 -100 -10 0 10 100 1000 Lag [trades] −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 Rc [bp] -1000 -100 -10 0 10 100 1000 Lag [trades] True TIM1 TIM2 HDIM2* HDIM2 CIM2 FIG. 10. Conditioned price responses Rπ for AAPL (left column) and MSFT (right column) for 2015-2016, and for the models simulated using the real order-ﬂow. Upper row: non-price-changing events ( π =n). Lower row: price-changing events (π =c). 16 AAPL ADBE AMZN CMCSA CSCO EBAY GOOG INTC MSFT NFLX QCOM ELUXB FSPAA HMB LMEB MEDAA MEO1V NBH NOK1V NOVO SANDA TLIA VOLVB VWS Rescaled Volume ImbalanceRescaled Impact BOBL BUND DAX EUROSTOXX SCHATZ SMI 101 102 103 104 Bin size N FIG. 11. Price impact predicted by the HDIM2 as a function of the true volume imbalance. The raw point-clouds were quantile- binned along the imbalance axis. Therefore the curves have a constant noise level but a range of imbalances that changes with the temporal bin size N. First two rows: NASDAQ stocks, 2012-2016. Rows three and four: OMX stocks, 2012-2016. Lowest row: EUREX futures (10/2014-12/2015). 17 AAPL ADBE AMZN CMCSA CSCO EBAY GOOG INTC MSFT NFLX QCOM ELUXB FSPAA HMB LMEB MEDAA MEO1V NBH NOK1V NOVO SANDA TLIA VOLVB VWS Rescaled Sign ImbalanceRescaled model Impact BOBL BUND DAX EUROSTOXX SCHATZ SMI 101 102 103 104 Bin size N FIG. 12. Price impact predicted by the HDIM2 as a function of the true order sign imbalance. Instruments and years as in Fig. 11.