A High Frequency Trade Execution Model for Supervised Learning ∗ Matthew Dixon Stuart School of Business Illinois Institute of Technology 10 West 35th Street Chicago, IL 60616 December 5, 2017 Abstract This paper introduces a high frequency trade execution model to evaluate the economic impact of supervised machine learners. Extending the concept of a confusion matrix, we present a ’trade infor- mation matrix’ to attribute the expected proﬁt and loss of the high frequency strategy under execution constraints, such as ﬁll probabilities and position dependent trade rules, to correct and incorrect predic- tions. We apply the trade execution model and trade information matrix to Level II E-mini S&P 500 futures history and demonstrate an estimation approach for measuring the sensitivity of the P&L to the error of a Recurrent Neural Network. Our approach directly evaluates the performance sensitivity of a market making strategy to prediction error and augments traditional market simulation based testing. 1 Introduction High frequency trading has been characterized as an arms race with ’Red Queen’ characteristics (Farmer and Spyros, 2012). This perpetual state of needing to invest in infrastructure just to maintain a competitive advantage is an artifact of a ’ﬂawed’ continuous limit order book market design currently predominately deployed by ﬁnancial exchanges (Budish et al., 2015). It is improbable, even impossible, that many market participants can sustain a competitive advantage through the sole reliance on low latency trade execution systems. But rather than looking to researchers, regulators and exchanges to overhaul the auctioning process, many high frequency trading ﬁrms have set out to leverage their technical might in other ways. The growth in volume of market data, advances in computer hardware and commensurate prominence of supervised learning in other disciplines, have spurred the exploration of supervised learning for price discovery. Modern ﬁnancial markets facilitate the electronic trading of ﬁnancial instruments through an instanta- neous double auction. At each point in time, the market demand and the supply can be represented by an electronic limit order book, a cross section of orders to execute at various price levels away from the market price. The price levels closest to the market price deﬁne the ’inside market’ and is the most actively traded. The market price is closely linked to its liquidity - that is the immediacy in which the instrument can be converted into cash. The liquidity of markets are characterized by their depth, the total quantity of quoted buy and sell orders about the market price and is hence constantly evolving in response to trading activity (Bloomﬁeld et al., 2005). A participant enters into a trade by submitting an order to a queue and either waits up to a few seconds for the order to be ﬁlled or cancels the order. This type of trading adds liquidity and is said to be ’making a market’. Market making is a primary function of proprietary traders that are making markets algorithmically and from buy-side institutions that are submitting limit orders as part of ’slice and dice’ ∗An early version of this paper was presented at the Machine Learning Mini-Symposium of the 2016 SIAM Conference on Financial Mathematics and Engineering, Austin, TX. The author would like to thank Prof. Brian Peterson, University of Washington and Partner at DV Trading, for many helpful comments. 1 arXiv:1710.03870v3 [q-fin.TR] 5 Dec 2017 algorithms (Hendershott et al., 2011). A participant willing to pay a premium to trade at the best price can bypass the queue and is said to be ’market taking’. Liquid markets are attractive to market participants as they permit the near instantaneous execution of large volume trades at the best available price, with marginal price impact. However, sometimes a large market order, or a succession of smaller markets orders, will consume an entire price level. This is why the market price ﬂuctuates in liquid markets - an eﬀect often referred to by practitioners as a ’price-ﬂip’. Price level consumption is followed by an initial widening of the bid-ask spread which quickly reverts as market makers exploit it, leading to a new mid-price. Microstructure researchers seek to evaluate how the increased information stored in the limit order book informs price discovery and ultimately translates to consistent economic utility from trading. There appears to be no consensus on the extent to which limit order books convey predictive information. Early seminal papers studying equities, including Glosten (1994); Seppi (1997), state that the limit orders beyond the insider market contain little information. In contrast, several other studies state that such limit orders are informative (Parlour, 1998; Bloomﬁeld et al., 2005; Cao et al., 2009; Zheng et al., 2013; Kearns and Nevmyvaka, 2013; Cont et al., 2014; Palguna and Pollak, 2014). In particular, Cao et al. (2009) study the information content of a limit-order book from the Australian Stock Exchange. They found that the book’s contribution to price discovery is approximately 22% while the remaining comes from the ﬁrst level data and transaction prices. They also demonstrate that order imbalances between the demand and supply exhibit a statistically signiﬁcantly relationship to short-term future returns. There is growing evidence that the study of microstructure is critical to ﬁnding longer term relations and even cross-market eﬀects (Dobrislav and Schaumburg, 2016). Many quantities, such as the probability of price movements given the state of the limit order, are relevant for trading and intraday risk management. The complex relation between order book dynamics and price movements has been the focus of econometric and stochastic modeling (see Engle and Russell (1998); Cont et al. (2010b, 2014); Cont and de Larrard (2013); Chavez-Casillas and Figueroa-Lopez (2017) and references therein). For analytic tractability, these models assume a data generation process and typically estimate quantities based on asymptotic limits of diﬀusion processes. In a Markovian setting, and under further modeling assumptions, such as the treatment of the arrival rate of market orders as a poisson process, homogenous order sizes, and the assumption of independence of cancellations and orders, a probability of an up-tick is derived. However, these modeling assumptions made are likely too strong for describing micro-scale book dynamics (sub 1ms). At this scale, price is not Markovian, increments are neither independent nor stationary and depend on the state of the order book. Attempts to relax the Markovian assumption, using for example the ’heavy traﬃc’ approximation approach (Cont and de Larrard, 2010; Chavez-Casillas and Figueroa-Lopez, 2017) are best suited for meso-scale analysis of the price movements, but not micro-scale. Guided by the reduced order book models of Cont and de Larrard (2013), our approach selects similar exogenous variables. In particular, we treat queue sizes at each price level as the independent variables. We additionally include properties of market orders, albeit in a form which we have observed to be most relevant to prediction the direction of price movements. In sharp contrast to stochastic modeling, we do not impose conditional distributional assumptions on the independent variables (a.k.a. features) nor assume that price movements are Markovian. Most of the aforementioned predictive modeling studies rely on regression for explanatory power of liquidity on the continuous volume weighted average price (VWAP), a.k.a. ’smart price’. The utility of the smart price is limited for high frequency trading. So called ’market makers’ quote limit orders on both sides of the market in attempt to capture the spread. Their inability to pre-empt a price ﬂip, by adjusting their quotes, typically results in adverse price selection and a loss of proﬁt. A change in the smart price does not imply a price-ﬂip. For example, a change in the volume of the best bid quantity will result in a change in the smart price, but not necessarily a change in the mid-price, the latter eﬀect is attributed to price level consumption from incoming market orders. The successful prediction of a price ﬂip, and not the change in smart price, can therefore be directly used to avoid adverse price selection. Sudden price ﬂips in the the tick data are hard to capture with traditional modeling techniques which rely on instantaneous inside market liquidity imbalance alone. Breiman (2001) describes the two cultures of statistical modeling when deriving conclusions from data. One assumes a data generating process, the latter uses algorithmic models, treating the data mechanism as 2 unknown. Machine learning falls into the algorithmic class of reduced model estimation procedures. It is designed to provide predictors in complex settings where relations between input and output variables are nonlinear and input space is often high dimensional. A number of researchers have applied machine learning methods to the study of limit order book dynamics (Kearns and Nevmyvaka, 2013; Kercheval and Zhang, 2015; Sirignano, 2016; Dixon et al., 2017; Dixon, 2017). This paper takes an algorithmic approach to predicting the next event price-ﬂip from a short sequence of observations of limit order book depths and market orders. We choose a spatio-temporal representation (Sirignano, 2016; Dixon, 2017) of the limit order book combined with history of the market orders as the predictors. Our approach solves a sequence classiﬁcation problem - a short sequence of observations of book depths and market orders can be classiﬁed into directional mid-price movement. A sequence classiﬁer oﬀers potential signiﬁcant beneﬁt to market participants. For example, a market maker can use the classiﬁer to continuously adjust the quotes, potentially reducing the likelihood of adverse price selection. Sequence classiﬁcation has been considered elsewhere in the literature for lower frequency price movement prediction from historical prices (Leung et al., 2000; Dixon et al., 2016). The novelty of our approach therefore arises from the application of a recurrent neural network classiﬁer to a spatio-temporal representation of the limit order book combined with market order history in order to predict price-ﬂips. Training a recurrent neural network architecture can be performed with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) which learns the weights and oﬀsets in an architecture between the layers. Drop-out (DO) performs variable selection (Srivastava et al., 2014). RNNs rely on a moderate amount of training time series data together with a ﬂexible architecture to ’match’ in and out of sample performance as measured by mean error, area under the curve (AUC) or the F1 score, which is the harmonic mean of precision and recall. Economic value The aforementioned theoretical and empirical research articles partially address the question of whether limit orders contain information beyond the best bid and ask prices. Through the prolif- eration of electronically traded exchanges, traders can use large numbers of variables, often available at every tick, when making trading decisions. Researchers are also able to use techniques that are more sophisticated than the standard time series analysis to forecast future price movements. However, until recently, there have been few studies focusing on whether this information can be eﬃciently and systematically translated to consistent economic proﬁts. Despite ﬁnding statistically signiﬁcant explanatory variables describing the structure of the limit order book, Kozhan and Salmon (2012) and Kearns and Nevmyvaka (2013) conclude, in their respective studies of the FX and Equity markets, that the information content of the limit order book does not seem to translate to greater economic proﬁts through diﬀerent high frequency trading rules. More precisely, these authors arrive at a similar conclusion that limit order book data alone is not robust enough to justify market taking. Confusion matrices There are several techniques for measuring the performance of classiﬁcation based supervised learning models including the ROC curve, the confusion matrix, the F-score (see for example Bishop (2006) or Hastie et al. (2001)). The confusion matrix remains one of the most widest techniques. Each column of the matrix represents the instances in a predicted class while each row represents the instances in an actual class. It is often instructive to monitor the true positive and true negative rates, which are ratios of true positive instances of a predicted positive class to the total instances of actual positives and true negative instances of a predicted negative class to the total instances of actual negatives respectively. Oftentimes, in application, the signiﬁcance of the true positive rate may not be the same as that of the true negative rate. For example, in fraud detection, there may be a higher penalty associated with falsely predicting a negative class when the instance is in fact positive, than predicting a positive when the instance is in fact negative. This construct is analogous to Type I and Type II errors in the statistics literature. It is common practice in the decision sciences to oftentimes weight the true positive and negative rates by their economic signiﬁcance accordingly. Borrowing such a concept, made concrete within the context of fraud detection in Bhowmik (2008), we introduce a trade information matrix to characterize the economic impact of false positives and false negatives. 3 1.1 Overview The main contribution of this paper is to present a ’trade information matrix’ to attribute the expected proﬁt and loss of tick level predictive classiﬁers under execution constraints, such as ﬁll probabilities and position dependent trade rules, to correct and incorrect predictions. We introduce and apply a trade execution model for evaluating market making strategies and use Level II E-mini S&P 500 futures history to estimate the terms in the trade information matrix. Using exchange matching engine rules, this trade execution model estimates the queue position of a reference order and determines whether it is ﬁlled on arrival of new market orders and limit order cancellations. The probability of a ﬁll is estimated based on its size, side, level and time that it was placed. Such probabilistic measures of liquidity constraints govern how the quotes placed by a strategy generate expected P&L and are conveniently expressed in a trade information matrix. This trade information matrix is then simply multiplied by the confusion matrix of the classiﬁer to assess the economic impact of Type I and II error. We begin in the next section by introducing supervised machine learning and our preferred classiﬁcation approach, recurrent neural networks. Section 3 motivates the application of supervised learning to market making and then presents a trade execution model. Section 4 presents the trade information matrix for measuring strategy performance under error. Section 4.2 describes the preparation of the Level II data used to train the classiﬁer, referred to as the ’feature set’. Section 5 presents results measuring the performance of the classiﬁer and demonstrates the estimation of the trade information matrix to market data. Our results show the degree of error tolerance in a market making strategy that uses the prediction signal. The results also compare the strategy with a ’blind’ strategy that does not use prediction and describes the factors when the former is more favorable. For completeness, Section 5.2 presents further results demonstrating that there is little gain from re-training the model on a frequent basis; (ii) that there are distinct intra-day classiﬁer performance trends; and (iii) classiﬁer accuracy quickly erodes with the length of prediction horizon. Finally Section 6 concludes with comments and further research questions aimed at addressing the practicality of using supervised learning and the trade information matrix. 2 Supervised Learning Supervised learning addresses a fundamental prediction problem: Estimate a nonlinear predictor, ˆY (X), of an output, Y , given a high dimensional input matrix X = (X (1),...,X (P )) of P variables. Supervised learning can be simply viewed as the study and estimation of an input-output map of the form Y =F (X) where X = (X (1),...,X (P )). The output variable, Y , can be continuous, discrete or mixed. For example, in a classiﬁcation problem, F :X→Y whereY ∈{ 1,...,K } andK is the number of categories. When Y is a continuous vector and f is a semi-aﬃne function, then we recover the linear model Y =AX +b. 2.1 Sequence Learning If the input-output pairsD ={Xt,Yt}N t=1 are auto-correlated observations ofX andY at timest = 1,...,N , then the fundamental prediction problem can be expressed as a sequence prediction problem: estimate a nonlinear times series predictor, ˆY (X), of an output, Y , using a high dimensional input matrix of T length sub-sequences X: y =F (X) where Xt =seqT (Xt) = (Xt−T +1,...,X t) whereXt−j is a jth lagged observation of Xt, Xt−j =Lj[Xj], for j = 0,...,T − 1. Sequence learning, then, is just a composition of a non-linear map and a vectorization of the lagged input variables. If the data is i.i.d., then no sequence is needed (i.e. T = 1), and we recover the standard prediction problem. 4 2.2 Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) RNNs are sequence learners which have achieved much success in applications such as natural language un- derstanding, language generation, video processing, and many other tasks Graves (2013). We will concentrate on simple RNN models for brevity of notation. A simple RNN is formed by a repeated application of a function Fh to the input sequence Xt = (X1,...,X T ). For each time step t = 1,...,T , the function generates a hidden state ht from the current input Xt and the previous output ht−1: ht =Fh(Xt,ht1) =σ(WhXt +Uhht1 +bh), (1) for some non-linear activation function σ(x). When the output is continuous, the model output from the ﬁnal hidden state, Y =Fy(hT ), is given by the semi-aﬃne function: Y =Fy(hT ) =WyhT +by, (2) and when the output is categorical, the output is given by Y =Fy(hT ) = softmax(Fy(hT )), (3) where Y has a ’one-hot’ encoding - a K-vector of zeros with 1 at a single position. HereW = (Wh,Uh,Wy) and b = (bh,by) are weight matrices and oﬀsets respectively. Wh∈ RH×P denotes the weights of non-recurrent connections between the input Xt and the H hidden units. The weights of the recurrence connections between the hidden units is denoted by the recurrent weight matrix Uh∈ RH×H. Without such a matrix, the architecture is simply an unfolded single layer feed-forward network without memory and each observation Xt is treated as an independent observation. Wy denotes the weights tied to the output of the hidden units at the last time step, ht, and the output layer. If the output variable is a continuous vector, Y ∈ RM thenWy∈ RM×H. If the output is categorical, with K states, then Wy∈ RK×H. 2.3 Training, Validation and Testing To estimate and evaluate a learning machine, we start by controlled splitting of the data into training, validation and test sets. The training data consists of input-output pairs D ={Yt,Xt}N t=1−(T−1). We then sequence the data to give Dseq ={Yt, Xt}N t=1. The goal is to ﬁnd the machine sequence learner Y =F (X), where we have a loss function L(Y, ˆY ) for a predictor, ˆY , of the output signal,Y . In many cases, there’s an underlying probability model, p(Y | ˆY ), then the loss function is the negative log probability L(Y, ˆY ) =− log p(Y | ˆY ). For example, under a Gaussian modelL(Y, ˆY ) = ||Y − ˆY||2 is a L2 norm, for binary classiﬁcation, L(Y, ˆY ) = −Y log ˆY is the negative cross-entropy. In its simplest form, we then solve an optimization problem minimize W,b f(W,b ) +λφ(W,b ) f(W,b ) = 1 N N∑ t=1 L(Yt, ˆY (Xt)) with a regularization penalty, φ(W,b ). Here λ is a global regularization parameter which we tune using the out-of-sample predictive mean- squared error (MSE) of the model on the veriﬁcation data. The regularization penalty, φ(W,b ), introduces a bias-variance tradeoﬀ. ∇L is given in closed form by a chain rule and, through back-propagation on the unfolded network, the weight matrices ˆW are ﬁtted with stochastic gradient descent. See Rojas (1996); Graves (2013) for a further description of stochastic gradient descent as it pertains to recurrent neural networks. 5 3 High Frequency Trading We shall begin by informally motivating why machine learning is useful for high frequency trading. Consider the following scenario where a market maker oﬀers to sell at price xt +s/2 and buy at price xt−s/2 in an attempt to capture the spread s, where xt is the mid-price at time t. The market maker runs the risk of an adverse mid-price movement between the ﬁll of the sell order and the buy order. For example, a buy market order matching with the entire resting ask quantity, at price xt +s/2, eﬀectively results in an up-tick of the mid-price,xt+1 =xt +s. The market maker has sold at xt +s/2 but can very likely not buy back atxt−s/2 as the bid is no longer at the inside market. Instead the market marker may systematically be forced to cancel the bid and buy back at a price higher than xt−s/2, taking a loss. Figure 1 (left) illustrates a typical mechanism resulting in an adverse price movement. A snapshot of the limit order book at time t, before the arrival of a market order, and after at time t + 1 are shown in the left and right panels respectively. The resting orders placed by the market marker are denoted with the ’+’ symbol- red denotes a buy limit order and blue denotes a sell limit order. A buy market order subsequently arrives and matches the entire resting quantity of best ask quotes. Then at event time t + 1 the limit order book is updated - the market maker’s sell limit order has been ﬁlled (blue minus symbol) and the buy order now rests away from the inside market. The mechanism is analogous for a down-tick of the book. In the above illustrated example, the market maker is assumed to have no knowledge of the future and therefore does not pre-empt the price movement by adjusting their quotes accordingly. But suppose now that the market maker reasonably suspects an up-tick and has the capacity to avoid a loss resulting from the adverse price movement. Figure 1 (right) illustrates the result of a market maker acting to prevent losing the spread -the sell limit order is adjusted to a higher ask price. In this illustration, the buy limit order is not replaced and the market maker may capture a tick more than the spread. However, it’s unlikely that the buy limit order will be ﬁlled and hence may also need to be adjusted up to the inside market, albeit with loss of queue position. Such trade-oﬀs are the focus of execution optimization and, although important, are not considered further here. Adverse price selection Avoiding adverse price selection. Figure 1: (left) Illustration of a typical mechanism resulting in adverse price selection. A snapshot of the limit order book is taken at time t. Limit orders placed by the market marker are denoted with the ’+’ symbol- red denotes a buy limit order and blue denotes a sell limit order. A buy market order subsequently arrives and matches the entire resting quantity of best ask quotes. Then at event time t + 1 the limit order book is updated. The market maker’s sell limit order has been ﬁlled (blue minus symbol) and the buy order now rests away from the inside market. (Right) A pre-emptive strategy for avoiding adverse price selection is illustrated. The sell limit order is requoted at a higher ask price. In this case, the buy limit order is not replaced and the market maker may capture a tick more than the spread if both orders are ﬁlled. 3.1 Level-2 representation of a limit order book As mentioned in the previous section, the amount of liquidity in the market can be characterized by the cross-section of book depths and this liquidity evolves in response to trading activity. Note that the purpose of this paper is not to explicitly model the dynamics of the limit order book as in, for example, Cont et al. (2010a,b). Instead, we seek to build a simple exchange simulator suﬃcient to measure the performance of a trading strategy as a function of model prediction error. More formally, we represent the state of the limit order book by • the n-vector of bid prices sb := (sb,1 t ,...,s b,n t ) and the ask prices sa t := (sa,1 t ,...,s a,n t ) at all levels of the order book. We use the convention that the i = 1 component represents the best bid and ask and the i> 1 represents each level away from the inside market; 6 • the n-vector of bid queues qb t := (qb,1,...,q b,n t ), whereqb,i t denotes the depth of each bid level i at time t; and • the n-vector of ask queues qa t := (qa,1,...,q a,n t ) whereqa,i t denotes the depth of each bid level i at time t. The state of the limit order book is thus described by Xt := (sb t, sa t, qb t, qa t ) which takes values in the discrete state space δ· Z2n× N2n for some tick size δ <<1. Note, for avoidance of doubt, that this notation still permits the bid-ask spread to change - this occurs when one or more of the price levels at the inside market has zero depth. The stateXt of the order book is modiﬁed by the following order book events arriving at time t: • limit orders (at the bid or ask) of size Lb t := (Lb,1 t ,...,L b,n t ) and La t := (La,1 t ,...,L a,n t ); • market orders (to buy or sell) of sizeMb t andMs t . These are referred to by practitioners as ’aggressors’; and • cancelations of limit orders of size Cb t := (Cb,1 t ,...,C b,n t ) and Ca t := (Ca,1 t ,...,C a,n t ). When the bid or ask queue is depleted, the price moves up or down to the next level of the order book. More precisely, 1. When the best bid queue is depleted, the mid-price decreases by half a tick. The bid-ask spread is temporarily one and a half ticks; 2. Quotes subsequently arrive at a new lower ask level so that the bid-ask spread returns to a tick - the mid-price has now decreased by another half-a-tick; 3. This full tick change in the mid-price, inclusive of the intermediate state, shall be referred to as a ’price-down-ﬂip’ or just ’price-ﬂip’. Practitioner’s also use the terminology ’down-tick’ or the price is said to ’tick-down’. The converse mechanism, when the best ask queue is depleted, is referred to a ’price-up-ﬂip’. The following example illustrates a price-down-ﬂip in response to the arrival of a sell aggressor. Example: Order book update Figure 2 illustrates a typical mechanism resulting in mid-price movement. The charts on the left and right respectively show the limit order book of ESU6 before and after the arrival of a large sell aggressor. The aggressor is suﬃciently large to match all of the best bids. Once matched, the limit order is updated with a lower best bid of $2175.5. The gap between the best ask and best bid would widen if it weren’t for the arrival of 23 new contracts oﬀered at a lower ask price of $2175.75. The net eﬀect is a full down-tick of the mid-price. Using the notation introduced in this section, Table 1 records the limit order book before and after the arrival of the sell aggressor. time X 1 t Ms t La,1 t t0 (2175.75, 2176.0, 103, 82) 0 0 t1 (2175.5, 2176.0, 177, 82) 103 0 t2 (2175.5, 2175.75, 177, 23) 0 23 Table 1: This table shows the limit order book of ESU6 before and after the arrival of the sell aggressor, as illustrated in Figure 2. The focus of the remainder of the paper is to develop and demonstrate a practical approach for measuring the economic impact of the ability to predict these price-ﬂips. We use supervised learning to predict the price movements and then combine a simple model for estimating the queue position, ﬁll execution, and for a given market making strategy, estimate the expected P&L as a function of prediction error. The market making strategy exploits predicted price movements. 7 2174.75 2175 2175.25 2175.5 2175.75 2176 2176.25 2176.5 2176.75 2177 price depth −150 −100 −50 0 50 100 150 120 124 132 177 103 −82 −162 −173 −164 −146 2174.5 2174.75 2175 2175.25 2175.5 2175.75 2176 2176.25 2176.5 2176.75 price depth −150 −100 −50 0 50 100 150 78 120 124 132 177 −23 −82 −162 −173 −164 Timestamp: 06:00:00.015 Timestamp: 06:00:00.036 Trade 103 @ 2175.75 (Sell) Figure 2: This ﬁgure illustrates a typical mechanism resulting in mid-price movement of ESU6. The charts on the left and right respectively show the limit order book before and after the arrival of a large sell aggressor. 3.2 Trade Execution Given a description of the order book and its updates, we seek to evaluate whether a quote placed by a market participant is ﬁlled over some time horizon. The ability to accurately model this action from this data is central to evaluating the performance of any high frequency trading strategy and, speciﬁcally for this paper, the economic impact of a supervised learning based trade decision. Consider a market participant that places a limit buy order at the best bid price. This order, hereon be referred to as the ’reference order’, is received by the exchange at time t0. Suppose that the matching engine receives n market or limit orders which aﬀect the queue position of the best bid level in the limit order book over the subsequent interval τ := t−t0. These orders are either sell market orders, buy limit order cancellations or new buy limit orders. The set of arrival times of all orders, including the reference order, is t :={t0,...,t n}. Implicit in our notation, is the constraint that no two orders can arrive and be processed by the matching engine at exactly the same time. Denote the sets of order sizes as • sell market orders: Ms τ :={Ms t | t∈ ts} which arrive at times ts⊆ t; • buy market orders: Mb τ :={Mb t | t∈ tb} which arrive at times tb⊆ t; • bid order cancellations: Cb,i τ :={Cb,i t | t∈ tc,i}; • ask order cancellations: Ca,i τ :={Ca,i t | t∈ tc,i}; • bid orders: Lb,i τ :={Lb,i t | t∈ tb,i}; and • ask orders: La,i τ :={La,i t | t∈ ta,i}. Further denote the queue position at time t of a limit order arriving at time s as φ(t,s ). With slight abuse of notation, denote Xj 0 as the state of the ﬁrst j levels of the order book at time t− 0 . The subset of 8 events arriving in period τ that changeXj 0 , are denoted by Db,j τ = (Ms τ,{Cb,i τ }j i=1,{Lb,i τ }j i=1) Da,j τ = (Mb τ,{Ca,i τ }j i=1,{La,i τ }j i=1) (4) and the union of these sets represents all book updates Dj τ =Da,j τ ⋃Db,j τ . Clearly, book updates at the inside market are a subset of book updates resolved to outer levels: D1 τ⊂D 2 τ⊂···⊂D τ≡D n τ. (5) Similarly the state of the top level of the book is a subset of the state including the outer levels, X 1 t ⊂X 2 t ⊂···⊂X t≡X n t . It is instructive to illustrate the notation with an example which is closely related to the one illustrated in Figure 2. Example Suppose that prior to time t0 the top of the book is X 1 0 = (2175.75, 2176.0, 102, 82). The following sequence of events occur: 1. At time t0, a one lot best bid order, Lb,1 t0 = 1, is received by the exchange. 2. As in the previous example, a sell market order of size Ms t1 = 103 is received by the exchange at time t1 and clears the best buy level. The best bid price and quantity is updated. 3. Then at time t2, a limit order of size 23 is quoted at a new best ask level, restoring the spread to a tick (0.25). The books updates, D1 τ, and the current state of the book, X 1 t , are enumerated in Table 3.2. Ω1 τ time X 1 0 Ms τ Mb τ Cb,1 τ Ca,1 τ Lb,1 τ La,1 τ X 1 t t− 0 (2175.75, 2176.0, 102, 82) {} {} {} {} {} {} (2175.75, 2176.0, 102, 82) t0 (2175.75, 2176.0, 102, 82) {} {} {} {} { 1} {} (2175.75, 2176.0, 103, 82) t1 (2175.75, 2176.0, 102, 82) {103} {} {} {} { 1} {} (2175.5, 2176.0, 177, 82) t2 (2175.75, 2176.0, 102, 82) {103} {} {} {} { 1} { 23} (2175.5, 2175.75, 177, 23) Table 2: This table shows how the state of the top of the book X 1 t is updated by data D1 τ . Remark 3.2.1 (market data). The evolution of the state of the book shown in Table 3.2 assumes rules for pairing the market order with the limit order. Therefore, in order to simulate the state evolution, these rules must be prescribed but are, in fact, complex and based on the type of market data available and the exchange. Moreover, in many cases, the market data is not suﬃciently complete to specify the evolution of the state and a model must be introduced to estimate the probability of order execution. Without such a model, the economic impact of a decision to trade can not be known and is therefore central to algorithmic trading. 3.3 Execution Model Informally, we assume that there exists a state update function HM :δ· Z2n× N2n→δ· Z2n× N2n (6) that uses new data to evolve the state Xt =HM(X0;Dτ). (7) The function depends on heuristics for updating the state given new data, Dτ. These heuristics depend on the matching rule,M- the exchange deﬁned procedure for ﬁnding pairs or groups of orders that are executed 9 against each other. The most common types of matching are FIFO and pro-rata, each leading to diﬀerent scenarios under which a limit order may gain queue position. We shall assume that queue position of a limit order place at times is given by a functionφs : R+×Z→ N, so that φt,s :=φt(Ls;Xs−,Dτ) gives its queue position at time t≥s. These matching rules are diﬀerent for each exchange and are occasionally updated. The reference bid (or ask) order L0 received by the exchange at time t0 is ﬁlled (a.k.a. executed) by time tn if both criteria are met: 1. All bids (respectively oﬀers) at the best level in the limit order book with higher queue priority are either cancelled or all these higher priority limit orders, including the reference order, are matched with one or more sell (respectively buy) aggressors arriving over the interval τ. Our order is partially ﬁlled if, under the same set of events, the exchange only matches a portion of the reference order. 2. Any reference order cancellation is not received at or before time tn. We quantify the extent to which L0 is ﬁlled given the triple (L0,X0,Dτ). Since the queue position of L0 in unknown, we introduce a parameterization representing the degree of conservativeness in order execution. We introduce the trade-to-book ratio as a measure of the trade size relative to resting quantity in front of and including an order placed at time t0. This ratio is scaled so that a value of at least unity indicates a complete ﬁll. Otherwise, the ratio indicates that the current trade size is inadequate to completely ﬁll the order. It is further possible to determine the lower bound corresponding to a partial ﬁll of the reference order. Deﬁnition 3.3.1 (Trade-to-Book Ratio). In the event of a sell market order arriving at time t, the trade- to-book ratio of a level j bid limit order, Lb,j 0 , placed at time t0 is a function R : R+× N→ R+ of the form Rt(Lb,j 0 ;Db,j τ ,ω ) = Ms t Qb,j 0 − (∑ u∈tsMsu +ω∑j i=1 ∑ u∈tc,iCb,i u −∑j i=1 ∑ t∈tb,i 1 {φu,u<φu,t0}Lb,i u ) (8) where • Qb,j 0 :=∑j i=1qb,i t0 denotes the sum of the depths of the queue at time t0 up to the jth bid level; • ∑ u∈tsMs u are subsequent set of sell market orders arriving at times ts; • ∑ u∈tc,iCb,i u is the subsequent of level i bid orders cancelled at times tc,i; • 1 {φu,u<φu,t0} is an indicator function returning unity if a subsequent limit order placed at time u has higher queue priority than the time t0 reference limit order; and • ω∈ [0, 1] is an unknown cancellation parameter which denotes the proportion of cancellations of orders with higher queue priority than the reference limit order over the interval τ. ω = 1 represents the most favorable scenario where all cancellations result in an advancement of queue position and ω = 0 the converse. Remark 3.3.2 (market-by-order data). If market-by-order data is available, then Dτ contains a richer set of information that can be used to exactly determine the queue position of a cancelled limit order. Then the parameterω can be replaced by the indicator function 1 {φu,u<φu,t0} (placed inside the summation operator) and no approximation is needed. It is instructive to view numerical examples of the trade-to-book ratio estimation, under either FIFO or pro-rata matching rules. These examples assume full view of the limit orders at the best buy level. Depending on the market, the size of each order may not be not known, only the total resting quantity and number of orders at the price level can typically be extracted from the market data feeds. 10 Example: FIFO market Suppose at time t− 0 the queue depth at the best bid is 50. The reference limit order to buy 50 contracts at the best bid level is received by the exchange at time t0. In a FIFO market, the limit order joins the back of the queue at the best bid level. Let’s further suppose that between time t0 and time t a market sell order of size 25 subsequently arrives. Additionally, in this time interval, a best bid limit order of size 20, received prior to time t0, is cancelled. As a result of the market sell order matching with 25 contracts in the best bid queue and the cancellation of the best bid order, the queue position of the reference order has advanced so that there are 5 contracts ahead of it. If a new sell market order of size 10 arrives at time t then its trade-to-book ratio, with respect to the reference limit order, has the value Rt(50;D1 τ, 1) = 10 50 + 50− (25 + 1· 20 + 0) = 2/11. (9) and so the reference order is partially ﬁlled. Note that the reference order is partially ﬁlled if the trade-to- book ratio is above 1/11. Example: Pro-Rata market Suppose once again at time t− 0 the queue depth at the best bid is 50 consisting of orders of size {25,15,10}. The reference limit order to buy 10 contracts at the best bid level is received by the exchange at time t0 and joins the back of the queue in a pro-rata market. Let’s further suppose that between time t0 and time t a market sell order of size 25 subsequently arrives and is matched with the best bid order of size 25. Additionally, in this time interval, a new best bid limit order of size 15 arrives and joins the queue in second place. The net result of the market sell order matching with 25 contracts and the new best bid order arriving is that the queue position of the reference order remains the same. However the resting quantity of contracts ahead of it has fallen from 50 to 40. If a new sell market order of size 10 arrives at time t then it’s trade-to-book ratio, with respect to the reference limit order, has the value Rt(10;D1 τ, 1) = 10 50 + 10− (25 + 0− 1· 15) = 0.2. (10) Remark 3.3.3 (special cases). In certain limiting cases, the value of ω is known. For example, in a FIFO market, if the total depth of the best bid level monotonically reduced over τ then no new orders arrived. Furthermore the change in the total depth minus the sum of market orders gives the number of orders cancelled with higher queue priority than the reference order, and hence ω = 1. Again, this estimate assumes that each and every change is reported as a separate update in the market data feed. 4 Market Marking Strategy The trade-to-book-ratio will be used to simulate whether the reference order is ﬁlled. The mechanism for deciding when and how orders are placed and cancelled is given by a strategy. We restrict our consideration to market making strategies that use a prediction of the future mid-price to allocate quotes. Suppose that at time t0 a trade decision is made based on a strategy using the predicted change in mid-price over a horizon τ. In the simplest case, the strategy will place a limit order at the inside market if there is no predicted mid-price change. Otherwise it will place a limit order one level away from the inside market - placing an ask above the best ask if there is a predicted up-ﬂip or placing a bid below the best bid if there is a predicted down-ﬂip. If a quote already exists at the inside market, the strategy will submit a cancel-replace order on prediction of a price move. The strategy can, of course, be much more elaborate using layers and other forms of trade-expression. For simplicity, we also ignore partial ﬁlls in our cash ﬂow calculations. More formally, we deﬁne a strategy as follows: Deﬁnition 4.0.1 (Strategy). A strategy is a n-vector function L : R+× Z∩ (−m,m ]→ Zn of the form Lt( ˆYt), where t denotes the time that the trade is placed. Based on the predicted value of ˆYt, the strategy quotes on either the bid and ask at one or more price levels. Deﬁnition 4.0.2 (Market Making Strategy) . A market making strategy is the pair Lt := (La t,Lb t) repre- senting the quoting of a bid and ask at time t. 11 Note that for ease of notation, we will hereon use short-hand notation for the ﬁll probabilities Rk t := Rt(Lk 0( ˆY0);Dk τ,ω ). In practice, the decision to buy or sell depends on the net position. The net position is, however, a complex function of ﬁlled current and past orders. For this reason, we introduce a state variable representing the state of whether the spread is captured, only one side is ﬁlled leading due to adverse selection or no trades on either side are ﬁlled: Deﬁnition 4.0.3 (Spread State). The state of the spread at time t based on the market making strategy L0 is a function Z : [−1, 1]∩ Z→ [−1, 1]∩ Z of the form Zt( ˆY0) =    1, A :=⋃n k=1{Rk,a t ≥ 1}∩ ⋃n k=1{Rk,b t ≥ 1}⁄ =∅, −1, B :=⋃n k=1{Rk,a t < 1}∩ ⋃n k=1{Rk,b t < 1}⁄ =∅, 0, (A∪B)c⁄=∅. (11) Deﬁnition 4.0.4 (Realized P&L). Let Φ : [−1, 1]∩ Z→ R denote the realized P&L from capturing the spread or adverse selection, after including transactions costs c : Φ(z) = { La( ˆYt)· sa t−Lb( ˆYt)· sb t− 2Lc, z = 1, La( ˆYt)· sa t−Lb( ˆYt)· sb t−L(δ + 2c), z = 0. (12) The size of the order on each side of the book is assumed to be the same |La| =|Lb| = L and c is the transaction cost per contract. Remark 4.0.5 (Adverse selection cost). Implicit in our assumption of cash ﬂow is that an adverse selection leads to a relative loss of one tick per contract as one side is ﬁlled at a competitive price and the market maker must then quote a less competitive price on the other side to close out the position. In some cases, as for example in strategy s1, this leads to transaction costs without capturing the spread. The cash ﬂow at time t from the market making strategy L0 := (La 0,Lb 0) as a function of the prediction ˆY0 is given by Vt( ˆY0) = ∑ z∈{0,1} 1{Zt( ˆY0)=z}Φ(z). (13) whose value depends on the dataDτ and the triple (L, ˆY0,Y 0), consisting of all oﬀers placed by the strategy L0, the prediction ˆY0 and the true state Y0 at time t0. Example: Market Marking Strategy An example of a simple market making strategy L0 = (La 0,Lb 0), assuming n = 2, which either quotes at or away from either side of the inside market is La( ˆY0)    {0,L}, ˆY0 = 1, {L, 0}, ˆY0 = 0, {L, 0}, ˆY0 =−1. (14) Lb( ˆY0)    {L, 0}, ˆY0 = 1, {L, 0}, ˆY0 = 0, {0,L}, ˆY0 =−1. (15) Φ(z) =    L ( δn( ˆY0)−c ) , 1 L ( δ(n( ˆY0)− 1)−c ) , 0 (16) wherec is a round-trip transaction cost and n : [−1, 1]∩ Z→ [1, 2]∩ Z withn(0) = 1 and n(−1) =n(1) = 2. The cash ﬂow at time t from the strategyL0 as a function of the prediction ˆY0 is given by Vt( ˆY0) = ∑ z∈{0,1} 1{Zt( ˆY0)=z}Φ(z). (17) Remark 4.0.6 (latency). Our notation may suggest that order receipt time and decision time are the same. In practice, latency l between the participant and the exchange is an important factor and a trade decision must be made at time t0−l for it to be received at time t0. Additional constraints are usually added to the strategy to manage inventory but have been ignored here for ease of exposition. 12 4.1 Strategy Performance The assessment of the economic impact of a trade decision can be measured as a function of error in the prediction. We recall the standard deﬁnition of a confusion matrix used to characterize error. Deﬁnition 4.1.1 (Confusion Matrix). The confusion matrix is a function C : R+→ RM×M + , M = 2m + 1 of the form Cij(t) :=P ( ˆYt =yj| Yt =yi),∀i,j ∈{ 1,...,M }×{ 1,...,M }, (18) for a predicted state ˆYt∈ y :=∈ [−m,m ]∩ Z and a true state Yt∈ y. The economic impact of a level k quote placed at time t0 can be measured by its expected cash ﬂows conditioned on the pair (Y0, ˆY0). We use a matrix to represent the expected cash ﬂows from this quote over all combinations of true-predicted value pairs. Deﬁnition 4.1.2 (Trade Information Matrix) . The trade information matrix is a function T : R+ → RM×M, M = 2m + 1 of the form Tij(t; Ωk 0,Dk τ,ω ) :=P (Y0 =yi)E[Vt( ˆY0 =yj)|Y0 =yi, ˆY0 =yj] (19) which uses the triple Ωk 0 := (Lk 0, ˆY0,Y 0), consisting of predictions ˆY0, the true state Yt and the kth level oﬀer placed by a strategyL0 at time t0, in addition to the order book events Dk τ . Theorem 4.1.3 (Expected Cash Flow). The expected cash ﬂow from the triple Ω0 := (L0, ˆY0,Y 0) is E[Vt] =tr(C(t0)T′(t)) (20) whereT′ denotes the transpose of T . Proof. From Equation 13, the expected value of the cash ﬂow is E[Vt] = ∑ z∈{0,1} P (Zt( ˆY0) =z)Φ(Zt =z) (21) Using the following property of conditional probabilities P (Zt =z) = ∑ i P (Zt =z|Y0 =yi]P (Y0 =yi) (22) = ∑ j ∑ i P (Zt =z|Y0 =yi, ˆY0 =yj)P ( ˆY0 =yj|Y0 =yi)P (Y0 =yi) (23) and inserting the far right hand side of the above expression into Equation 21 gives E[Vt] = ∑ j ∑ i ∑ z∈{0,1} P (Zt =z|Y0 =yi, ˆY0 =yj)P ( ˆY0 =yj|Y0 =yi)P (Y0 =yi)Φ(z) (24) = ∑ j ∑ i E[Vt( ˆY0 =yj)|Y0 =yi, ˆY0 =yj]P ( ˆY0 =yj|Y0 =yi)P (Y0 =yi) (25) Inserting the deﬁnition of the confusion matrix and rearranging the order of the terms E[Vt] = ∑ i ∑ j ∑ z∈{0,1} Cij(t0)P (Y0 =yi)E[Vt( ˆY0 =yj)|Y0 =yi, ˆY0 =yj] (26) and from the deﬁnition of Tij(t) gives E[Vt] =tr (C(t0)T′(t)). (27) 13 Remark 4.1.4 (Fill probability estimation). The magnitude of the entries in the trade information matrix depend on the ﬁll probabilities, conditioned on true state, the probability of a change in state and the prediction signal based strategy. The ﬁll probabilities are the most diﬃcult to estimate because, as previously mentioned, they depend on a number of factors including the matching engine algorithm, order book imbalance and queue priority. The following example assumes a parameter form for these probabilities, however, as described later in the paper, it is assumed that they are estimated from an exchange simulator. Example: Parametric ﬁll probabilities We now illustrate the trade information matrix by comparing two strategies. One strategy s1 = ({1, 0},{1, 0}) simply places a one lot bid at the inside market and does not use a prediction. The other strategy s2 = (La 0,Lb 0) does use the prediction ˆY0 as follows: La( ˆY0) =    {0, 1}, ˆY0 = 1, {1, 0}, ˆY0 = 0, {1, 0}, ˆY0 =−1. Lb( ˆY0) =    {1, 0}, ˆY0 = 1, {1, 0}, ˆY0 = 0, {0, 1}, ˆY0 =−1. To illustrate the evaluation of the expected cash ﬂows with the trade information matrix, assume now that conditional ﬁll probabilities and the conditional probability of a change of mid-price are given by the exponential distributions in Table 3. λ1 is the decay parameter for the mid-price change probabilities. λ2 is the decay parameter for the ﬁll probabilities. The parameter a> 0 is used to control the asymmetry in the mid-price movements, where a = 0.5 is the symmetric case. The parameter b is used to adjust the relative ﬁll rates by level. It is assumed that quotes at outer prices levels are more diﬃcult to be ﬁlled and hence 0<b< 1. y -1 0 1 P (Y0 =y) a (1− exp(−λ1(t−t0))) exp(−λ1(t−t0)) (1−a) (1− exp(−λ1(t−t0))) P (Ra,1 t ≥ 1| Y0 =y) 1− exp(−λ2b(t−t0)) 1− exp(−λ2(t−t0)) 1 P (Rb,1 t ≥ 1| Y0 =y) 1 1− exp(−λ2(t−t0)) 1− exp(−λ2b(t−t0)) P (Ra,2 t ≥ 1| Y0 =y) 0 0 1− exp(−λ2(t−t0)) P (Rb,2 t ≥ 1| Y0 =y) 1− exp(−λ2(t−t0)) 0 0 Table 3: This table shows the conditional ﬁll probabilities and the mid-price change probabilities. λ1 is the decay parameter for the mid-price change probabilities. λ2 is the decay parameter for the ﬁll probabilities. The parameter a >0 is used to control the asymmetry in the mid-price movements, where a = 0.5 is the symmetric case. The parameter b is used to adjust the relative ﬁll rates by level. It is assumed that quotes at outer prices levels are more diﬃcult to be ﬁlled and hence 0<b< 1. Figure 3 shows the expected realized P&L of strategys2 (red line) compared with strategys1 (black line) under the probability model deﬁned in Table 3 with the following parameterization a = 0.5,b = 0.5,λ 1 = 1. The spread δ = $12.5 and the round-trip transaction cost is c = $0.7. Larger values of λ2 correspond to increased growth rates of the ﬁll probabilities. The ﬁgure also compares the eﬀect of a white noise predictor (dotted) with a perfect predictor (dashed). The equilibrium level of the white noise predictor is lower than the perfect predictor but still more proﬁtable than strategy s1. Table 4 show the trade information matrices for the s1 (left) and s2 (right) strategies. The elements in the trade information matrix for s1 are the same in each row because the strategy is stateless. Therefore the expected P&L is independent of the confusion matrix. We observe that most of the P&L is generated when there is no price-ﬂip although small, and equal, amounts are generated when there is either a price up ﬂip or down ﬂip. Note that the top and bottom rows are smaller in magnitude reﬂecting the relatively low probability of a price-ﬂip compared to a stationary mid-price. The elements in each row of the trade information matrix for s2 are not always the same. If the price is stationary but the strategy receives a non-zero signal, then it will quote away from the inside market with any higher gain due to the increased potential for capturing a 2 tick spread exactly oﬀset by the lower probability of a ﬁll. And so, in this special case, the outcome of the prediction was irrelevant to the gain 14 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0 5 10 15 time E[Vt] Vt(s1) Vt(s2): perfect Vt(s2): white noise Figure 3: This ﬁgure shows the expected realized P&L of strategys2 compared with strategys1 for the following conﬁgurationa = 0.5,b = 0.5,λ 1 = 1. The spread δ = $12.5 and the round-trip transaction cost is c = $0.7. Larger values of λ2 correspond to increased growth rates of the ﬁll probabilities. The ﬁgure also compares the eﬀect of a white noise predictor (dotted) with a perfect predictor (dashed). The equilibrium level of the white noise predictor is lower than the perfect predictor but more proﬁtable than strategy s1. - the strategy is robust to false positives or negatives when the true state is stationary. When there is a price-ﬂip, the most proﬁt is gained with a correct prediction. ˆY0 =y -1 0 1 -1 1.062 1.062 1.062 0 9.660 9.660 9.660 1 1.062 1.062 1.062 ˆY0 =y -1 0 1 -1 2.195, 1.062 1.0695 0 9.660 9.660 9.660 1 1.0695 1.062 2.195 Table 4: These tables show the trade information matrices for the s1 (left) and s2 (right) strategies evaluated at elapsed time t = 0.2. The above example provides some insight into the conditions under which a market making strategy that exploit a prediction signal will outperform a naive strategy. The remainder of the paper shall now describe the estimation of the trade information matrix from market data, using empirical probabilities rather than parametric, and further evaluate the comparative gains of a market making strategy. In particular we estimate the ﬁll and mid-price change probabilities using our exchange simulator. 15 4.2 High Frequency Data Our dataset is an archived Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) FIX format message feed captured from August 1, 2016 to August 31, 2016. This message feed records all transactions in the front month E-mini S&P 500 futures contract (ESU6) between the times of 12:00pm and 22:00 UTC. The ES tick size is a quarter of a point, or 12.50 per contract (rounded to the nearest cent). We extract details of each limit order book update, including the nano-second resolution time-stamp, the quoted price and depth for each limit order book level. The mid-price at time t is denoted by pt = sa,1 t +sb,1 t 2 . (28) This mid-price can evolve in minimum increments of half a tick but is almost always observed to move at increments of a tick over time intervals of a milli-second or less. In our feature set, each limit order book update is recorded as an observation. Each observation is labelled based on whether the mid-price will increase, decrease or remain constant over a horizon h: Yt = ∆pt t+h, (29) where ∆pt t+h is the forecast of discrete mid-price changes from time t to t +h, given measurement of the predictors up to time t. The forecasting horizon h can be chosen to represent a ﬁxed number of events or can be a ﬁxed time interval. This choice is based on practical considerations which are discussed later in Section 5. Table 5 shows the limit order book before and after the arrival of the sell aggressor. Here, the response Yt is mid-price movement, in units of ticks, between the current and next tick. Timestamp sb,1 t sb,2 t ... qb,1 t qb,2 t ... sa,1 t sa,2 t ... qa,1 t qa,2 t ... Yt 06:00:00.015 2175.75 2175.5 ... 103 177 ... 2176 2176.25 ... 82 162 ... -1 06:00:00.036 2175.5 2175.25 ... 177 132 ... 2175.75 2176 ... 23 82 ... 0 Table 5: This table shows the limit order book of ESU6 before and after the arrival of the sell aggressor listed in Figure 2. Here, the response is the mid-price movement over the subsequent interval, in units of ticks. sb,i t and qb,i t denote the level i quoted bid price and depth of the limit order book at time t. sa,i t and qa,i t denote the corresponding level i quoted ask price and depth. The result of categorizing (a.k.a. labeling) each observation leads to a class imbalance problem as, at such a short prediction horizon, approximately 99% of the observations have a zero response. To construct a ’bal- anced’ training set, observations (sequences of input variables) labeled by the minority class are oversampled with replacement and the majority class observations are undersampled without replacement. Following Kercheval and Zhang (2015); Sirignano (2016); Dixon (2017), we compose our feature set of ﬁve levels of prices, volumes and number of limit orders on both the ask and bid side of the book. We additionally, and somewhat heuristically via a process of ’feature engineering’, characterize order ﬂow by the ratio of the number of market buy orders arriving in the prior 50 observations to the resting number of ask limit orders at the top of book. We estimate the analogous ratio for the sell by orders. This rationale for this ratio is motivated by our observation that an increase in this ratio will more likely deplete the best ask level and the mid-price will up-tick, and vice-versa for a down-tick. The combination of this spatial representation of the limit order book and the order ﬂow gives a total of P = 32 features. 5 Results The exact architecture and weight matrix sizes of our recurrent neural network are given by output : Yk = softmax(Fk y (hT )) = exp(Fk y (hT )) ∑K j=1 exp(Fj y (hT )) , hidden states : ht = max (WhXt +Uhht−1 +bh, 0), t = 1,...,T, 16 where Wh∈ R20×32,Uh∈ R20×20 and Wy∈ R3×20. We initialize the hidden states to zero. We use the SGD method, implemented in Python’s TensorFlow Abadi et al. (2016) framework, to ﬁnd the optimal network weights, bias terms and regularization parameters. We employ an exponentially decaying learning rate schedule with an initial value of 10 −2. The optimal 𝓁2 regularization is found, via a grid-search, to be λ2 = 0.01. The Glorot and Bengio method is used to initialize the weights of the network Glorot and Bengio (2010). Times series cross-validation is performed over 20 consecutive trading days. Training sets are compiled from the previous 3 trading days and contain, on average, 5 , 192, 822 observations. These sets are balanced resulting in a reduced training set size of typically just less than 100 , 000 observations. The validation and test sets are compiled for the next trading day following the 3 day training period. These are unbalanced, with the veriﬁcation set containing 2 × 105 observations and the remaining test set, on average, containing approximately 1.5× 106 observations. Each experiment is run for 1000 epochs with a mini-batch size of 500 drawn from the training set of 32 input variables. We follow the standard convention of choosing the number of epochs based on convergence of the cross-entropy and the mini-batch size is chosen for computational performance. Each sequence is chosen to be of length 10 and the number of hidden units is chosen between 10 and 20. The gridded search to ﬁnd the optimal network architecture and regularization parameters takes several hours on a modern graphics processing unit (GPU). The search yields several candidate architectures and parameter values. To reliably measure performance on the unbalanced test set, we compute the F 1 score - the geometric mean of the precision and recall: F 1 = 2 precision· recall precision + recall. The F 1 score is designed for binary classiﬁcation problems. When the data has more than two classes, the F 1 score is provided for each class k by setting Y = k to the positive and all remain classes to the negative label. Table 6 compares the performance of the RNN with the elastic net method, implemented in the R package glmnet (Friedman et al., 2010; Simon et al., 2011), for predicting the next price movement. The elastic-net method, with α = 0.5, exhibits an out-of-sample classiﬁcation accuracy of 49.6%. Table 7 compares the confusion matrices for the (left) in-sample performance of the RNN classiﬁer with the (right) out-of-sample performance of the RNN classiﬁer using a prediction horizon h = 1ms. Each confusion matrix is formed by averaging the daily confusion matrices over the month of August. The parentheses show the standard deviation. Model F1 (-1) F1(0) F1 (1) Accuracy Elastic-Net 0.116 (0.061) 0.649 (0.156) 0.108 (0.055) 0.626 (0.141) RNN 0.165 (0.050) 0.881 (0.050) 0.161 (0.045) 0.817 (0.187) Table 6: This table summarizes the performance of the RNN over a 20 trading day test period. The RNN classiﬁer is used to predict the categories: {Y =−1,Y = 0,Y = 1}. The mean and standard deviation of the f1 scores are compared with the elastic-net method. In Sample -1 0 1 -1 0.93 (0.03) 0.03 (0.01) 0.04 (0.03) 0 0.10 (0.02) 0.81 (0.03) 0.09 (0.02) 1 0.05 (0.02) 0.04 (0.02) 0.91 (0.02) Out-of-Sample -1 0 1 -1 0.84 (0.06) 0.06 (0.05) 0.10 (0.04) 0 0.10 (0.03) 0.78 (0.06) 0.12 (0.03) 1 0.11 (0.04) 0.06 (0.04) 0.83 (0.04) Table 7: This table compares the confusion matrices for the (left) in-sample performance of the RNN clas- siﬁer with the (right) out-of-sample performance of the RNN classiﬁer using a prediction horizon h = 1ms. Each confusion matrix is formed by averaging the daily confusion matrices over the month of August. The parentheses show the standard deviation. 17 5.1 Strategy comparison The estimation of the trade information matrix from a market simulator is now described. A new prediction is made for each limit order book in the market data. By using the market simulator to evaluate the current position, a market making strategy will typically quote to maintain a target position and remain within an inventory constraint. A prediction based market marking strategy will additionally adjust the quote if the prediction changes, even if the overall position hasn’t changed since the previous book update. In our experiments, we update the quotes at the end of each prediction horizon which has been chosen to beh = 1s. Our trade execution model assumes that ω = 0, leading to the most conservative queue position estimate. We ﬁrst illustrate the two market making strategies, given in Example 4.1, with a backtest simulation. Figure 4 (top) compares the P&L of strategyMM 1, the prediction agnostic strategy, to the prediction based strategy MM 2. Each strategy is applied to ESU6 data from 11am to 12:30pm (CST) on August the 4th, 2016 and a unit inventory constraint is set. The classiﬁer is trained from the market data using the previous three trading days and a 1s prediction horizon. With perfect information, and 0ms latency, strategy MM 2 is shown to outperform strategy MM 1. The backtest assumes that the market maker is a clearing member or equity member ﬁrm with a transaction cost per contract of 35 cents CME (2017). Each strategy modiﬁes its execution to ensure that the overall position remains within a limit. Figure 4 (bottom) shows the position over time resulting from the MM2 strategy with a unit position limit. Figure 4: (top) The top-of-the book prices together with the cumulative P&L of the market making strategies are shown over the period 11am to 12:30pm (CST) on August the 4th, 2016. (bottom) The position in ESU6 resulting from the MM2 strategy with a unit position limit. 18 Figure 5 (left) shows the empirical probabilities of price-ﬂips against prediction horizon h. The proba- bilities of price-ﬂips are similar and observed to increase to approximately 0.17 at a horizon of 1s shows the empirical distribution of ﬁll times (ms) on August 4th 2016. The boxplot in the right hand panel shows the empirical distribution of ﬁll times. After 1 second, the order is cancelled if it is no longer at the target price level. Fill times are separately estimated for best bid and ask quotes conditioned on Y0. When the book is stationary over the next interval, the distribution of best bid ﬁll times is similar to the best ask ﬁll times. The median of the best ask ﬁll times is lower when there is a price-up-ﬂip since by construction the best ask level will, modulo the reference order, be cleared. Conversely, when there is a price-down-ﬂip, the best bid level will be cleared. The best bid and best ask can be ﬁlled even if the mid-price movement is away from those levels, but it is much rarer and tends to occurs almost immediately and well before the price movement. Figure 5: (left) The empirical probabilities of price-ﬂips are shown against prediction horizon h. The prob- abilities of price-ﬂips are similar and observed to increase to approximately 0.17 at a horizon of 1s. The boxplot (right) shows the empirical distribution of ﬁll times on August 4th 2016. Empirical ﬁll times are separately estimated for best bid and ask quotes conditioned on Y0. When the book is stationary over the next interval, the distribution of best bid ﬁll times is similar to the best ask ﬁll times. The median of the best ask ﬁll times is lower when there is a price-up-ﬂip since, by construction, the best ask level is, modulo the reference order, cleared. Conversely, when there is a price-down-ﬂip, the best bid level is cleared. The best bid and best ask are ﬁlled even if the mid-price moves away from those levels, but it is much rarer and tends to occurs almost immediately and well before the price movement. Table 8 shows the estimated empirical price movement probabilities, quote ﬁll probabilities and spread ﬁll probabilities conditioned on the movement of the true state over a forecasting horizon of t = h = 1s. Each column shows the corresponding conditional probabilities for each value of Y0. These probabilities are estimated using the market simulator applied to ESU6 data between 6am and 4pm CST on August 4th, 2016. y -1 0 1 P (Y0 =y) 0.134 0.732 0.134 P (Ra,0 t ≥ 1|Y0 =y) 0.074 0.67 0.581 P (Rb,0 t ≥ 1|Y0 =y) 0.563 0.615 0.107 P (Z = 1|Y0 =y) 0.042 0.412 0.062 P (Z = 0|Y0 =y) 0.554 0.461 0.563 Table 8: This table shows the estimated empirical price movement probabilities, quote ﬁll probabilities and spread ﬁll probabilities conditioned on the movement of the true state over a forecasting horizon oft =h = 1s. Each column shows the corresponding conditional probabilities for each value of Y0. 19 Table 9 show the trade information matrices for the MM1 (left) and MM2 (right) strategies. The elements in the trade information matrix for MM1 are the same in each row because the strategy is stateless. Therefore the expected P&L is independent of the confusion matrix. We observe that most of the P&L is generated when there is no price-ﬂip although small, but not equal, amounts are generated when there is either a price up ﬂip or down ﬂip. Note that the top and bottom rows are smaller in magnitude reﬂecting the relatively low probability of a price-ﬂip compared to a stationary mid-price. The elements in each row of the trade information matrix for MM2 are not the same. If the price is stationary but the strategy receives a non-zero signal, then it will quote away from the inside market with a higher gain due to the increased potential for capturing a 2 tick spread. The elements in each row of the trade information matrix for MM 2 are not the same. If the price is stationary but the strategy receives a non-zero signal, then it will quote away from the inside market with any higher gain due to the increased potential for capturing a 2 tick spread being unevenly oﬀset by the lower probability of a ﬁll. For the stationary case, we observe that more proﬁt can be gained from a wrong prediction. Even though the spread is not ﬁlled if the prediction is wrong, adverse selection may still result in a higher gain by quoting away from the inside market than quoting at the inside market. And so the strategy is robust to false positives or negatives when the true state is stationary (and may actually beneﬁt from them if the adverse selection gains are suﬃciently favorable). When there is a price-ﬂip, proﬁt is only gained with a correct prediction. ˆY0 =y -1 0 1 -1 0.014 0.014 0.014 0 3.324 3.324 3.324 1 0.045 0.045 0.045 ˆY0 =y -1 0 1 -1 0.604 0 0 0 2.457 2.225 4.059 1 0 0 0.640 Table 9: These tables show the trade information matrices for the MM1 (left) and MM2 (right) strategies. table shows the trade information matrix for all quotes placed at the inside market and the bottom table corresponds to quotes placed at the next price level away from the inside market. Further insight into the values of the trade information matrices can be gained by studying the constituent probabilities. Table 10 shows the estimated empirical price movement probabilities, Level 1 and 2 quote and spread ﬁll probabilities conditioned on the movement of the true state over a forecasting horizon of 1 s. Each column shows the corresponding conditional probabilities for each value of Y0. These probabilities are estimated using the market simulator applied to ESU6 data between 6am and 4pm CST on August 4th, 2016. Table 11 shows the probability that the spread is ﬁlled (top) and the probability of adverse selection using the MM2 strategy conditioned on the true movement Y0 and the prediction ˆY0. y -1 0 1 P (Y0 =y) 0.134 0.732 0.134 P (Ra,1 t ≥ 1|Y0 =y) 0.007 0.511 0 P (Ra,2 t ≥ 1|Y0 =y) 0 0 0.421 P (Rb,1 t ≥ 1|Y0 =y) 0 0.504 0.011 P (Rb,2 t ≥ 1|Y0 =y) 0.403 0 0 Table 10: This table shows the estimated empirical price movement probabilities, Level 1 and 2 quote and spread ﬁll probabilities conditioned on the movement of the true state over a forecasting horizon of 1s. Each column shows the corresponding conditional probabilities for each value of Y0. 20 P (Zt = 1|Y0 =yi, ˆY0 = ˆyj) ˆy y -1 0 1 -1 0.003 0 0 0 0 0.258 0 1 0 0 0.005 P (Zt = 0|Y0 =yi, ˆY0 = ˆyj) y y -1 0 1 -1 0.404, 0.003 0 0 0.305 0.5 0.504 1 0 0.011 0.423 Table 11: This table shows the probability that the spread is ﬁlled (top) and the probability of adverse selection using the MM2 strategy conditioned on the true movement Y0 and the prediction ˆY0. Remark 5.1.1 (Backtesting challenges). The ﬁll probability estimates highlight a complex design decision in the market simulator because the mere placement of an order changes the future state of the book in a way that could not be known with certainty at decision time. Therefore a future price-ﬂip does not guarantee that a quote at best ask will be ﬁlled. For example, suppose at t0 the depth of the best ask level includes two orders, one of which has been placed by another participate and one is our reference order. The labeling of a price-ﬂip does not account for our reference order. And so in the event that the market participate cancels the order or it is ﬁlled by a matching market order, the data is labelled as an up-ﬂip. But the presence of our order, had the label accounted for such a position, would not necessarily have been ﬁlled. This problem arises because we have chosen to separate the labeling from the strategy. It is however possible to quantify this eﬀect by estimating the expected value of a trade if the order was always inconsequential to the sequence of price-ﬂips. Here, we estimate the expected value under the assump- tion that the ﬁll probabilities of a best bid or best ask oﬀer are unity under a down-ﬂip or up-ﬂip respectively. The true state of the order book in response to a reference order can not be known of course. This is the reason why many market making ﬁrms use live simulation to accurately measure the strategy performance rather than historical simulation. Our goal here, however, is to measure the comparative advantages of a strategy against a baseline in the presence of decision error. Our approach is not intended to replace live simulation, or for that matter historical simulation, only serve as a computationally tractable approach for understanding the implications of decision error. For the purpose of assessing how error aﬀects the expected realized proﬁt, we shall assume that the confusion matrix is symmetric and parameterized by ϵ∈ [0, 2/3]: Cij = { 1−ϵ, i =j, ϵ 2, i ⁄=j. (30) ϵ = 0 represents a perfect predictor and ϵ = 2/3 represents uniform white noise. Figure 6 compares the expected P&L of the two market market strategies as a function of error ϵ in the confusion matrix. It is observed that the expected realized proﬁt from MM2 (red) linearly decays with ϵ, to the extent that it can become less proﬁtable than the baseline strategy MM1 (black). The ﬁgure suggests that our confu- sion matrices estimated in the previous section are suﬃciently accurate to warrant market making with a prediction. 21 Figure 6: This ﬁgure compares the expected P&L of the two market market strategies as a function of error ϵ in the confusion matrix. It is observed that the expected realized proﬁt from MM2 (red) linearly decays with ϵ, to the extent that it can become less proﬁtable than the baseline strategy MM1 (black). 5.2 Classiﬁer error characteristics In this section, we provide further assessment of the RNN performance over the month of August 2016. Figure 7 shows the F1 scores of the RNN, measured on any hourly basis. We observe little variation in the F1 scores for up-tick and down-tick predictions and hence no evidence of secular F1 score decay and hence the need to retrain the model intra-day. In fact when we observe the opposite from the F1 score for predicting no book movement- the F1 score is observed to gradually increase over the course of the day. Figure 8 shows 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.20 6−7am 7−8am 8−9am 9−10am 10−11am 11−12pm 12−1pm 1−2pm 2−3pm 3−4pm days F1(−1) uncertainty Median 0.6 0.7 0.8 6−7am 7−8am 8−9am 9−10am 10−11am 11−12pm 12−1pm 1−2pm 2−3pm 3−4pm days F1(0) uncertainty Median 0.13 0.15 0.17 0.19 0.21 6−7am 7−8am 8−9am 9−10am 10−11am 11−12pm 12−1pm 1−2pm 2−3pm 3−4pm days F1(1) uncertainty Median (a) F1 score of ˆY =−1 (b) F1 score of ˆY = 0 (b) F1 score of ˆY = 1. Figure 7: The intra-day F1 scores are shown for (left) downward, (middle) neutral, or (right) upward next price movement prediction. the importance of retraining the model on a daily basis. The F1 scores are observed to exhibit a secular 22 decay when the model is not re-trained on a daily basis but instead trained only at the beginning of the month. While the evidence for secular decay is clear, it is surprising to observe that a model trained at the beginning of the month can still be eﬀective weeks later. Typically econometrics models for non-stationary time series perform very poorly when not frequently re-ﬁtted to new data. This surprising model robustness, without re-training, suggests a robust relationship between the liquidity imbalance and price movements. 0.10 0.14 0.18 2016−08−04 2016−08−05 2016−08−08 2016−08−09 2016−08−10 2016−08−11 2016−08−12 2016−08−15 2016−08−16 2016−08−17 2016−08−18 2016−08−19 2016−08−22 2016−08−23 2016−08−24 2016−08−25 2016−08−26 2016−08−29 2016−08−30 2016−08−31 days F1(−1) Median (with) Median (without) 0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 2016−08−04 2016−08−05 2016−08−08 2016−08−09 2016−08−10 2016−08−11 2016−08−12 2016−08−15 2016−08−16 2016−08−17 2016−08−18 2016−08−19 2016−08−22 2016−08−23 2016−08−24 2016−08−25 2016−08−26 2016−08−29 2016−08−30 2016−08−31 days F1(0) Median (with) Median (without) 0.10 0.15 0.20 2016−08−04 2016−08−05 2016−08−08 2016−08−09 2016−08−10 2016−08−11 2016−08−12 2016−08−15 2016−08−16 2016−08−17 2016−08−18 2016−08−19 2016−08−22 2016−08−23 2016−08−24 2016−08−25 2016−08−26 2016−08−29 2016−08−30 2016−08−31 days F1(1) Median (with) Median (without) (a) F1 score of ˆY =−1 (b) F1 score of ˆY = 0 (b) F1 score of ˆY = 1. Figure 8: The F1 scores over the calendar month, with (red) and without (blue) daily retraining of the RNN, are shown for (left) downward, (middle) neutral, or (right) upward next price movement prediction. Figure 9 compares the Receiver Operator Characteristic (ROC) curves of a binary RNN classiﬁer over varying prediction horizons. The plot is constructed by varying the probability threshold (a.k.a. cut-points) for positive classiﬁcation Y = 1 over the interval [0.5, 1) and estimating the true positive and true negative rate of each model. The dashed line shows the performance of a white-noise classiﬁer. We observe that the performance of the RNN decays as we increase the prediction horizon from the next book update event to 1s in the future. Latency between trading systems and the exchange is dependent on several factors including the execution platform, the distance of the co-located server to the exchange and even the amount of incoming traﬃc to the CME matching engines. It is commonplace however for this latency to lie in the range of 100 micro-seconds to 1ms. Our estimate, based on preliminary investigation, is that a c/c++ implementation of our RNN can predict in around 100 micro-seconds on a modern CPU with compiler optimizations but without low level programming techniques for code optimization. 23 Figure 9: The Receiver Operator Characteristic (ROC) curves of a binary RNN classiﬁer over varying prediction horizons. In practice, the prediction horizon should be chosen to adequately account for latency between the trade execution platform and the exchange. 24 6 Conclusion This paper introduces a high frequency trade execution model to evaluate the economic impact of supervised learners. We present a trade information matrix to attribute the expected proﬁt and loss of tick level predictive classiﬁers. This attribution considers execution constraints such as ﬁll probabilities and position dependent trade rules. Our ﬁndings suggest that our approach can be a valuable and computationally tractable addition to standard market simulation based backtesting. In particular, it allows strategies to be compared given the confusion matrix of the classiﬁer and could even be used to tailor a strategy to the accuracy characteristics of the classiﬁer. Some of these characteristics have been presented for ESU6 over the month of August 2016. For supervised learning and our trade information matrix to be of practical use in market making, a number of questions remain as a corollary of this research. Some of these questions relate to the supervised learner itself. For example, how can the prediction label Yt account for the impact of a trade on the state of the book when the decision to trade is itself based on a prediction ˆYt of that label? Is reinforcement learning the best approach for addressing this issue, as described for market taking in Kearns and Nevmyvaka (2013)? How much latency does a RNN model add to the quote time if implemented eﬃciently? Then there are questions surrounding the trade information matrix; How frequently should the ﬁll probability estimates be updated? Should ﬁll probabilities be conditioned on time of day and, perhaps, other periodic events such as earnings announcements? Our preliminary ﬁndings suggest that there is merit in applying non-linear classiﬁers, such as RNNs, to Level 2 data. Instead of asking the question ’can supervised learning be used for high frequency market making?’, we believe that this paper advances this discussion to a question of how much error is tolerable when supervised learning is used to avoid adverse selection. References M. Abadi, P. Barham, J. Chen, Z. Chen, A. Davis, J. Dean, et al. TensorFlow: A System for Large-scale Machine Learning. In Proceedings of the 12th USENIX Conference on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, OSDI’16, pages 265–283, 2016. R. Bhowmik. Data mining techniques in fraud detection. Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law , 3, 2008. C. M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science and Statistics) . Springer- Verlag New York, Inc., Secaucus, NJ, USA, 2006. ISBN 0387310738. R. Bloomﬁeld, M. O’Hara, and G. Saar. The ”make or take” decision in an electronic market: Evidence on the evolution of liquidity. Journal of Financial Economics , 75(1):165–199, 2005. L. Breiman. Statistical Modeling: The Two Cultures (with comments and a rejoinder by the author). Statistical Science, 16(3):199–231, 2001. ISSN 0883-4237, 2168-8745. E. Budish, P. Cramton, and J. Shim. The high-frequency trading arms race: Frequent batch auctions as a market design response. The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 130(4):1547, 2015. C. Cao, O. Hansch, and X. Wang. The information content of an open limit order book. Journal of Futures Markets, 29:16–41, 2009. J. A. Chavez-Casillas and J. E. Figueroa-Lopez. A one-level limit order book model with memory and variable spread. Stochastic Processes and their Applications , 127(8):2447–2481, 2017. CME. Fee summary guide: proprietary trading ﬁrms. Technical report, CME Group, January 2017. URL http://www.cmegroup.com/clearing/files/fee-summary-guide-for-proprietary-trading-firms.pdf. R. Cont and A. de Larrard. Linking volatility with order ﬂow: heavy traﬃc approximations anddiﬀusion limits of order book dynamics. Working paper, 2010. 25 R. Cont and A. de Larrard. Price dynamics in a markovian limit order market. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics, 4(1):1–25, 2013. doi: 10.1137/110856605. URL https://doi.org/10.1137/110856605. R. Cont, S. Stoikov, and R. Talreja. A stochastic model for order book dynamics. Operations Research, 58: 549–563, 2010a. R. Cont, S. Stoikov, and R. Talreja. A stochastic model for order book dynamics. Operations Research, 58 (3):549–563, 2010b. ISSN 0030364X, 15265463. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/40792679. R. Cont, S. Kukanov, and S. Stoikov. The price impact of order book events. Journal of Financial Econo- metrics, 12:47–88, 2014. M. Dixon. Sequence classiﬁcation of the limit order book using recurrent neural networks. Journal of Computational Science , 2017. ISSN 1877-7503. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocs.2017.08.018. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877750317309675. M. Dixon, D. Klabjan, and J. H. Bang. Classiﬁcation-based ﬁnancial markets prediction using deep neural networks. Algorithmic Finance, 2016. M. Dixon, N. Polson, and V. Sokolov. Deep learning for spatio-temporal modeling: Dynamic traﬃc ﬂows and high frequency trading. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.09851 , 2017. D. Dobrislav and E. Schaumburg. High-frequency cross-market trading: Model free measurement and ap- plications. Technical report, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2016. R. F. Engle and J. R. Russell. Autoregressive conditional duration: A new model for irregularly spaced transaction data. Econometrica, 66(5):1127–1162, 1998. ISSN 00129682, 14680262. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/2999632. J. Farmer and S. Spyros. Review of the beneﬁts of a continuous market vs. randomised stop auctions and of alternative priority rules (policy options 7 and 12). Technical report, UK Government Oﬃce for Science, 2012. J. Friedman, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani. Regularization paths for generalized linear models via coordinate descent. Journal of Statistical Software , 33(1):1–22, 2010. X. Glorot and Y. Bengio. Understanding the diﬃculty of training deep feedforward neural networks. In In Proceedings of the International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS?10). Society for Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , 2010. L. Glosten. Is the electronic open limit order book inevitable? Journal of Finance , pages 1127–1161, 1994. A. Graves. Generating sequences with recurrent neural networks. CoRR, abs/1308.0850, 2013. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1308.0850. T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman. The Elements of Statistical Learning. Springer Series in Statistics. Springer New York Inc., New York, NY, USA, 2001. T. Hendershott, C. M. Jones, and A. J. Menkveld. Does algorithmic trading improve liquidity? The Journal of Finance, 66(1):1–33, 2011. ISSN 1540-6261. M. Kearns and Y. Nevmyvaka. Machine learning for market microstructure and high frequency trading. High Frequency Trading - New Realities for Traders , 2013. A. Kercheval and Y. Zhang. Modeling high-frequency limit order book dynamics with support vector ma- chines. Journal of Quantitative Finance , 15(8):1315–1329, 2015. R. Kozhan and M. Salmon. The information content of a limit order book:the case of an FX market. Journal of Financial Markets , 15, 2012. 26 M. Leung, H. Daouk, and A. Chen. Forecasting stock indices: A comparison of classiﬁcation and level estimation models. International Journal of Forecasting, 16(2):173–190, 2000. D. Palguna and I. Pollak. Mid-price prediction in a limit order book. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, 10, 2014. C. Parlour. Price dynamics in limit order markets,. Review of Financial Studies , 11:789–816, 1998. R. Rojas. Neural Networks: A Systematic Introduction . Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., New York, NY, USA, 1996. ISBN 3-540-60505-3. D. Seppi. Liquidity provision with limit orders and strategic specialist. The Review of Financial Studies , 10 (1):103–150, 1997. N. Simon, J. Friedman, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani. Regularization Paths for Cox’s Proportional Hazards Model via Coordinate Descent. Journal of Statistical Software , 39(5):1–13, 2011. J. A. Sirignano. Deep learning for limit order books. arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.01987 , 2016. N. Srivastava, G. E. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. Salakhutdinov. Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 15(1):1929–1958, 2014. B. Zheng, E. Moulines, and F. Abergel. Price jump prediction in a limit order book. Journal of Mathematical Finance, 3:242–255, 2013. 27