Inferring agent objectives at different scales of a complex adaptive system D. Hendricks∗ A. Cobb R. Everett J. Downing S.J. Roberts Machine Learning Research Group Oxford-Man Institute of Quantitative Finance University of Oxford ∗Corresponding author: dieter.hendricks@eng.ox.ac.uk Abstract We introduce a framework to study the effective objectives at different time scales of ﬁnancial market microstructure. The ﬁnancial market can be regarded as a complex adaptive system, where purposeful agents collectively and simultaneously create and perceive their environment as they interact with it. It has been suggested that multiple agent classes operate in this system, with a non-trivial hierarchy of top- down and bottom-up causation classes with different effective models governing each level. We conjecture that agent classes may in fact operate at differenttime scales and thus act differently in response to the same perceived market state. Given scale-speciﬁc temporal state trajectories and action sequences estimated from aggregate market behaviour, we use Inverse Reinforcement Learning to compute the effective reward function for the aggregate agent class at each scale, allowing us to assess the relative attractiveness of feature vectors across different scales. Differences in reward functions for feature vectors may indicate different objectives of market participants, which could assist in ﬁnding the scale boundary for agent classes. This has implications for learning algorithms operating in this domain. 1 Introduction Equity ﬁnancial markets consist of multiple competing agents operating through a centralised electronic exchange, giving rise to non-linear interactions both through time and among agent classes. Investors use their understanding of asset dynamics to time buying and selling decisions for ﬁnancial gain, traders use their understanding of market dynamics to plan trades and minimise the cost of realising investment decisions and market makers use their understanding of investor demand to proﬁt from liquidity provision. The ﬁeld of market microstructure [ 1] studies the dynamics of price formation in this system at intraday time scales, considering how mechanistic rules, regulatory oversight and social behaviours of participants interact to manifest the observed time series’. The Complexity Economics [2] paradigm seeks to explain observed behaviours through the lens of complex adaptive systems, where competing agents continually adapt their actions and strategies based on the observed state they mutually create. Wilcox and Gebbie [3] take this further, proposing a mechanism for bottom-up and top-down causation, with level-speciﬁc effective models governing actors and inter-level interaction via noise terms. Actors at each level perceive the system in a different way, which invalidates the use of hierarchies of the same effective model to capture system complexity. We are interested in developing learning algorithms in this domain, where an understanding of scale-speciﬁc state representation, in the context of competing agents, is key to ensuring relevant features can be exploited and useful learning can take place faster than the natural time-scale of the system. Galla, Farmer and Sanders [ 4, 5] investigate the nature of agent learning in complicated games, using Experience Weighted Attraction (EWA) to evaluate the propensity for asymptotic learning. They demonstrate the importance of understanding agent payoff (reward) correlations when 31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA. arXiv:1712.01137v1 [q-fin.TR] 4 Dec 2017 setting learning rates, to ensure that learning is feasible and chaotic regimes are avoided. This study seeks to understand the landscape of competing agents at different time scales, to interrogate the importance of scale for learning policies in this domain. We use Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) to compute the effective reward function at different scales of equity market microstructure, using scale-speciﬁc temporal state trajectories and action sequences estimated from aggregate market behaviour. This allows us to identify attractive states and assess the attractiveness of the associated feature vector across different scales. This is a ﬁrst step towards understanding relative objectives of agent classes at different scales of this system. 2 Method 2.1 Inverse Reinforcement Learning for state attractiveness IRL aims to infer the reward function in a Markov decision process (MDP) deﬁned by the tuple m =⟨S,A,P,γ,R⟩, describing the state spaceS, the action spaceA, the transition functionP, the discount factorγ and the rewardR. Given access to sample state-action space trajectories collected from observing an agent’s behaviour, the objective is to ﬁnd a reward function that induces agents to follow trajectories matching the expert trajectories. While many IRL algorithms have been proposed ([ 6, 7, 8, 9]), we will use Maximum entropy (MaxEnt) IRL [10], which represents a move towards looking at probability distributions over paths. Ziebart et al. employ the principle of maximum entropy to pick the least informative set of parameters for a linear reward functionr =θ⊤fζ, a linear combination of state-action trajectories fζ that match the feature expectations between an agent’s observed trajectories and the learner’s behaviour. This matching equation, ∑ Pathζi P (ζi)fζi = ˜f (1) provides the constraints for maximum entropy, where ˜f = 1 m ∑ i f ˜ζi is the average empirical feature count from m observed trajectories. Therefore summing the feature mappings along a trajectory results in fζi = ∑ sj∈ζ fsj . Ziebart et al. evaluate a probability distribution over trajectories through spaceP (ζi| θ,T ) that give trajectories with equal rewards, equal probabilities and assign an exponentially higher preference to higher rewards. Note thatT is the transition model of the MDP. The optimal set of parameters θ∗ is then obtained by maximising the likelihood,L(θ), i.e. θ∗ = argmax θ L(θ) = argmax θ ∑ examples logP (˜ζ| θ,T ) (2) Since this function is convex for deterministic MDPs, we can use gradient optimisation methods, requiring knowledge of the gradient given as ∇L(θ) = ˜f− ∑ ζ P (˜ζ| θ,T )fζ = ˜f− ∑ si Dsi fsi. (3) This gradient represents the difference between the empirical expected feature counts from the observations and the learner’s expected feature counts. The difﬁculty in the optimisation process is in computing the value of the expected state visitation frequencies,Dsi to calculate the gradient. The details of the algorithm forDsi are given in the Ziebart et al. [10]. To summarise, it involves a backwards pass to calculateP (ζi| θ,T ) and then followed by a forward pass to calculate the expected state visitation frequencies. Note that a large horizon is used to calculate the state frequencies to approximate the inﬁnite time horizon of the MDP. We will use the MaxEnt IRL implementation provided by Matthew Alger [11]. 2.2 Determining temporal state trajectories Hendricks et al. [12] propose an approach for the detection and online estimation of intraday temporal states from equity market microstructure features. They found an interesting hierarchy of system behaviour at different calendar time scales, with results suggesting there may be different universality classes characterising behaviour at each scale. The approach uses an analogy to the q-state Potts 2 model to develop an unsupervised clustering technique consistent with ﬁnding meta-stable object conﬁgurations in complex systems. Time periods are clustered into states based on observed trade price, spread, volume and volume imbalance features for major stocks on an exchange. Signiﬁcant states are identiﬁed, with the associated State Signature Vectors (SSV) used for online state detection and assignment. Figure 1 illustrates the temporal states and associated feature vectors for 60-minute and 30-minute time scales. Each node represents a time period within the month, with node shading indicating the time of day and node connectedness indicating cluster (state) membership. 60-min states 30-min states 60-min feature vectors 30-min feature vectors Figure 1: (Above) Each node represents a time period, with the colour shading indicating the time- of-day (Morning = green, Lunch = yellow, Afternoon = red) and node connectedness indicating identiﬁed states. (Below) Average change in trade price, spread, trade volume and quote volume imbalance across member periods in each temporal state. We will construct temporal state trajectories at different calendar scales based on the SSV state assignment using the method in [12]. The chronological sequence of cluster membership indices thus deﬁnes the associated state trajectory at each scale. Given the objective of categorising agent classes at different scales, we will use the sequence of average price returns at each scale to determine associated actions. The motivation is that if the behaviour at a certain scale resulted in apositive (negative) price return, this could indicate net buying (selling) decisions for that class. We will thus use the sign of average price return to assign the action to one of three states,{BUY, SELL, NEUTRAL}. 3 Experiments Data State and action trajectories were computed from tick-level trades and top-of-book quotes for 42 stocks on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) from 1 November 2012 to 30 November 2012, sourced from the Thomson Reuters Tick History (TRTH) database. This data was resampled based on the scale considered. We use four features for each stock: Change in i) trade price, ii) quote spread (Ask price - Bid price), iii) trade volume and iv) quote volume imbalance ( Ask volume Bid volume ). Results Figure 2 shows the feature vectors and estimated reward functions for each state at the four candidate time scales: 5, 15, 30 and 60 minutes. It is interesting that low spread states are 3 unfavourable, perhaps because there are fewer opportunities when markets are highly liquid, whereas high spread states provide opportunity for proﬁt via market dislocations. Upon examination of the relative rewards and feature vectors, it appears there are differences in attractiveness across scales, although plausible explanations for these results are difﬁcult without knowledge of the ground truth. Figure 3 shows the relative reward across scales for similar feature vectors. We used a simple K- means clustering algorithm to group all states into 6 clusters on the basis of feature vector similarity. We then sum the (normalised) rewards for all states at the same scale in each cluster. This allows us to consider the net reward for each scale given the same feature vector. Node size indicates scale (60-min=large, 5-min=small) and colour indicates reward (red=negative, green=positive). Clusters 1-5 all show both positive and negative rewards, providing some evidence that agents react differently to observed features at different scales. Interpreting the rewards using relative cluster centroid spread and volume imbalance provides some intuition. For Cluster 1, negative volume imbalance and negative spread could indicate a larger quantity of aggressive buy orders, which could have a short-term negative effect of buying at a higher price, but if the stock is held at longer time scales, there could be a net gain in asset value. For Cluster 3, we see a larger negative volume imbalance and negative spread, which appears to be favourable at the 5-min scale, but unfavourable at longer time-scales. This suggests that the magnitude of certain features may affect the state’s attractiveness, at least when measured using aggregate buying/selling behaviour as actions. For Cluster 5, positive volume imbalance and negative spread indicate a larger quantity of aggressive sell orders. This could be positive at the 5-min scale, where a short-term sell is more easily matched, but the increase in aggressive ask quotes could translate into downward price pressure, leading to negative rewards at higher scales. For Cluster 6, negative volume imbalance and positive spread could be enable agents to buy larger quantities of stocks at lower prices, with the imbalance leading to further price appreciation across all scales. State Feature Vectors and Estimated Reward Function - Ordered by spread Feature Value 4 2 0 -2 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 Estimated Reward Feature Value 2 0 -2 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Estimated Reward Feature Value 2.5 0.0 -2.5 Estimated Reward 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 Feature Value 2 0 -2 Estimated Reward 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 5 Minutes 15 Minutes 30 Minutes 60 Minutes Price Spread Volume Volume Imbalance Features Figure 2: This ﬁgure shows the feature vectors (dots) and estimated reward function (bars) for each state, at 4 candidate time scales (5, 15, 30 and 60 minutes) 4 + Volume Imbalance - Spread + Spread - Volume Imbalance More liquidity for BUY orders at lower price Forced to SELL at lower price Price could continue to decrease Forced to BUY at higher price Price could continue to increase More liquidity for SELL orders at higher price 1 2 3 4 5 6 Estimated Reward at each scale, grouped by Feature Vector similarity Figure 3: This ﬁgure illustrates the relative reward across scales for similar feature vectors. Node size indicates scale (smallest=5min, largest=60min), node colour indicates reward (red=low negative, green=high positive), nodes are clustered by feature vector similarity, and clusters are positioned by the relative spread and volume imbalance feature values of the cluster centroids. 4 Discussion and future work We have provided a framework which allows us to interrogate the relative attractiveness of feature vectors at different scales of a complex adaptive system. While we have suggested plausible expla- nations for observed feature vector attractiveness, more work is required to analyse the inducing policies from estimated reward functions and assess whether this suggests particular objectives or adversarial behaviour across scales. Ultimately, this approach can help to assess whether a scale boundary exists for agent classes, to better inform learning algorithm speciﬁcation. This could lead to a hierarchical reinforcement learning framework with multi-scale learning in ﬁnancial markets to exploit hierarchy of causality at different scales. Further work will assess a complete spectrum of event time scales, consistent with how machine algorithms process information, to provide clarity on boundaries between high-frequency (algorithmic) market making, machine trading, human trading and investment decisions. References [1] M. O’Hara. Market Microstructure Theory. Blackwell publishing, 1998. [2] W.B. Arthur. Complexity and the economy. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 2014. [3] D. Wilcox and T. Gebbie. Hierarchical causality in ﬁnancial economics. Working paper, available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2544327, 2014. [4] T. Galla and J.D. Farmer. Complex dynamics in learning complicated games. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(4):1232–1236, 2013. [5] J.B.T. Sanders, J.D. Farmer, and T. Galla. The prevalence of chaotic dynamics in games with many players. Working paper, arXiv:1612.08111 [q-ﬁn.EC], 2016. [6] S. Russell. Learning agents for uncertain environments. In Proceedings of the eleventh annual conference on Computational learning theory, pages 101–103. ACM, 1998. [7] A.Y . Ng and S.J. Russell. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. InICML, pages 663–670, 2000. [8] S. Levine, Z. Popovic, and V . Koltun. Nonlinear Inverse Reinforcement Learning with Gaussian processes. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 19–27, 2011. [9] M. Wulfmeier, P. Ondruska, and I. Posner. Maximum Entropy Deep Inverse Reinforcement Learning. Working paper, arXiv:1507.04888 [cs.LG], 2016. 5 [10] B.D. Ziebart, A.L. Maas, J.A. Bagnell, and A.K. Dey. Maximum Entropy Inverse Reinforcement Learning. In AAAI, volume 8, pages 1433–1438. Chicago, IL, USA, 2008. [11] M. Alger. Inverse Reinforcement Learning, 2016. [12] D. Hendricks, T. Gebbie, and D. Wilcox. Detecting intraday ﬁnancial market states using temporal clustering. Quantitative Finance, 16(11):1657–1678, 2016. 6