Equilibrium Eﬀects of Intraday Order-Splitting Benchmarks∗ Jin Hyuk Choi Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) Kasper Larsen Rutgers University Duane J. Seppi Carnegie Mellon University March 31, 2020 Abstract: This paper presents a continuous-time model of intraday trading, pricing, and liquidity with dynamic TWAP and VWAP bench- marks. The model is solved in closed-form for the competitive equilib- rium and also for non-price-taking equilibria. The intraday trajectories of TWAP trading targets cause predictable intraday patterns of price pressure, and randomness in VWAP target trajectories induces ad- ditional randomness in intraday price-pressure patterns. TWAP and VWAP trading both reduce market liquidity and increase price volatil- ity relative to just terminal trading targets alone. The model is com- putationally tractable, which lets us provide a number of numerical illustrations. Keywords: Dynamic trading, TWAP, VWAP, portfolio rebalancing, liq- uidity, market-maker inventory, equilibria, market microstructure ∗The authors have beneﬁted from helpful comments from Yashar Barardehi, Umut Cetin, Chris Frei, Steve Karolyi, Ajitesh Mehta, Johannes Muhle-Karbe, Dan Ocone, Tom Ruchti, Chester Spatt, Harvey Stein, Kim Weston, Ariel Zetlin-Jones, and seminar participants at Carnegie Mellon Univer- sity, Columbia University, IAQF/Thalesians, and Intech. Kasper Larsen is partly supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant No. DMS 1812679 (2018 - 2021). Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the National Science Foundation (NSF). Jin Hyuk Choi has email: jchoi@unist.ac.kr and Duane J. Seppi has email: ds64@andrew.cmu.edu. The corresponding author is Kasper Larsen. Kasper Larsen has email: KL756@math.rutgers.edu. arXiv:1803.08336v6 [q-fin.MF] 28 Mar 2020 Dynamic order-splitting strategies are a prominent feature of present-day ﬁnancial markets. As described in O’Hara (2015), large asset managers use sequences of small child orders to trade on large latent meta parent demands. These strategies include heuristically mimicking the time-weighted average price (TWAP) or volume-weighted average price (VWAP) and also optimized strategies from formal execution-cost mini- mization problems (see, e.g., Almgren and Chriss, 1999 and 2000). The scale of order splitting in present-day markets is substantial. The Financial Insights (2006) trading survey reports that one popular strategy, VWAP execution orders, represents around 50% of all institutional trading. 1 Dynamic trading strategies can be price-sensitive in that they respond to the price of liquidity as investors trade oﬀ price improvement and trading proﬁts vs. tracking error relative to intraday trading targets. 2 In addi- tion, high frequency market makers use dynamic strategies to supply liquidity while attempting to keep their inventory close to an intraday target of zero.3 The result is a complex ecosystem in which asset managers, other position-taking traders, and high frequency market makers all use dynamic trading strategies to supply and demand liquidity given diﬀerent benchmarked intraday targets. Our paper is the ﬁrst to model the equilibrium impact of TWAP, VWAP, and other dynamic benchmarks on intraday trading and liquidity. Speciﬁcally, we focus on liquidity eﬀects of order splitting rather than on information aggregation as in Kyle (1985). We take intraday trading target trajectories and penalties as inputs to our model, and then show how they aﬀect price dynamics and liquidity over the trading day via their eﬀect on aggregate order imbalances. In particular, we model a market with multiple price-sensitive investors with heterogeneous trading targets who follow optimal continuous-time dynamic strategies. We solve for equilibria in closed-form. Our main results are as follows: • Order-splitting benchmarks like TWAP, Almgren-Chriss targets, and VWAP 1Large asset managers conduct dynamic trading strategies using in-house trading desks and also via principal and agency trading with external brokers. 2Madhavan (2002) discusses price improvement on order execution relative to VWAP. Domowitz and Yegerman (2005) estimate empirical order-execution costs benchmarked relative to VWAP. 3Hagstr¨ omer and Nord´ en (2013) and Menkveld (2013) show that high-frequency (HFT) market makers are an important source of intraday liquidity. A common feature of HFT market makers is that they have “very short time-frames for establishing and liquidating positions” (SEC 2010), which is consistent with a zero target inventory level. Weller (2013) shows further that liquidity over the trading day is provided by a network of liquidity providers with slower and faster trading latencies who shift inventory between themselves over holding periods of diﬀerent lengths. This behavior is also consistent with zero intraday inventory targets. 1 lead to predictable intraday price pressure due to persistant latent trading- demand imbalances. In particular, aggregate latent buy (sell) imbalances lead to positive (negative) price pressure at the market open that then decays, i.e., trends down (up) on average, over the trading day. • Trading benchmarks reduce intraday liquidity and increase price volatility rel- ative to when investors just have terminal end-of-day trading targets. This is because penalties for intraday deviations from trading target trajectories reduce the inventory-holding ﬂexibility of investors over the day. • Comparative static results lead to empirical predictions about price dynamics. For example, market illiquidity and price volatility in a competitive Radner equi- librium are increasing in investor order-execution costs and inventory penalties for trading deviations from trading target trajectories. • In a competitive Radner equilibrium, price-sensitive investors deviate from their ideal trading targets by a fraction of the aggregate latent trading-demand imbal- ance. In non-price-taking equilibria, investor target deviations can also depend on individual investor targets. Our research is related to several prior research literatures. First, there is a large optimal control literature on optimal order execution with exogenous price impact. This includes Bertsimas and Lo (1998); Almgren and Chriss (1999, 2000); Gatheral and Schied (2011); Engle et al., (2012); Predoiu et al., (2011); Boulatov et al., (2016) and other research surveyed in Gatheral and Shied (2013). In contrast, we model dynamic trading benchmarks and their eﬀects in an equilibrium framework. Second, the practice of benchmarking order-execution quality with VWAP and other metrics is described in Berkowitz, Logue, and Noser (1988) and Madhavan (2002). 4 Bal- dauf, Frei, and Mollner (2018) show that VWAP benchmarking is optimal for certain principal-agent problems in delegated order execution. In contrast, we model the market eﬀects of trading benchmarks rather than the reasons why investors use such strategies. Third, Korajczyk and Murphy (2019), van Kervel and Menkveld (2018), and van Kervel, Kwan, and Westerholm (2018) document empirical interactions be- tween dynamic trading by diﬀerent investors. Our work is most closely related to van Kerval et al. (2018), which shows theoretically and empirically how dynamic 4Implementation shortfall is another alternative trading benchmark; see Perold (1988). 2 trading strategies interact across multiple strategic investors. In contrast, we model the equilibrium price eﬀects of dynamic trading as well as trading interaction eﬀects. Our analysis extends the costly inventory model of market making — see, e.g., Garman (1976), Stoll (1978), and Grossman and Miller (1988) — by allowing for endogenous arriving orders from optimized order-splitting strategies. In particular, our model highlights the idea that, with endogenous investor trading demand, price pressure in equilibrium prices is not just due to inventory-holding costs of liquidity providers on executed transactions. Rather, equilibrium price pressure also depends on the underlying latent investor trading-demand imbalances. In order for markets to clear, equilibrium prices deter investors from trading on trading demands for which is there is no counterparty and, thus, which do not lead to executed transactions. This is a new perspective relative to more transactional market microstructure mod- els, but one that is consistent with empirical evidence in van Kerval et al. (2018) that large investors trade less in the direction of aggregate imbalances in underlying parent trading demands. Our modeling approach is related to previous research by Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2005) and Carlin, Lobo, and Viswanathan (2007) on optimal rebalancing and predatory trading. There are two main diﬀerences: First, investors in our model are subject to penalties tied to intraday trading target tra- jectories rather than to just a single hard terminal constraint at the end of the day. Second, there are no ad hoc intraday liquidity providers in our model. Instead, all intraday liquidity is provided endogenously by rational optimizing investors. As a result, there is no predatory trading in our model even when investors are strategic. 5 Our paper also builds on the Vayanos (1999) dynamic trading model. Like Vayanos (1999) — and the continuous-time extension in Sannikov and Skrzypacz (2016) — our model includes investors who smooth a series of random intraperiod shocks but, in addition, we also have investors with private heterogeneous trading target trajec- tories they would like to follow over the day. The discrete-time model in Du and Zhu (2017) also has quadratic penalties but with zero targets and has private dividend information (whereas dividend information is public in our model). 5Predatory trading is a manipulative strategy to buy (sell) to raise (lower) prices artiﬁcially and then unwind these positions at a proﬁt given price support from predictable persistent buying (sell- ing) by a large investor rebalancing its portfolio. In Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2005), predatory trading is possible because of ad hoc liquidity providers who trade using exogenous linear sched- ules that do not rationally anticipate predictable future price changes later in the day given earlier trading. 3 Our model is also related to Gˆ arleanu and Pedersen (2016) and the multi-investor extension in Bouchard, Fukasawa, Herdegen, and Muhle-Karbe (2018). In these com- petitive equilibrium models, traders incur penalties based on their stock holdings and their trading rates. Our model diﬀers because we allow for possible price-impact of individual trades and for non-zero trading targets that are ex ante private information. Lastly, there is no asymmetric information about future asset cash-ﬂow fundamen- tals in our model. Thus, our analysis here on trading and non-informational price pressure is complementary to Choi, Larsen, and Seppi (2019), which studies order- splitting and dynamic rebalancing in a Kyle (1985) style market in which a strategic informed investor with long-lived private information and a strategic rebalancer with a hard terminal trading target both follow dynamic trading strategies. 1 Model primitives The goal of our analysis is to model the equilibrium eﬀects of TWAP and other intra- day trading benchmarks on prices and trading. Thus, the necessary model ingredi- ents are investors who have heterogeneous trading targets and penalties for deviating from their intraday targets and who are price-sensitive so that market-clearing can be endogenized. Moreover, given the high empirical frequency of child orders in dy- namic order-execution strategies in Korajczyk and Murphy (2019) and van Kervel and Menkveld (2018), modeling these eﬀects in continuous time is appropriate. We develop a continuous-time equilibrium model with a unit time horizon in which trade takes place at each time point t∈ [0, 1]. This can be interpreted as one trading day. There are two securities: A money market account with a constant unit price (i.e., the account pays a zero interest rate) and a stock with an endogenously deter- mined price process S = (St)t∈[0,1]. Information about future dividends is generated by an exogenous standard Brownian motion D = (Dt)t∈[0,1] with a given known ini- tial value D0∈ R, zero drift, and volatility normalized to one. Here Dt denotes the expected present value at time t≤ 1 of subsequent future dividends, where D1 is the expectation at the end of the day. The market microstructure literature calls Dt the “fundamental asset value.” In our model, the diﬀerence St−Dt is price pressure required to clear the stock market. Investors in our model all follow optimal trading strategies that trade oﬀ trading proﬁts/costs and diﬀerent types of inventory-holding penalties. For a generic investor 4 i, let θi,t denote the investor’s actual stock holdings at time t∈ [0, 1]. By subtracting any initial stock position, we can, without loss of generality, normalize initial stock positions θi,− to zero. Let θc i,− denote the trader’s initial cash money-market bal- ance. Formally, the optimal stock holdings for each investor i over the day solve an optimization problem Vi(Xi,0) := sup θi∈Ai E [ Xi,1−Li,1 ⏐⏐⏐Fi,0 ] , (1.1) where Xi,1 is the investor’s terminal wealth at t = 1 given her trading gains or losses over the day given by the wealth process Xi,t :=θc i,− + ∫ t 0 θi,udSu, t ∈ [0, 1], (1.2) where Xi,0 :=θc i,− is investori’s initial wealth (i.e., initial cash balance in her money market account) and where Li,1 in (1.1) is an investor-speciﬁc terminal cumulative inventory penalty at t = 1 that accrues over the day. The initial information set Fi,0 in (1.1) is formally deﬁned in (1.12), and the admissible set of controls Ai is deﬁned in Deﬁnition 2.1. Two types of investors trade in our model with diﬀerent holding penalties: • There are M∈ N price-sensitive targeted investors whose terminal penalty Li,1 accrues via a penalty process Li,t := ∫ t 0 κ(s) ( θi,s−γ(s)˜ai )2 ds, t ∈ [0, 1], i ∈{ 1,...,M}, (1.3) where ˜ai is investor i’s end-of-day target stock holdings and γ(t)˜ai is a trajec- tory of intraday target stock holdings. The function κ(t) describes the severity of penalties for deviations of actual holdings θi,t over time from the target tra- jectory γ(t)˜ai. The variables (˜ai,θc i,−) are private knowledge of trader i but are partially revealed in equilibrium to other investors. At this point, we make no distributional assumptions about (˜a1,..., ˜aM) except that they are independent of the dividend-information Brownian motion D.6 6We do not need to impose a Gaussian structure on the private information variables because our investors’ optimal strategies do not involve ﬁltering. This is because — as we shall see in (1.11) below — the equilibria we construct initially reveal a suﬃcient statistic for how investor rebalancing targets aﬀect price dynamics. 5 We diﬀerentiate between two types of targeted investors based on their trading targets ˜ai. We refer to traders with targets ˜ ai⁄= 0 as rebalancers. These are large asset managers who use dynamic order-execution algorithms to trade on their targets. Traders with ˜ai = 0 do not need to trade per se but can provide liquidity, and so we call these intraday liquidity providers. The target ratio γ(t) is a deterministic function that gives how much of her daily target ˜ai investori would ideally hold at each time t during the day. The trajectory γ(t)˜ai can be thought of as a time-weighted average price (TWAP) strategy or as, more generally, a variation on an Almgren-Chriss trading strat- egy.7 Realistically, the target ratio γ(t) should be non-decreasing over the day with γ(1) = 1 at the end of the day. For example, for a standard TWAP strat- egy, the target ratio grows linearly with time as γ(t) := t. Alternatively, for a more generalized strategy,γ(t) might follow the shape of the average cumulative volume curve over the trading day. The assumption that γ(t) is deterministic simpliﬁes the analysis. Later, Section 5 extends the model to allow for stochastic target ratios γt that are then related to VWAP trading in Section 6. • There areM∈ N price-sensitive realtime hedgers indexed byi∈{M +1,...,M + M}. These hedgers have have no private information. Their cumulative penalty Li,1 in (1.1) accrues via the process Li,t := ∫ t 0 κ(s) ( θi,s−ϵBs )2 ds, t ∈ [0, 1], i ∈{M + 1,...,M +M}, (1.4) which is similar to the common-value speciﬁcation in Sannikov and Skrzypacz (2016). In (1.4), the process B = (Bt)t∈[0,1] withB0 = 0 is a standard Brownian motion representing a publicly observable risk-factor that is independent of all other random variables, and ϵ≥ 0 scales the hedger target holdings relative to the risk-factor Bt.8 The hedgers’ penalty-severity function κ(s) is potentially diﬀerent from κ(s) in (1.3). In the special case κ(s) := 0, the hedgers reduce to risk-neutral Merton investors with potential price impact. Another special 7It is a “variation” in the sense that Almgren and Chriss (1999, 2000) solve for optimal orders given speciﬁc risk and cost objectives, whereas we represent investor i’s risk and execution-cost objectives implicitly via the Li,t penalty. 8For simplicity, we assume ϵ is constant. Alternatively, it could be a time-dependent function ϵ(t). 6 case isϵ := 0 in which the hedgers coincide with the intraday liquidity providers discussed above but with a possibly diﬀerent penalty-severity function κ. Trading by the hedgers injects intraday randomness (due toBt) in the aggregate trading-demand imbalances over the day. However, unlike noise traders, the hedgers are price-sensitive and optimize their trades. Investors optimize their trading in actual markets given a variety of considerations. These include both the underlying utility gains from changing their holdings and also bid-ask and other order-execution costs (if taking liquidity) or proﬁts (if providing liquidity), inventory and risk-management costs, and predictable wealth eﬀects due to trading with/against price pressure. Our analysis decomposes trading optimization for targeted investors into two parts: First, we interpret the intraday trajectoryγ(t)˜ai as a partially optimized strategy given the end-of-day latent target ˜ai and given order- execution, inventory, and risk-management costs but omitting wealth eﬀects due to price pressure. 9 Second, the targeted investor’s optimization problem in (1.1) then adjusts the partially optimized strategy γ(t)ai for price-pressure eﬀects to obtain the fully optimized strategy θi,t. In particular, (1.1) includes the expected gain/loss from how the holdings θi,t comove with/against price pressure and also an expected penalty, givenLi,t in (1.3), which is a reduced-form representing incremental increased order-execution, inventory, and risk-management costs given the deviation ofθi,t from the partially optimized trajectory γ(t)˜ai over the day.10 An analogous logic justiﬁes the hedger trading optimization (1.1) with the penalty in (1.4) except that now the partially optimized hedger strategy — given order-execution, risk-management, and inventory costs and ineﬃciency costs from incomplete hedging but not wealth eﬀects from price pressure — is the stochastic process ϵBt. Given this motivation, there are several speciﬁc points to note: First, the de- composition leading to (1.1) makes our model mathematically tractable, because the quantitiesγ(t), ϵ, κ(t), and κ(t) describing investor trading preferences are inputs in our analysis rather than something to be solved for formally. 9In other words, γ(t)˜ai is the ideal trading trajectory if investor i could trade at prices Dt with just order-execution, risk, and inventory costs but without the price impact of order-ﬂow imbalances. 10To keep the model parsimonious, we assume rebalancers and liquidity providers have the same penalty-severity functionκ(t) (where γ(t) does not matter for liquidity providers for whom ˜ai = 0). In a richer model, the liquidity-provider penalty severity might diﬀer due to additional market- making considerations such as funding costs, risk-aversion, moral hazard costs due to risk limits arising from in-ﬁrm principal-agent conﬂicts, and the fact that liquidity providers are more likely then rebalancers to earn than to pay the bid-ask spread. 7 Second, our analysis makes a distinction between price pressure St−Dt, which is explicitly modeled, and order-execution costs — like bid-ask spread add-ons, broker- age fees, and exchange fees — that are implicitly modeled as one of the determinants of the penalties Li,t in (1.3) and (1.4). 11 In particular, the target ratio function γ(t), hedging scalar ϵ, and penalty-severity functions κ(t) and κ(t) all implicitly depend on order-execution costs as well as on inventory and other costs. Intuitively, varia- tion in the target ratio γ(t) and penalty severity κ(t) over the day reﬂects, in part, time patterns in order-execution costs (e.g., U-shaped average bid-ask spreads, see McInish and Wood 1999, and price impacts, see Barardehi and Bernhardt 2018) and an intensifying inventory-holding preference to reach the target ˜ ai towards the end of the day. Our analysis allows, in particular, for penalty-severity functions κ(t) that explode towards the end of the trading day as t↑ 1 as well as for bounded penalty severities. Third, the targeted investors and hedgers are all price-sensitive, and so they ad- just their stock holdings θi,t relative to their intraday trading targets in response to premia and discounts in prices in order to clear the market over time given the aggre- gate latent trading-demand imbalances γ(t)˜aΣ + ¯MϵBt. In particular, their intraday targets are soft rather than hard constraints. Thus, there are two competing drivers in the objective (1.1). On one hand, neglecting the penalty term Li,1 in (1.1), investor i would maximize her expected trading proﬁt from liquidity provision. On the other hand, neglecting the wealth term Xi,1 in (1.1) means investor i would minimize the penalty Li,1. In this case, targeted investors i∈{ 1,...,M} would use the strategy γ(t)˜ai, and the hedgers i∈{ M + 1,...,M +M} would hold ϵBt. The equilibrium strategies ˆθi,t in (3.6) below strike an optimal balance between these two compet- ing forces where the penalty-severity functions κ(t) and κ(t) determine the relative importance of these two forces over the trading day [0 , 1]. Fourth, an important point about the targeted investors is that they care, not just about their terminal trading targets ˜ai, but about the entire path of their holdings over the day relative to their intraday target trajectories γ(t)˜ai. In other words, the rebalancers’ latent stock demand over the day given ˜ai⁄= 0 has a time-varying trend controlled byγ(t). This aspect of our model — which allows us to study TWAP and other forms of targeted trading — is new relative to the previous literature, which 11The implicit order-execution costs are add-ons on top of St for individual transactions of indi- vidual investors, whereas St−Dt is market-wide price pressure in all transactions for all investors. 8 has modeled constant zero targets (Du and Zhu 2017), driftless stochastic targets (Vayanos 1999 and Sannikov and Skrzypacz 2016), and ﬁxed terminal targets but no intraday targets (Brunnermeir and Pedersen 2005). Market clearing in the model takes the following form: Recall that all initial stock positions θi,− have been normalized to zero. Given an aggregate stock supply normalized to zero, market clearing requires equilibrium investor-holdings ˆθi,t over the day to satisfy 12 M+M∑ i=1 ˆθi,t = 0 for all times t∈ [0, 1]. (1.5) The money market is also normalized to be in zero supply. By Walras law, clearing in the stock market implies clearing in the money market because investors use self- ﬁnancing strategies. In particular, we assume the initial money-market endowments θc 1,−,...,θ c M+M,− clear the money market M+M∑ i=1 θc i,− = 0. (1.6) The following analysis distinguishes between conceptually diﬀerent stock-price processes. Let S = (St)t∈[0,1] denote a generic stock-price process deﬁned in terms of its dynamics dSt :=µtdt +dNt, S 0 := ˆS0, (1.7) whereµ = (µt)t∈[0,1] is a generic drift process,N = (Nt)t∈[0,1] is a ﬁxed martingale, and ˆS0 is a ﬁxed initial stock price. The equilibrium price process we seek to determine is denoted by ˆS = ( ˆSt)t∈[0,1] and has two boundary conditions at times t∈{ 0, 1}: First, the equilibrium stock price ˆS1 at the end of the trading day at t = 1 is 12It is possible to extend our model to include noise-trader orders such that the ﬂoating stock sup- ply becomes an exogenous stochastic processa(t)+b(t)Zt +c(t)Bt wherea,b , andc are deterministic functions of time t∈ [0, 1], Bt is the risk-factor Brownian motion in (1.4), and Zt is a Brownian motion independent of all other random variables. 9 pinned down by a reduced-form end-of-day requirement 13 ˆS1 =D1 +ϕ0ϵB1 +ϕ1˜aΣ (1.8) where ϕ0,ϕ 1∈ R are exogenous constants and the total target imbalance is denoted by ˜aΣ := M∑ i=1 ˜ai. (1.9) When our model is applied to a short time horizon (e.g., a trading day), the end-of-day price ˆS1 is assumed to be the overnight valuation that clears the stock market given the latent trading-demand imbalances due to the aggregate rebalancer and hedger targets. In particular, market-clearing at t = 1 at the end of the day is assumed to reﬂect overnight stock-holding by the rebalancers, market-makers, and hedgers and also possibly additional net stock demand from overnight liquidity providers who do not trade during the day. If ϕ1 > 0, then a positive aggregate latent target ˜aΣ pushes up the end-of-day price ˆS1 relative to D1 in order for markets to clear. Similarly, if ϕ0 > 0, then a positive hedging target ϵB1 also raises ˆS1 relative toD1. Both eﬀects are qualitatively natural for how latent trading-demand imbalances might aﬀect end- of-day prices. A special case of (1.8) is ˆS1 =D1. (1.10) This case applies if D1 is a liquidating dividend paid at time t = 1 (as in, e.g., Grossman and Stiglitz 1980 and Kyle 1985) or, alternatively, if there are no overnight liquidity eﬀects in pricing at t = 1. For ( ˆSt)t∈[0,1] to satisfy (1.8) or (1.10), the price dynamics in (1.7) must be restricted as time approaches maturity (i.e., as t↑ 1). As we shall see in Theorem 3.2 below, the equilibrium stock-price process is linear in (Dt, ˜aΣ,Bt) with time-varying deterministic coeﬃcients. The terminal restriction (1.8) gives boundary conditions for these time-varying coeﬃcient functions. This allows us to derive endogenous intraday price and investor holding processes that are 13If the terminal restriction (1.8) is eliminated, our model becomes simpler because the stock volatility becomes a free parameter and can, for example, be set to be one. The fact that competitive Radner equilibrium models without dividends have free volatilities is well-known; see, e.g., Theorem 4.6.3 in Karatzas and Shreve (1998). 10 consistent with the assumed end-of-day price in (1.8). Second, all investors act as price-takers at time t = 0. This means the initial price S0 = ˆS0 in (1.7) is unaﬀected by individual investor holdings θi,0. This is for tractability. In addition, in equilibrium, the initial orders of investors cause the en- dogenous opening price ˆS0 to adjust to clear the market given the underlying latent trading-demand imbalance due to the aggregate target ˜aΣ. From a modeling perspec- tive, the initial stock price ˆS0 at time t = 0 is required to reveal the aggregate target ˜aΣ deﬁned in (1.9) in the sense that σ( ˆS0) =σ(˜aΣ). (1.11) The measurability requirement (1.11) allows investors to avoid ﬁltering and thereby keeps the model tractable. The information structure of our model is as follows: For tractability, all traders have homogeneous beliefs in the sense that they all believe the processes ( D,B ) are the same independent Brownian motions. At each timet∈ [0, 1] over the trading day, the dividend-information process Dt and the real-time hedging factor Bt are publicly observed. At each time t∈ [0, 1], each investor i chooses a stock-holding position θi,t adapted to the ﬁltration 14 Fi,t :=    σ(Su,Du,Bu, ˜ai,θc i,−)u∈[0,t], i = 1,...,M, σ(Su,Du,Bu,θc i,−)u∈[0,t], i =M + 1,...,M +M. (1.12) While the risk factor Bt is observable, the requirement S0 = ˆS0 in (1.7) and the measurability property (1.11) ensure the total latent target ˜aΣ can be inferred from S0. 2 Individual optimization problems This section gives a precise description of the optimization problem in (1.1) for the targeted investors and hedgers. Our analysis proceeds in two steps: First, we describe technical properties of the set of admissible holding strategiesAi in (1.1). Second, we 14As usual in continuous-time models, certain stochastic integrals need to be martingales; see Deﬁnition 2.1 below for details. Also, as usual, we have implicitly augmented (1.12) with null-sets to ensure that the “usual conditions” hold (see, e.g., Protter 2004 for details). 11 construct perceptions of oﬀ-equilibrium market-clearing prices for a generic investor i in (1.1) when using an arbitrary holding strategy θi∈A i. Section 3 then derives equilibrium strategies ˆθi,t for investor i given these price beliefs. Step 1: The set of admissible strategiesAi for investori in (1.1) is deﬁned as follows where a c` agl` ad process is a left-continuous process with right limits: Deﬁnition 2.1. For a given stock-price processSt with driftµt and martingaleNt as in (1.7) with a predictable quadratic variation process ⟨N⟩t, we deﬁneFi,t by (1.12). A c` agl` ad processθi = (θi,t)t∈[0,1] adapted toFi,t is admissible, and we write θi∈A i, if the following integrability condition holds: E [∫ 1 0 ( |θi,tµt|dt +θ2 i,td⟨N⟩t )⏐⏐⏐Fi,0 ] <∞, i ∈{ 1,...,M +M}. (2.1) ♦ It is well-known that an integrability condition like (2.1) rules out doubling strategies (see, e.g., Chapters 5 and 6 in Duﬃe 2001). The equilibrium stock-holding process in (3.6) below is not bounded (because it depends linearly on Bt) but does still sat- isfy (2.1). There are two reasons for the left-continuity requirement placed on θi,t. First, left-continuity of the investor holding paths is suﬃcient to ensure that the state-process Yt appearing in (2.2) below is left-continuous (ultimately, Yt in (2.2) becomes the solution Yθi t to the stock-market clearing equation (2.5)). In turn, Yt’s left-continuity is suﬃcient for investors to infer Yt from past and current stock-price observations (see Lemma A.1 in Appendix A). Second, in Example 5.3 in Section 5, which is an extension of our model to stochastic targets, the martingale Nt is only c` adl` ag (i.e., right-continuous with left limits). WhenNt has such points of discontinu- ity, left-continuity ofθi,t and the integrability condition (2.1) are suﬃcient to ensure martingality of the stochastic integral ∫t 0θi,udNu,t∈ [0, 1] (see, e.g., p.171 in Protter 2004).15 Except for Example 5.3, however, strategies θi,t are continuous and, thus, are automatically left-continuous in Deﬁnition 2.1. 15Veriﬁcation of optimality of conjectured optimizers in continuous-time stochastic control prob- lems always involves proving certain stochastic integrals are martingales. This is illustrated in Duﬃe (2001, Chapter 9C). 12 Step 2: This step constructs perceptions for a generic investor i about the market- clearing prices Sθi t she faces given arbitrary holdings θi,t. In equilibrium, price dy- namics and price perceptions must agree. Oﬀ equilibrium, however, price perceptions must be reasonable. We describe two diﬀerent cases of reasonable oﬀ-equilibrium price beliefs. One case is standard pricing-taking. This is the simplest version of our model. The second case has price-impact in the sense that investors are strategic and believe their individual holdings aﬀect oﬀ-equilibrium market-clearing prices. In particular, although we assume investors are price-takers at the market open att = 0, our second case allows for price impact of investor holdings θi,t over the rest of the day for t∈ (0, 1). Case of price-taking perceptions: Optimal holdings for investors with price- taking beliefs are derived from (1.1) under the assumption that the oﬀ-equilibrium prices Sθi t each investor i perceives herself as facing, the martingale Nt, and the perceived price drift µθi t given holdings θi,t for investor i are all unaﬀected by her arbitrary holdings θi,t. The equilibrium construction for this case in Sections 3 and 4 then derives an equilibrium price process such that the market clears given investor optimal holdings given the equilibrium price process with price-taking beliefs. Case of price-impact perceptions: There are many ways to model price-impact. For example, stock prices are aﬃne functions of investor orders in the discrete-time models in Vayanos (1999, Eq. (4.2)) and Kyle (1985, Eq. (3.12)). A discrete-time version of our model also takes price changes ∆Stn as aﬃne functions of the holdings θi,tn. However, modeling oﬀ-equilibrium prices in continuous-time as functions of the levels of arbitrary holdings over time is technically diﬃcult because, while θi,t can serve as an integrand, integration with respect to dθi,t might be ill-posed. Thus, in our continuous-time model of price impact, we assume that the perceived price drift µθi t is an aﬃne function of the holdingsθi,t, but that the martingaleNt in (1.7) and the initial valueS0 = ˆS0 are both independent of the holding processθi,t. Thus, our model of price-impact is an aﬃne drift speciﬁcation in the general continuous-time price- impact setting in Cvitani´ c and Cuoco (1998). Given the perceived oﬀ-equilibrium price impacts, we derive optimal holding strategies for investors in our model. Our eventual goal is to construct a Subgame Perfect Nash equilibrium, so the oﬀ-equilibrium prices associated with oﬀ-equilibrium holdings by a given investor i 13 must be consistent with oﬀ-equilibrium beliefs for other investors such that, given the other investors’ optimal oﬀ-equilibrium holdings given their beliefs, the market clears to produce the prices perceived by investor i. We denote the other investors who respond to oﬀ-equilibrium holdings by investor i using an index j⁄=i. Next, we construct perceived market-clearing prices for investor i and the associated perceived responses θj,t of other investors j⁄=i to arbitrary holdings θi,t by investori. Our derivation of optimal investor holding strategies involves two diﬀerent oﬀ- equilibrium stock-price processes in the ﬁltrations in (1.12) and in the investor wealth dynamics in (1.2). First, let SY t denote the oﬀ-equilibrium prices as perceived by a generic investor j with j⁄=i given investor j’s own holdings θj,t and given a general state-process Yt representing the perceived net eﬀect of arbitrary holdings by other investors.16 Second, letSθi t denote oﬀ-equilibrium prices perceived by investori given investori’s holdingsθi,t and given the state-processYθi t induced by the market-clearing responses of investors j⁄= i to i’s holdings θi,t. The diﬀerence between these two perceived price processes is that SY t is for an arbitrary exogenous state-process Yt whereas Sθi t is for an endogenous state-process Yθi t given the eﬀect of θi,t on market- clearing. The prices SY t and Sθi t are linked with each other and with the equilibrium prices ˆSt. First, the initial stock prices SY 0 and Sθi 0 are always pinned down to be ˆS0 in (1.7). Thus, all investors act like price takers at time t = 0. However, the perceived oﬀ-equilibrium terminal prices Sθi 1 and SY 1 are not required to satisfy the equilibrium terminal condition (1.8). This is permissible because these are perceived oﬀ-equilibrium prices that can diﬀer from equilibrium prices. Second, the equilibrium holdings ˆθi,t for all traders i∈{ 1,..,M +M} must produce the same equilibrium stock price S ˆθi t = ˆSt, which in turn must satisfy condition (1.8) at time t = 1. The aspect of price beliefs that matters for modeling the impact of oﬀ-equilibrium holdings on market-clearing is how θi,t for an investor i at time t aﬀects the market- clearing stock-price drift µt and, thus, the investment attractiveness of holding stock at time t. Thus, we start this step with an assumption that the perceived general price process SY = (SY t )t∈[0,1] for other investors j ⁄= i in trader j’s optimization problem (1.1) has the form in (1.7) where the perceived stock-price drift µ = µY is 16The ﬁltrationFi,t in (1.12) also depends onS and thusFi,t varies depending on which stock-price process S∈{ ˆS,S θi,SY} we consider in the various steps of the equilibrium construction. 14 deﬁned as17 µY t :=    ν0(t)Yt +ν1(t)γ(t)˜aΣ +ν2(t)Bt +ν3(t)θj,t +ν4(t)γ(t)˜aj, j ∈{ 1,...,M}, ¯ν0(t)Yt + ¯ν1(t)γ(t)˜aΣ + ¯ν2(t)Bt + ¯ν3(t)θj,t, j ∈{ 1 +M,...,M +M}, (2.2) whereY = (Yt)t∈[0,1] is an exogenous state-process with c` agl` ad paths andν0(t),...,ν 4(t) and ¯ν0(t),..., ¯ν3(t) are continuous deterministic functions with ν0(t)⁄= 0, ¯ν0(t)⁄= 0 such that ν3(t)<κ (t) when M≥ 1 and ¯ν3(t)<κ(t) when M≥ 1, t ∈ [0, 1). (2.3) The martingale N in the price process (1.7) for SY has dynamics dNt :=dDt +ζ(t)ϵdBt, N 0 := 0, (2.4) where ζ(t) is a continuous deterministic function of time for t∈ [0, 1]. The coeﬃcients ν0(t),..., ¯ν3(t) and ζ(t) in (2.2) and (2.4) describe the subjective perceptions (i.e., oﬀ-equilibrium beliefs) of investor j about the price process she faces. We assume all investors perceive the same pricing coeﬃcients. The coeﬃcients ν3(t) and ¯ν3(t) represent, speciﬁcally, an investor’s perception of how her own holdings θj,t directly aﬀect prices oﬀ-equilibrium. In the discussion here, the perceived price coeﬃcients are taken as given. However, they are endogenized in the equilibrium construction in Section 3. Because the state-process Yt is general (e.g., Yt need not be Markovian), it is crucial for tractability that investors have linear utilities as in (1.1). With linear preferences, investors’ optimal holding decisions at each time t∈ [0, 1] only depend on the perceived price drift and the associated holding penalties accruing at that time t. Thus, investors optimize pointwise given the impact their holdings have on the perceived price drift.18 19 These arguments lead to Lemma A.1 in Appendix A, which 17The equilibrium construction in Section 3 explicitly solves for perceived prices with this conjec- tured form that are consistent with equilibrium. 18More speciﬁcally, investors maximize the expectation of the integrand of a Riemann integral of a quadratic function of θi,t at each time t∈ [0, 1]. See Eqs. (A.2) and (A.3) in Appendix A. 19An optimal trading strategy is typically computed as the solution to a Hamilton-Bellman-Jacobi equation that takes intertemporal trade-oﬀs into account. However, in our model the intraday target trajectory γ(t)˜ai and hedge positions ϵBt are interpreted as the solutions to the targeted investors’ 15 gives the optimal response holdings θY j,t in (A.1) for targeted investors and hedgers given a perceived price process for investor j of the form described in (2.2) through (2.4).20 The restrictions in (2.3) ensure the second-order condition for optimality of (A.1) is satisﬁed. The optimal-response holdings θY j,t in Lemma A.1 in Appendix A are for an ar- bitrary left-continuous state-process Yt. However, to construct perceived prices for investori that also clear the stock market, the price perceptions of investori must take into account the fact that her holdings θi,t also aﬀect the state-process Yt perceived by other investors j⁄=i via the market-clearing condition: θi,t + M+M∑ j⁄=i,j=1 θY j,t = 0, t ∈ [0, 1], (2.5) where θY j,t denotes optimal responses of investors j ⁄= i in (A.1) in Lemma A.1 in Appendix A to a state-process Yt. Thus, given arbitrary holdings θi,t, we can then solve (2.5) for the associated state-process, which we denote by Yθi t . The state- process Yθi t ensures that the oﬀ-equilibrium optimal-response holdings for traders j∈{ 1,...,M +M}\{ i} clear the stock market as trader i varies her oﬀ-equilibrium holdings θi,t. The perceived oﬀ-equilibrium market-clearing stock-price process Sθi t associated with θi,t has a drift process µθi t given by (2.2) with Yt := Yθi t . However, the initial price Sθi 0 := ˆS0 and martingale Nt in dSθi t in (1.7) do not depend on θi,t. Lemma 2.2. Assume that ν0(t)⁄= 0 , ¯ν0(t)⁄= 0 , t∈ [0, 1], and that (2.3) holds. The oﬀ-equilibrium stock-price process perceived by investor i∈{ 1,...,M +M} for arbitrary holdings θi∈A i is deﬁned by Sθi t := ˆS0 + ∫ t 0 µθi udu +Nt, t ∈ [0, 1], (2.6) and hedgers’ intertemporal partial optimization problems with order-execution, risk, and inventory costs but when price pressure from aggregate order-ﬂow imbalances is ignored. As a result, the full optimization problem in (1.1) involves a series of separable trade-oﬀs between incremental penalties for deviations of θi,t from the target trajectory and hedge positions at each time t∈ [0, 1] and the contemporaneous price drift (expected capital gain) at time t when investors adjust their position to trade on price pressure. 20In Lemma A.1 in Appendix A with price-impact, the state-process Yt must be inferable, which is ensured by Yt having left-continuous paths, which follows from investor holdings having left- continuous paths as required by Deﬁnition 2.1. If investor strategies are continuous, then the state- process Yt can be taken to be continuous too. 16 where the stock-price drift is deﬁned by µθi t :=    2κν0(¯ν3−κ)+(¯ν3−κ)ν0ν4+M(κ−ν3)(ν1¯ν0−ν0¯ν1) (M−1)ν0(κ−¯ν3)+M ¯ν0(κ−ν3) γ˜aΣ− M(κ−ν3)(ν0¯ν2−ν2¯ν0+2κν0ϵ) (M−1)ν0(κ−¯ν3)+M ¯ν0(κ−ν3)Bt +κ(−2κν0+2ν0¯ν3+ν3M ¯ν0)−ν3((M+1)ν0(¯ν3−κ)+ν3M ¯ν0) (M−1)ν0(κ−¯ν3)+M ¯ν0(κ−ν3) θi,t + 2κν0(κ−¯ν3)+Mν0ν4(κ−¯ν3)+ν4M ¯ν0(κ−ν3) (M−1)ν0(κ−¯ν3)+M ¯ν0(κ−ν3) γ˜ai, i ∈{ 1,...,M}, − (κ−¯ν3)(¯ν0(2κ+Mν1+ν4)−Mν0¯ν1) Mν0(κ−¯ν3)+(M−1)¯ν0(κ−ν3) γ˜aΣ− M(κ−¯ν3)(ν2¯ν0−ν0¯ν2)+2κ(M−1)¯ν0ϵ(κ−ν3) Mν0(κ−¯ν3)+(M−1)¯ν0(κ−ν3) Bt + 2κ¯ν0(ν3−κ)+κMν0¯ν3−Mν0¯ν2 3+(M+1)¯ν0¯ν3(κ−ν3) Mν0(κ−¯ν3)+(M−1)¯ν0(κ−ν3) θi,t, i ∈{M + 1,...,M +M}, (2.7) and where the martingale Nt is as in (2.4), and given an initial stock price ˆS0 that satisﬁes (1.11). The price process (2.6) clears the stock market in the sense that (2.5) holds. We note three consequences of Lemma 2.2: First, because the state-process Yθi t in (A.5) in Appendix A is aﬃne in θi∈A i, we see that Yθi t has left-continuous paths because θi,t has left-continuous paths (see Deﬁnition 2.1). Furthermore, from (A.1) in Lemma A.1 in Appendix A, investor j’s optimal response θYθi j,t for j⁄= i is also aﬃne in trader i’s oﬀ-equilibrium holdings θi,t. Second, because the price drift (2.7) is aﬃne in θi,t, the corresponding optimization problem (1.1) is a quadratic problem when the stock price is deﬁned as in (2.6). These two properties are used to derive the equilibrium holdings ˆθi∈A i in Theorem 3.2 in Section 3. Third, the case of price- taking perceptions is a special case of the price-impact case in which the coeﬃcients multiplyingθi,t in (2.7) are zero. Our equilibrium construction in Section 3 is for the general price-impact case. Section 4 then derives conditions on the price-perception coeﬃcients in (2.2) for equilibrium with price-taking perceptions. 3 Equilibria with deterministic targets Having described the individual investor optimization problems in Section 2, this section formally deﬁnes and constructs an equilibrium. Deﬁnition 3.1 (Equilibrium). A Subgame Perfect Nash equilibrium consists of per- ceived price coeﬃcients given by deterministic functionsν0(t),...,ν 4(t), and ¯ν0(t),..., ¯ν3(t) in (2.2) with ν0(t)⁄= 0 and ¯ν0(t)⁄= 0, an initial stock price ˆS0 satisfying (1.11), and a martingale N = (Nt)t∈[0,1] such that, given the perceived stock-price process (2.6), the resulting optimal stock-holding processes ˆθ1,t,..., ˆθM+M,t from (1.1) satisfy the following conditions: 17 (i) The optimal holdings ˆθi∈A i, i∈{ 1,...,M +M}, satisfy the intraday market- clearing condition (1.5). (ii) When θi,t is set to the optimizer ˆθi,t in (2.7), the resulting stock-price drifts µ ˆθi t are the same ˆµt for all investors i∈{ 1,...,M +M}. The corresponding equilibrium stock-price process from (2.6) with θi,t = ˆθi,t is denoted by ˆSt. (iii) The stock-price process ˆSt satisﬁes the terminal price condition (1.8) at time t = 1 for given constants ϕ0,ϕ 1∈ R. ♦ Our equilibrium concept is stronger than Nash because it involves beliefs for each investori about the perceptions of other investors j⁄= i that determine investor j’s optimal responses to hypothetical oﬀ-equilibrium holdings by investor i. Our main result is Theorem 3.2 below, which gives restrictions ensuring equilib- rium existence (proof is in Appendix A). As we shall see, there are two degrees of freedom in the perceived price coeﬃcients ν0(t),...,ν 4(t) and ¯ν0(t),..., ¯ν3(t), and so there are multiple (indeed, inﬁnitely many) equilibria. This situation is similar to Vayanos (1999, Sec. 5) and Sannikov and Skrzypacz (2016). Keeping the price im- pact coeﬃcients ν3(t) and ¯ν3(t) as the two free parameters simpliﬁes the exposition. In Section 4 we use the mathematical ﬂexibility of these free functions to consider equilibria with diﬀerent amounts of competition and strategic behavior. The equilibrium stock-price process ˆSt will be shown to have the form ˆSt :=Dt +g(t)˜aΣ +ζ(t)ϵBt, (3.1) for two continuously diﬀerentiable deterministic functions g,ζ : [0, 1]→ R. Con- sequently, the equilibrium stock-price drift ˆµt and martingale Nt in (1.7) are given by ˆµt =g′(t)˜aΣ +ζ′(t)ϵBt, dNt =dDt +ζ(t)ϵdBt, N 0 = 0. (3.2) We note three features about (3.1). First, equilibrium prices are expressed in (3.1) as functions of the underlying trading-demand variables ˜ aΣ and Bt. In particular, prices are functions of market-clearing investor holdings, which are functions of the 18 underlying latent trading-demand variables ˜ai (which aggregate to ˜aΣ) and Bt. The intuition is that equilibrium prices depend on the underlying latent total trading de- mand, which includes both trades that occur in equilibrium and also trading-demand imbalances that prices deter so that markets clear. Making the role of latent trading demand — and especially demand imbalances due to intraday TWAP trading targets — explicit is one of the contributions of our analysis. Second, given ˜ aΣ, the equilib- rium stock-price process is Gaussian. More speciﬁcally, the price process (3.1) is a Bachelier model with time-dependent coeﬃcients. 21 Third, the individual investors’ perceived price processes in (2.6) exhibit path dependency in the sense that the path of (Bu)u∈[0,t] is needed to determine Sθi t for t∈ [0, 1] for an arbitrary holding process θi,t. However, only the current value of Bt aﬀects the equilibrium prices ˆSt in (3.1). Theorem 3.2. Let γ : [0, 1]→ [0,∞) be a continuous function, let ν3, ¯ν3 : [0, 1)→ R be continuous functions, let κ,κ : [0, 1)→ (0,∞) be continuous and integrable functions; i.e., ∫ 1 0 ( κ(t) +κ(t) ) dt< ∞, (3.3) that satisfy the second-order conditions (2.3), and let there be at least M +M≥ 2 investors. In addition, assume that (1.6) holds in the money market. Deﬁne the functions in (3.1) by g(t) :=ϕ1− ∫ 1 t µ1(u)γ(u)du, ζ(t) :=ϕ0− ∫ 1 t µ2(u)du, (3.4) 21While the equilibrium stock price can be negative with positive probability, such Gaussian models have been widely used in the market microstructure literature by, e.g., Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) and Kyle (1985). Gaussian models are also widely used in the optimal order-execution literature including Almgren and Chriss (1999, 2001); see, e.g., the discussion in the Gatheral and Schied (2013, Section 3.1) survey. 19 for t∈ [0, 1] where22 µ1 :=− 2κ ( 2(M +M)κ− (1 +M +M)¯ν3 ) M ( 2(M +M)κ− (1 +M +M)¯ν3 ) +M ( 2(M +M)κ− (1 +M +M)ν3 ), µ2 :=− 2Mκ ( 2(M +M)κ− (1 +M +M)ν3 ) M ( 2(M +M)κ− (1 +M +M)¯ν3 ) +M ( 2(M +M)κ− (1 +M +M)ν3 ). (3.5) Provided that g(0)⁄= 0, price-perception functions ν0⁄= 0,ν 1,ν 2,ν 4, and ¯ν0, ¯ν1, ¯ν2 sat- isfying (A.10) and (A.12) in Appendix A together withNt in (3.2) form an equilibrium in which: (i) Investor equilibrium holdings are given by ˆθi,t =    α1(t)γ(t)˜aΣ +α2(t)ϵBt +α3(t)γ(t)˜ai, i ∈{ 1,...,M}, ¯α1(t)γ(t)˜aΣ + ¯α2(t)ϵBt, i ∈{M + 1,...,M +M}, (3.6) where α1 := (M +M− 1)µ1 2(M +M)κ− (1 +M +M)ν3 , α2 := (M +M− 1)µ2 2(M +M)κ− (1 +M +M)ν3 , α3 := 2κ(M +M− 1) 2(M +M)κ− (1 +M +M)ν3 , ¯α1 = (M +M− 1)µ1 2(M +M)κ− (1 +M +M)¯ν3 , ¯α2 :=− M(M +M− 1)µ2 M ( 2(M +M)κ− (1 +M +M)ν3 ). (3.7) (ii) The equilibrium stock price ˆSt is given by (3.1) with g(t) and ζ(t) from (3.4). The associated equilibrium price drift in (3.2) is ˆµt :=µ1(t)γ(t)˜aΣ +µ2(t)ϵBt, (3.8) with µ1(t) and µ2(t) from (3.5). 22For notational brevity, the time arguments for µ1(t),µ 2(t),κ (t),κ(t),ν 3(t), and ¯ν3(t) are sup- pressed. 20 Remark 3.1. We note several properties of this equilibrium here: 1. From (3.1), the initial equilibrium stock price at t = 0 is ˆS0 =D0 +g(0)˜aΣ +ζ(0)ϵB0 =D0 +g(0)˜aΣ, (3.9) where the second equality follows because B0 = 0. Therefore, whenever g(t) from (3.4) satisﬁes g(0)⁄= 0, the aggregate target ˜aΣ can be inferred from ˆS0 and vice versa given that D0 is public information. Thus, when g(0)⁄= 0, we have σ( ˆS0) = σ(˜aΣ) as required in (1.11). By (3.4), the condition g(0)⁄= 0 is equivalent to ϕ1⁄= ∫ 1 0 µ1(u)γ(u)du, (3.10) where µ1 is from (3.5). Consequently, for given functions ( γ,κ, κ,ν 3, ¯ν3) satis- fying the second-order conditions (2.3), there is just one value of the terminal- price coeﬃcient ϕ1 for which g(0) = 0. For all other ϕ1, we have g(0)⁄= 0 and an equilibrium exists. 2. The equilibrium stock-price drift ˆµt and price levels ˆSt have the following qual- itative properties: The second-order conditions (2.3) ensure 2(M +M)κ− (1 +M +M)ν3 >κ> 0, 2(M +M)κ− (1 +M +M)¯ν3 >κ> 0, (3.11) so that the equilibrium price-drift coeﬃcients in (3.5) can be signed withµ1(t)< 0 and µ2(t) < 0. This is intuitive. Larger latent aggregate trading-demand targets ˜aΣ and larger hedging needs ϵBt mean that the equilibrium price drift ˆµt must be lower in order to incentivize price-sensitive targeted investors and hedgers to adjust their holdings to clear the market. Given negative price-drift coeﬃcients µ1(t) and µ2(t), it then follows from (3.4) that, given end-of-day terminal pricing coeﬃcients ϕ0,ϕ 1≥ 0, the intraday price-level coeﬃcients g(t) and ζ(t) are both positive. 3. The investor holding coeﬃcients α1(t),..., ¯α2(t) in (3.7) can also be signed us- ing (3.5) and (3.11). The targeted-investor coeﬃcients α1(t) and α2(t) on the 21 aggregate imbalance state variables ˜aΣ andϵBt are both negative. This is intu- itive because investors reduce their personal holdings in response to the lower price drifts induced in equilibrium by positive latent aggregate imbalances. A similar intuition applies for the negative hedger coeﬃcient ¯α1(t) on the latent aggregate rebalancer imbalance ˜aΣ. The coeﬃcient α3(t) on the targeted in- vestor’s personal target ˜ai is, as expected, positive. Similarly, the sign of the hedger’s coeﬃcient ¯α2(t) on the hedging imbalance state variable is positive. This is the net eﬀect of ϵBt both as a personal target in the hedger penalty Li,t in (1.4) and as a state variable for the impact of the aggregate latent hedger imbalance on the price drift in the investor trading proﬁts Xi,t in (1.2). Recall that all initial stock positions have been normalized to zero for all traders (with no loss of generality). Therefore, from (3.6), there are initial discrete orders (i.e., block trades θi,0−θi,−⁄= 0) at t = 0. This is related to why the initial price ˆS0 fully reveals ˜aΣ. However, afterwards trading evolves continuously for t∈ (0, 1].23 4. Inserting ¯ν0(t) from (A.10) in Appendix A into (2.7) and rearranging using (3.6) and (3.7) for the equilibrium holdings ˆθi,t and (3.5) and (3.8) for the equilibrium price drift ˆµt lets us express the perceived price drift for an investor i in (2.7) as µθi t =    ˆµt + ν3(t)(M+M+1)−2κ(t) M+M−1 ( θi,t− ˆθi,t ) , i ∈{ 1,...,M}, ˆµt + ¯ν3(t)(M+M+1)−2κ(t) M+M−1 ( θi,t− ˆθi,t ) , i ∈{M + 1,...,M +M}. (3.12) This is not surprising given the equilibrium requirement that each investor per- ceives the same price drift in equilibrium, i.e.,µ ˆθi t = ˆµt for alli∈{ 1,...,M +M}. Because the equilibrium holdings ˆθi,t include an ˜ai term, the representation (3.12) explains why there is an investor-speciﬁc ˜ai term in the perceived price drift µθi t in (2.7). 5. The speciﬁc price-perception functions ν0,ν 1, and ν2 for the targeted investors are irrelevant in Theorem 3.2 in the sense that, given ν3 and ¯ν3 and provided ν0(t)⁄= 0, all diﬀerent ν0⁄= 0, ν1, and ν2 produce the same equilibrium prices 23The discontinuous model in Example 5.3 below has optimal discrete orders throughout the trading day. 22 and investor holdings. To provide some intuition, consider the drift in (2.2) for j∈{ 1,...,M + ¯M}. This drift is overparameterized because both Y and θj are expressible in terms of (˜aj, ˜aΣ,B ) when Y is replaced by the solution Yθj of (2.5). We also note here that, whileν0,ν1, andν2 do not aﬀect equilibrium prices and investor holdings, they do pin down the other perceived price coeﬃcients ν4,ν0,ν1, and ν2 via (A.10) and (A.12) in Appendix A, which are related to market-clearing and the common perceptions of equilibrium price conditions from Deﬁnition 3.1. There is an important diﬀerence between prices in equilibrium and perceived oﬀ- equilibrium prices. Both in-equilibrium and oﬀ-equilibrium, the stock-price drifts ˆµt and µθi t are determined such that the market clears at each time t. In the one case, this is part of the deﬁnition of equilibrium, and, in the other case, it is a reasonable oﬀ-equilibrium belief. However, in equilibrium, the price level ˆSt adjusts at time t to be consistent with the required market-clearing drift ˆ µt and the terminal price condition in (1.8). For example, a large target ˜ aΣ leads from (3.1) and (3.4) to a high opening price ˆS0 at t = 0 so that the intraday drift ˆ µt from (3.5) and (3.8) can be predictably low with prices drifting down in expectation over the day to the terminal price ˆS1 in (1.8). Similarly, a positive random shock to Bt at time t leads from (3.1) and (3.4) to a random increase in prices ˆSt such that the market-clearing drift ˆµt can have a random decrease as required in (3.5) and (3.8). In contrast, for perceived oﬀ-equilibrium prices for investors with price-impact, we only specify how the perceived oﬀ-equilibrium price driftsµθi t in (2.7) change at each timet so that the market clears given an investor’s holdingsθi,t. However, the perceived oﬀ-equilibrium price levelSθi t at timet is not aﬀected byθi,t at timet. This simpliﬁes the speciﬁcation of oﬀ-equilibrium beliefs and is still reasonable for price beliefs since market-clearing depends on the price drift at time t, not on the contemporaneous price level (as per the discussion about the oﬀ-equilibrium price-impact model before (2.7)). Price pressure ˆSt−Dt is the eﬀect of intraday imbalances in latent trading demand. It can be positive or negative depending on the aggregate target imbalance ˜ aΣ and the hedging needϵBt. From (3.1), price pressure has a deterministic trendg(t)˜aΣ over the day given the total rebalancing target imbalance ˜aΣ and a stochastic component ζ(t)ϵBt due to the randomly evolving hedging target. For example, g(0)˜aΣ is the initial price impact of the aggregate latent trading-target imbalance ˜ aΣ revealed by 23 the opening order-ﬂow at time t = 0. Thereafter, the price impact g(t)˜aΣ of the imbalance ˜aΣ varies predictably over time with g(t). A similar phenomenon applies to price pressure due to hedging demand. In particular, ζ(t)ϵdBt is the immediate impact of an innovation ϵdBt in hedging demand at time t, and then ζ(s)ϵdBt is the predictable continuation impact of ϵdBt at times s > tlater in the day. From (3.4) and (3.5), we see that g(t) (the ˜aΣ coeﬃcient in ˆSt) is aﬃne in γ(t), and that ζ(t)ϵ (theBt coeﬃcient in ˆSt) is linear in ϵ (because ζ(t) does not depend on (γ,ϵ )). Thus, the path of intraday price pressure ˆSt−Dt at diﬀerent times t during the day has an intertemporal factor-type structure where ˜aΣ is a common factor (which is diﬀerent on diﬀerent days but ﬁxed over the course of a given day) that causes price pressure to change deterministically over the day given intraday variation in g(t), and Bt is a martingale that cause price pressure ˆSt−Dt to change randomly over the day. Thus, at a given times∈ [0, 1), the future random price pressure at subsequent times t∈ (s, 1] have the following conditional means and variances: E[ ˆSt−Dt|σ(˜aΣ,Bu)u∈[0,s]] =g(t)˜aΣ +ζ(t)ϵBs, V[ ˆSt−Dt|σ(˜aΣ,Bu)u∈[0,s]] =ζ(t)2ϵ2(t−s). (3.13) As a result, positive (negative) latent aggregate trading targets ˜aΣ lead to predictable positive (negative) price-pressure trends E[ ˆSt|σ(˜aΣ)]−Dt over the day. In addition, randomness in the intraday hedging factor Bt produces randomness in equilibrium price pressure, where higher hedging factors Bt are associate with higher prices and lower price drifts. Again, this is intuitive. Empirical predictions: Security prices are often decomposed econometrically into an informational component that follows a martingale and a residual liquidity eﬀect (as in, e.g., Hasbrouck 1991). A standard interpretation is that liquidity eﬀects in prices decay predictably over time as liquidity supply from initial liquidity providers is ﬁrst depleted by arriving order-ﬂow imbalances and then replenished as order-ﬂow imbalances are subsequently dispersed and absorbed by the broader market. Our model has two new empirical implications: First, our price pressureˆSt−Dt is driven by both arriving orders and also by what those orders reveal about the underlying latent trading-demand imbalances ˜aΣ andϵBt. Second, the source of intraday predictability in our price pressure diﬀers from the standard liquidity-supply interpretation. Price predictability here reﬂects the net eﬀect of predictable time variation in latent trading 24 demand (i.e., the targets γ(t)˜aΣ andϵBt) as well as predictability in liquidity supply (controlled by κ(t) and ¯κ(t)). Empirical predictions from our model are testable using diﬀerent types of data. First, using standard intraday price and order-ﬂow data (e.g., TAQ), the formula for equilibrium prices in (3.1) predicts intraday prices are driven by time-varying eﬀects (controlled by g(t)) of a daily aggregate parent target that is constant over the day (˜aΣ) plus a homoscedastic random walk ( Dt) and a second Brownian motion ( Bt) with heteroscedastic eﬀects (controlled by ζ(t)ϵ). Second, the price coeﬃcients g(t) and ζ(t) in (3.4) along with (3.5) give predictions for how the intraday eﬀects ( g and ζ in the ﬁrst prediction) vary across diﬀerent days given daily variation in the numbers of targeted rebalancers and hedgers (M andM) and given daily variation in order-execution costs due to variation in bid-ask spreads (since order-execution costs are implicitly represented byκ and ¯κ). This can be estimated using individual-trader data (e.g., from IIROC) and standard data on bid-ask quotes. 4 Competitive equilibrium and welfare From Theorem 3.2, the deterministic functions ν3(t) and ¯ν3(t) for perceived own- order price-impacts are two degrees of freedom in our model. By imposing additional economically-motivated structure onν3(t) and ¯ν3(t), we can identify unique equilibria corresponding to diﬀerent forms of competition and market power. From Section 2, price taking is a special case of interest. In the competitive Radner equilibrium, investors act like price-takers over the whole day — not just at the market open — in that the perceived prices Sθi t for each investor i are unaﬀected by her holdings θi,t. Hence, the competitive Radner equilibrium is obtained by requiring that the coeﬃcient in front ofθi,t in the perceived drift (2.7) for dSθi t is zero. From (3.12), this requirement on ν3(t) and ¯ν3(t) is seen to imply ν3(t)(M +M + 1)− 2κ(t) M +M− 1 = 0, ¯ν3(t)(M +M + 1)− 2κ(t) M +M− 1 = 0, (4.1) 25 which gives the competitive-equilibrium perceived pricing coeﬃcients 24 ν∗ 3(t) = 2κ(t) 1 +M +M, ¯ν∗ 3(t) = 2κ(t) 1 +M +M. (4.2) We show next that the competitive Radner equilibrium is the welfare-maximizing equilibrium. While there are many ways to measure social welfare (see, e.g., Section 6.1 in Vayanos 1999), we follow Du and Zhu (2017, Eq. 42) and consider maximizing the expected aggregate certainty-equivalent for the M +M investors. The certainty equivalent CEi∈ R for investor i is deﬁned by CEi :=Vi(Xi,0), i ∈{ 1,...,M +M}, (4.3) where the value functions Vi are deﬁned in (1.1). The aggregate expected social welfare objective is given by sup ν3(t),¯ν3(t) M+M∑ i=1 E[CEi], (4.4) subject to (ν3, ¯ν3) satisfying requirements (2.3). The expectation in the objective (4.4) is ex ante in the sense that it is taken over random daily investor variables (˜a1,..., ˜aM) and (θc 1,−,....,θ c M+M,−). The following theorem shows that the competitive Radner equilibrium (4.2) attains (4.4). Theorem 4.1. In the setting of Theorem 3.2, let the random private targets(˜a1,..., ˜aM) be square integrable and not perfectly correlated, and letM≥ 2. The competitive Rad- ner equilibrium with (4.2) is the welfare-maximizing equilibrium in that the unique maximizers of (4.4) are given by ν∗ 3 and ¯ν∗ 3 in (4.2). The corresponding optimal 24At ﬁrst glance, it might seem that price-taking would mean price perceptions for investor i with ν3(t) = 0 (for targeted investors) and ¯ ν3(t) = 0 (for hedgers). However, investor i’s holdings θi,t have both a direct eﬀect (ν3 and ¯ν3) on perceived market-clearing prices in (2.6) and also an indirect eﬀect via the optimal responses θYθi j,t of other investorsj⁄=i toθi,t via the perceived market-clearing condition (2.5) and the endogenous perceived state-processYθi t solving (2.5). The conditions in (4.1) ensure that investor holdings θi,t have no perceived price impact net of both eﬀects. 26 holding strategies (3.6) are given by ˆθi,t =    γ(t)˜ai− κ(t) ( γ(t)˜aΣ+MϵBt ) Mκ(t)+Mκ(t) , i = 1,...,M, −κ(t)γ(t)˜aΣ+Mκ(t)ϵBt Mκ+Mκ(t) , i =M + 1,...,M +M, (4.5) and the corresponding equilibrium stock-price drift coeﬃcients in (3.8) are given by µ1(t) :=− 2κ(t)κ(t) Mκ(t) +Mκ(t), µ 2(t) :=− 2κ(t)κ(t)Mϵ Mκ(t) +Mκ(t). (4.6) The proof (see Appendix A) uses the non-trivial correlations between (˜a1,..., ˜aM) to produce a strict inequality in Cauchy-Schwartz’s inequality. This ensures that the second-order condition for optimality corresponding to (4.4) holds. A natural question concerns the impact of benchmarks like TWAP and Almgren- Chriss targets on competitive ﬁnancial markets. By inserting (4.2) into (3.5), the price coeﬃcients (3.4) become g(t) =ϕ1 + 2 ∫ 1 t κ(u)κ(u) κ(u)M +κ(u)Mγ(u)du, ζ(t) =ϕ0 + 2M ∫ 1 t κ(u)κ(u) κ(u)M +κ(u)Mdu. (4.7) From (4.7), when ϕ0 > 0 and ϕ1 > 0, then both functions g(t) and ζ(t) are positive, and equilibrium prices ˆSt diﬀer from Dt. In the special case of ϕ0 := ϕ1 := 0, the formulas in (4.7) show that if either κ or κ is set to zero (but not both) over [0 , 1], then g and ζ become 0, and, thus, ˆSt becomes Dt. This is because liquidity supply becomes inﬁnite with Li,1 = 0 for some investors. Foru∈ [0, 1), the integrand term κ(u)κ(u) κ(u)M+κ(u)M in (4.7) is increasing inκ(u) because its derivative with respect to κ(u) is Mκ(u)2 (κ(u)M+κ(u)M)2≥ 0. Therefore, given M,M≥ 1, the functions g(t) and ζ(t) in (4.7) are increasing in κ in the sense that κ(u) ≤ κ◦(u) for u∈ [0,t ] produces corresponding ordered solutions g(t)≤g◦(t) and ζ(t)≤ ζ◦(t). Hence, when the incremental order-execution costs and inventory and risk- management penalties for trading deviations from the target trajectory γ(t)˜ai are large, then predictable trends in intraday price pressure g(t)˜aΣ are large, and market liquidity ζ(t) for hedging trading imbalances ϵBt is low, and price-pressure variance ζ(t)2ϵ2t is high. This leads to the following comparison result: 27 Corollary 4.2. In the competitive Radner equilibrium with ν∗ 3 and ¯ν∗ 3 from (4.2), the function ζ(t) in (4.7) is increasing in κ(t) and ¯κ(t). Consequently, for a ﬁxed function κ(t) and a time point t◦∈ (0, 1), for two penalty-severity functions κ(t) and κ◦(t) ordered such that κ(t)<κ◦(t) for t∈ [0,t◦) and κ(t) =κ◦(t) for t∈ [t◦, 1], the illiquidity ζ(t) and price volatility in (3.13) are less in the market with κ(t) than in the market with κ◦(t). The same is true for analogous ¯κ(t) and ¯κ◦(t). Proof. The ﬁrst claim follows from ζ’s representation in (4.7). The second claim follows from the representation of ˆSt−Dt in (3.1). The third claim follows from symmetry. ♦ In addition, in the competitive equilibrium, predictable trends in intraday price pres- sureg(t)˜aΣ are increasing in the target ratio γ(t), and price volatility is increasing in the hedging scalar ϵ. For markets to clear, the equilibrium holdingsˆθi,t of targeted investors and hedgers diﬀer from their targets. In the competitive equilibrium, these diﬀerences, from (4.5), are ˆθi,t−γ(t)˜ai =−γ(t)˜aΣ +MϵBt Mκ(t) κ(t) +M , i = 1,...,M, ˆθi,t−ϵBt =−γ(t)˜aΣ +MϵBt M +Mκ(t) κ(t) , i =M + 1,...,M +M. (4.8) Thus, competitive rebalancers and liquidity providers split the aggregate imbalances γ(t)˜aΣ +MϵBt with the hedgers independently of their individual targets ˜ ai. The sharing is pro rata adjusted for their diﬀerential penalty severities. In this context, we note that intraday liquidity providers (i.e., targeted investors with targets ˜ai = 0) absorb a share of the aggregate demand imbalance, but not the full imbalance given their inventory-holding penalties from (1.3). Our results are consistent with evidence in van Kerval, Kwan, and Westerholm (2018) that dynamic trading by large investors involves reciprocal liquidity provision (if investor targets are in opposite directions and cancel out in aggregate) or reduced trading (if their targets are in the same direction). The limits of the diﬀerences in (4.8) as time t↑ 1 depend on the limiting behavior of the relative penalty severities κ(t) κ(t). Section 7 gives examples of κ(t) and κ(t) and illustrates diﬀerent possible limits of (4.8). 28 In non-competitive equilibria, investors behave strategically over t ∈ (0, 1] in that they perceive their holdings have an impact on prices. 25 In particular, the θi,t-coeﬃcients in the perceived drift (2.7) for dSθi t are non-zero. A natural non- competitive speciﬁcation is that these drift coeﬃcients would be negative so that increased positive holdings θi,t would depress perceived price drifts. Once again, the individual non-competitive strategies aggregate such that the resulting equilibrium prices only depend on the aggregate state variables ˜aΣ andϵBt. However, if investors are not price-takers and (4.2) does not hold, then the individual rebalancer targets ˜ai can appear in the rebalancer deviation ˆθi,t−γ(t)˜ai in addition to ˜aΣ and ϵBt. Empirical predictions: Eq. (4.7) and Corollary 4.2 lead to a set of empirical predictions about changing conditions across diﬀerent days in a competitive market. Suppose that on diﬀerent days there are diﬀerent numbers of investorsM (rebalancers and liquidity providers) and M (hedgers) with diﬀerent penalty severities κ and κ. Our model predicts the intraday price-pressure varianceζ(t)2ϵ2t and market illiquidity ζ(t) should be higher on days on which there are fewer rebalancers and liquidity providers M and larger penalty severities κ and κ. These results are not normative critiques of TWAP trading but rather positive predictions about the empirical eﬀect of targeted trading on daily market dynamics. 5 Equilibria with stochastic targets Because our traders have linear preferences, they behave myopically in the sense that the solution to their individual optimization problems (1.1) is found by maximizing pointwise at each time t∈ [0, 1]. Therefore, Theorem 3.2(i) continues to hold for equilibrium investor holdings ˆθi,t when the deterministic target ratio function γ(t) is replaced with an arbitrary stochastic process γ = (γt)t∈[0,1] that is independent of the Brownian motions (D,B ) and the private targets (˜a1,..., ˜aM). A natural interpre- tation is that random intraday ﬂuctuations in implicit bid-ask order-execution costs 25Even with non-price-taking behavior over t∈ (0, 1], our model still requires price-taking at the market open t = 0 such that (1.11) holds for the opening price S0 both on- and oﬀ-equilibrium. Allowing for non-price-taking behavior at t = 0 would complicate the measurability condition in (1.11), and, thus, might require investors to ﬁlter over time to estimate ˜ aΣ rather than being able to infer it from S0. Modeling targeted trading in this more complicated learning environment would be an interesting future extension. 29 lead to changes in the target ratio γt. Once again, the rebalancer penalty process Li,t is a reduced-form for incremental order-execution, inventory, and risk-management costs relative to the now stochastic target trajectory γt˜ai. Provided γt is observable for all investors at time t∈ [0, 1], we can re-deﬁne the ﬁltrations in (1.12) as Fi,t :=    σ(Su,Du,Bu,γu, ˜ai,θc i,−)u∈[0,t], i = 1,...,M, σ(Su,Du,Bu,γu,θc i,−)u∈[0,t], i =M + 1,...,M +M. (5.1) Lemma A.1 in Appendix A (trader j’s optimal response) continues to hold word- for-word when γ(t) is replaced with γt and the martingale Nt in (2.4) is replaced by either of the two martingales in (5.6) and (5.13) below. From the proof of Lemma A.1, the reason this extension is possible is that traders with linear utilities solve for their optimal holdings via pointwise optimization at each t∈ [0, 1]. Theorem 3.2(ii) for equilibrium prices ˆSt needs to be adjusted depending on the speciﬁcation of the stochastic dynamics of the target-ratio process γt. We consider two speciﬁc examples of stochastic target ratios. Both examples have a zero initial valueγ0 = 0, and both tie down the terminal target ratio by requiring γ1 = 1 at the end of the day. Example 5.1 (Brownian bridge). In this target speciﬁcation, the deterministic tar- get ratio γ(t) is replaced with the stochastic target-ratio process γt deﬁned as the Brownian bridge process solving the stochastic diﬀerential equation dγt := 1−γt 1−t dt +dZt, γ 0 := 0, (5.2) where Z = (Zt)t∈[0,1] is an independent standard Brownian motion. At time s, the conditional expected future target ratio at time t>s is Es[γt] =γs + t−s 1−s(1−γs), 0≤s<t< 1. (5.3) Moreover, the drift in (5.2) ensures that γt→ 1 almost surely as t↑ 1. To derive the appropriate version of Theorem 3.2(ii), we redeﬁne the candidate stock price (3.1) as ˆSt :=Dt + ( h(t) +σ(t)γt ) ˜aΣ +ζ(t)ϵBt, t ∈ [0, 1], (5.4) for three deterministic functions h(t),σ (t), and ζ(t) solving the system of linear 30 ODEs: σ′(t) = σ(t) 1−t +µ1(t), σ (1) = 0, h′(t) =−σ(t) 1−t, h (1) =ϕ1, ζ′(t) =µ2(t), ζ (1) =ϕ0, (5.5) where the deterministic functions µ1 and µ2 are unchanged from (3.5). The linear ODE system (5.5) is triangular in the following sense: First, the ODE for σ(t) in (5.5) is explicitly solved in (5.8) below. Second, given σ(t), the remaining two ODEs in (5.5) for h(t) and ζ(t) are solved by integrating, where their solutions are given in (5.10) and (3.4). Furthermore, the martingale Nt in (3.2) is redeﬁned as follows: dNt :=dDt +ζ(t)ϵdBt +σ(t)˜aΣdZt, N 0 := 0. (5.6) Thus, a qualitatively new feature with a stochastic target ratio is that intraday price pressure due to the target imbalance ˜aΣ is now random due to the target-ratio shocks dZt in (5.2). Theorem 5.2 (Brownian bridge). Under the assumptions of Theorem 3.2, h(0)⁄= 0, and when the target ratioγt is a Brownian bridge, there exists an equilibrium in which: (i) The perceived price parameters ν0,...,ν 4 and ¯ν0,..., ¯ν3 are as in Theorem 3.2. (ii) Investor equilibrium holdings are given by ˆθi,t =    α1(t)γt˜aΣ +α2(t)ϵBt +α3(t)γt˜ai, i ∈{ 1,...,M}, ¯α1(t)γt˜aΣ + ¯α2(t)ϵBt, i ∈{M + 1,...,M +M}, (5.7) where the deterministic functions α1,α 2,α 3, ¯α1, and ¯α2 are given by (3.6). (iii) The equilibrium stock price is deﬁned by (5.4) with the martingale Nt given by (5.6) for deterministic functions h,σ , and ζ that are the unique solutions of the linear ODE system in (5.5), and the price drift is given by ˆµt :=µ1(t)γt˜aΣ +µ2(t)ϵBt, (5.8) 31 where the deterministic functions µ1 and µ2 are given by (3.5). Furthermore, the linear ODE for σ in (5.5) is uniquely solved by σ(t) =− 1 1−t ∫ 1 t (1−u)µ1(u)du, t ∈ [0, 1), (5.9) which satisﬁes limt↑1σ(t) = 0. The solution (5.9) ensures that σ(t) 1−t is integrable; hence,h(t) in (5.5) is found by integration for t∈ [0, 1]: h(t) =ϕ1 + ∫ 1 t σ(u) (1−u)du. (5.10) The solution for ζ(t) is identical to (3.4). ♦ The coeﬃcienth(t)+σ(t)γt giving the price impact of the target imbalance ˜aΣ with a Brownian bridge target ratio γt in (5.4) is related to the corresponding coeﬃcient g(t) with a deterministic target ratio γ(t) as follows: Consider a deterministic target ratio equal to the ex ante expected Brownian bridge target ratioγ(t) := E[γt] =t and letg(t) denote the associated deterministic price impact in (3.4). Then, for t∈ [0, 1]: E[h(t) +σ(t)γt] =h(t) +σ(t)γ(t) =g(t), (5.11) where the last equality holds because at t = 1 we have g(1) = ϕ1 = h(1) and for t <1 the time-derivatives of both sides of (5.11) agree. 26 In other words, the price impact h(t) +σ(t)γt in (5.4) with a stochastic target ratio γt has the same ex ante expected price impact as in the corresponding deterministic model with γ(t) = E[γt] plus additional randomness. An unrealistic feature of the Brownian bridge target ratio is thatγt can be negative as well as bigger than one with positive probability at times t∈ (0, 1). Our next target-ratio process does not have these problems. The following construction is based on gamma processes. 27 Such pure jump processes have a long history of applications 26Fort∈ (0, 1), Eq. (3.4) produces g′(t) = µ1(t)γ(t) = µ1(t)t whereas (5.9) and (5.10) produce σ′(t) = σ(t) 1−t +µ1(t) and h′(t) =−σ(t) 1−t . Combining these with the product rule produces the claim. 27Recall that a L´ evy processl = (lt)t∈[0,1] with l0 := 0 and gamma distributed increments lt−ls, 0≤s<t ≤ 1, is called a gamma process. In our case, the mean and variance are normalized to one. 32 in option pricing theory (see, e.g., Madan, Carr, and Chang 1998). Example 5.3 (Gamma bridge). The following model is based on Frei and Westray (2015). In this model variation, the deterministic target ratio γ(t) is replaced with a stochastic target-ratio process γt that is a c` adl` ag gamma bridge process starting at γ0 = 0 and ending at γ1 = 1. In between the gamma bridge increases via a series of positive jumps that are dense on (0, 1]. Corollary 1 in ´Emery and Yor (2004) ensures thatγt has predictable intensity 1−γt− 1−t and that the quadratic variation process [γ]t has predictable intensity (1−γt−)2 (1−t)(2−t) whereγt− := lims↑tγt fort∈ (0, 1] is the left-continuous version of the c` adl` ag processγt. In other words, the compensated processes γt− ∫ t 0 1−γs− 1−s ds, and [ γ]t− ∫ t 0 (1−γs−)2 (1−s)(2−s)ds, t ∈ [0, 1], (5.12) are martingales.28 The equilibrium holdings ˆθi,t in the gamma bridge model are unchanged from (3.6) in Theorem 3.2(i). To derive the appropriate version of Theorem 3.2(ii) for the equilibrium stock price ˆSt, the candidate stock price (3.1) is again redeﬁned by (5.4) for deterministic functions (h,σ,ζ ), and the martingale Nt is redeﬁned as dNt :=dDt +ζ(t)ϵdBt +σ(t)˜aΣ ( dγt− 1−γt− 1−t dt ) , N 0 := 0. (5.13) Consider now the requirements in Deﬁnition 2.1 in this setting. First, the quadratic variation process [N]t of Nt has dynamics given by d[N]t = ( 1 +ζ(t)2ϵ2) dt +σ(t)2˜a2 Σd[γ]t. (5.14) Consequently, the second martingale in (5.12) produces dynamics for the predictable quadratic variation process (i.e., [N]t’s compensator; see, e.g., p.122 in Protter 2004) A gamma bridge process is then deﬁned by γt := lt l1 fort∈ [0, 1]. See ´Emery and Yor (2004) as well as Frei and Westray (2015) for more details. 28For simplicity, the underlying gamma process is normalized to have unit mean and unit variance, which among other properties gives usE[γt] =t and E[γ2 t ] = 1 2t(1+t). However, the following analysis can easily be modiﬁed to include a parameter m∈ (0,∞) by redeﬁning the predictable intensity of the quadratic variation process [γ]t to be (1−γt−)2 (1−t)(1+m(1−t)) and leaving γ’s predictable intensity as 1−γt− 1−t . This would give us E[γ2 t ] = t(1+mt) 1+m whereas E[γt] =t is as before. 33 as d⟨N⟩t = ( 1 +ζ(t)2ϵ2 +σ(t)2˜a2 Σ (1−γt−)2 (1−t)(2−t) ) dt. (5.15) Second, while holdings θi,t are required to be adapted to the ﬁltration Fi,t deﬁned in (5.1), the left-continuity requirement in Deﬁnition 2.1 (part of the c` agl` ad requirement on admissible θi,t) prevents trader i∈{ 1,...,M} from using holdings that depend on γt such as, e.g., ˜aiγt. This is because gamma bridges are not left-continuous. However, θi,t can depend on the left-continuous version γt−.29 Theorem 5.4 ( Gamma bridge). Under the assumptions of Theorem 3.2, h(0)⁄= 0, and when the target ratio γt is a gamma bridge, there exists an equilibrium in which: (i) The perceived price parameters ν0,...,ν 4 and ¯ν0,..., ¯ν3 are as in Theorem 3.2. (ii) Investor equilibrium holdings are given by ˆθi,t =    α1(t)˜aΣγt− +α2(t)ϵBt +α3(t)˜aiγt−, i ∈{ 1,...,M}, ¯α1(t)˜aΣγt− + ¯α2(t)ϵBt, i ∈{M + 1,...,M +M}, (5.16) where the deterministic functions α1,α 2,α 3, ¯α1, and ¯α2 are given by (3.6). (iii) The equilibrium stock price is deﬁned by (5.4) with the martingale Nt deﬁned in (5.13) for deterministic functions h,σ , and ζ given as the unique solutions of the linear ODE system in (5.5), and the price drift is given by ˆµt :=µ1(t)˜aΣγt− +µ2(t)ϵBt, (5.17) where the deterministic functions µ1 and µ2 are again deﬁned by (3.5). ♦ The equilibria with the Brownian bridge and gamma bridge target-ratio processes γt in Theorem 5.2 and Theorem 5.4 both have the following comparative statistics: Corollary 5.5. In the setting of Theorem 5.2 and Theorem 5.4, the dynamics of the predictable quadratic variation process of the equilibrium price pressure ˆSt−Dt 29This admissibility restriction is essentially an assumption about how quickly investors can act on γt. 34 and the predictable quadratic cross-variation processes between ˆSt−Dt and (γ,B ) are given by d⟨ ˆS−D⟩t =σ(t)2˜a2 Σd⟨γ⟩t +ζ(t)2ϵ2dt, d⟨ ˆS−D,γ⟩t =σ(t)˜aΣd⟨γ⟩t, d⟨ ˆS−D,B⟩t =ζ(t)ϵdt. (5.18) In the Brownian bridge model (5.2) we have d⟨γ⟩t =dt whereas in the gamma bridge model the second martingale in (5.12) producesd⟨γ⟩t = (1−γt−)2 (1−t)(2−t)dt. Proof. From Theorem 5.2 and Theorem 5.4 the equilibrium stock-price process is (5.4) for both the Brownian and gamma bridge processes. The variations (5.18) follow from the representation of ˆSt−Dt from (5.4). ♦ The formulas in (5.18) show that comovement between price pressure and the under- lying sources of randomness are completely determined by the solutions of the ODEs in (5.5). Consequently, variances and covariances for the price pressure ˆSt−Dt can be expressed in terms of these functions. For example, in the gamma bridge model, the price-pressure variance is V[ ˆSt−Dt|σ(˜aΣ)] = E [( σ(t)(γt−t)˜aΣ +ζ(t)ϵBt )2 |σ(˜aΣ) ] =σ(s)2E[(γt−t)2]˜a2 Σ +ζ(t)2ϵ2t =σ(s)2t(1−t) 2 ˜a2 Σ +ζ(t)2ϵ2t, (5.19) where the last equality uses E[γt] = t and E[γ2 t ] = 1 2t(1 + t). Section 7 provides numerical examples of the solutions to the ODEs in (5.5). Empirical predictions: In the competitive Radner equilibrium whereν∗ 3 and ¯ν∗ 3 are given by (4.2), the representation of ζ in (4.7) continues to hold whereas σ in (5.9) becomes σ(t) = 1 1−t ∫ 1 t 2(1−u)κ(u)κ(u) Mκ(u) +Mκ(u)du, t ∈ [0, 1). (5.20) Consequently, in the competitive Radner equilibrium, the comparative statistics for price volatility given in Corollary 4.2 continue to hold (i.e., price volatility is increasing 35 in κ). 6 Connection to VWAP benchmark trading The stochastic target ratio γt in Section 5 is driven by randomly evolving market conditions that aﬀect intraday order-execution costs. This section shows how the stochastic target ratio γt can be linked to VWAP trading. To do this, we augment our earlier model so that aggregate market volume is now the sum of two components: First, as before, there is trading by the rebalancers, liquidity providers, and hedgers. Second, there is now additional trading by a new group of investors that we introduce into the model. These are a large number of other buyers and sellers — who we call the crowd — with inelastic trading demands that are assumed to naturally net to zero. For example, these could be retail investors and small asset managers trading for naturally oﬀsetting personal reasons. In our augmented VWAP model, these two groups trade alongside each other. Since trading by the crowd is naturally oﬀsetting, it has no impact on aggregate trading-demand imbalances. However, it does contribute to the aggregate market volume. We assume here that crowd volume aﬀects (or is correlated with) order-execution costs and, thus, aﬀects the trading target trajectories γt˜ai of the targeted investors via γt. In contrast, trading by our targeted investors aﬀects aggregate order imbalances and, thus, market-clearing prices. However, we assume there is no feedback loop whereby their trading aﬀects order-execution costs and, thus, their (exogenous in our model) intraday trading target trajectories. 30 To this end, let vol = (volt)t∈[0,1] be an exogenous stochastic process for the stock’s cumulative crowd volume vol t over the interval [0,t ] for times t∈ [0, 1]. The relative cumulative volume process is then deﬁned as the ratio volt vol1 , t ∈ [0, 1], (6.1) which is zero initially, has non-decreasing paths, and has terminal value one. Because vol1 at time t = 1 cannot be observed at times t < 1, the volume ratio (6.1) also cannot be observed at times t< 1. Consequently, the ratio (6.1) cannot be used as a 30 In practice, VWAP benchmarking for an investor often excludes the investor’s own trading from the measure of volume used contractually in VWAP benchmarking (see, e.g., Madhavan 2002, Exhibit 1). For simplicity, we keep ϵ constant for hedgers. Allowing for a stochastic ϵt is also possible. 36 state-process. The VWAP objective replacing (1.1) for targeted investors is sup θi∈Ai E [ Xi,1− ∫ 1 0 κ(t) ( volt vol1 ˜ai−θi,t )2 dt ⏐⏐⏐Fi,0 ] , i ∈{ 1,...,M}. (6.2) The idea behind (6.2) is that intraday ﬂuctuations in the relative volume ratio (6.1) aﬀect the ex post intraday trading target trajectory volt vol1 ˜ai. However, because investor i’s position θi,t is adapted to the ﬁltration Fi,t and because investor i cannot use her holdings θi,t to manipulate the intraday volume weights volt vol1 , the optimization problem (6.2) can be replaced, given linear utilities, with the equivalent problem: 31 sup θi∈Ai E [ Xi,1− ∫ 1 0 κ(t) ( E [ volt vol1 ⏐⏐⏐Fi,t ] ˜ai−θi,t )2 dt ⏐⏐⏐Fi,0 ] . (6.3) We model E [ volt vol1 ⏐⏐⏐Fi,t ] directly as a gamma bridge γt. In that case, (6.3) becomes (1.1) whenFi,t is deﬁned by (5.1) and γ(t) is replaced byγt. Frei and Westray (2015) model the realized relative volume curve volt vol1 used for VWAP benchmarking by the gamma bridge γt from Example 5.3. However, as discussed on page 617 in Frei and Westray (2015), this presents a potential problem because the realized relative volume curve in (6.1) cannot be observed prior to the end of the trading day. In contrast, the intraday expected relative volume curve E [ volt vol1 |Fi,t ] in (6.3) in our model is — by deﬁnition — observable at times t∈ [0, 1]. Thus, we model it as a gamma bridge. Empirical implications: Prices in the gamma bridge model in Section 5 include a stochastic response to random changes in the target ratio γt, which includes the ef- fect of changing order-execution and inventory costs on the optimal target trajectory for targeted investors. Our VWAP analysis links these ﬂuctuations in the stochas- tic target ratio γt to intraday ﬂuctuations in the expected intraday volume ratio E [ volt vol1 ⏐⏐Fi,t ] . Thus, our VWAP model predicts that a positive shock to the expected daily volume ratio at time t increases the magnitude | ˆSt−Dt| of price pressure due to increased trading-demand imbalances due to an increase in the magnitude of the aggregate intraday trading target|γt˜aΣ|. 31Even though (6.2) and (6.3) yield diﬀerent objective values, they are equivalent in the sense that they share the same maximizer. This is because the terms in (6.2) and (6.3) involving θi,t are identical by iterated expectations. 37 7 Numerics This section presents numerics for the competitive Radner equilibrium where (4.1) holds. Our analysis uses the two bridge models for the target ratio γt in Examples 5.1 and 5.3. The objects of interest are: (i) properties of the equilibrium price process ˆSt in (5.4), and (ii) how the rebalancers, liquidity providers, and hedgers optimally trade. The numerical properties here illustrate the analytic derivations in Section 5. Our analysis uses the terminal stock-price restriction (1.10) (i.e., ϕ0 := ϕ1 := 0 in (1.8)), M := 10 targeted investors, and M := 10 hedgers. The private targets (˜a1,..., ˜aM) here are independent and have ex ante moments E[˜ai] = 0, E[˜a2 i ] = 1, i ∈{ 1,...,M}. (7.1) We consider penalty-severity functions in (1.3) and (1.4) deﬁned by κ(t) := (1−p) (1−t)p, t ∈ [0, 1), p ∈ [0, 1), κ(t) := (1− ¯p) (1−t)¯p, t ∈ [0, 1), ¯p∈ [0, 1), (7.2) which are parameterized by p and ¯p. For comparison purposes, these functions both integrate to one overt∈ [0, 1]. A natural baseline is p := 0, where the penalty severity is constant over the day. For p∈ (0, 1), the penalty functions explode as t↑ 1 at various rates but still satisfy the integrability condition (3.3). When p is close to one (e.g.,p := 0.99), the intraday penalty severities are negligible (i.e., close to zero) until close to the end of the day. In this case, our model mimics the situation where trader i∈{ 1,...,M} faces no intraday penalties but just a quasi-hard terminal constraint θi,1 = ˜ai. Fig. 1 illustrates some of the κ(t) functions used in our numerical analysis. Our ﬁrst topic is equilibrium pricing. From Theorems 3.2, 5.2, and 5.4, the price function ζ(t) in (3.1) and (5.4) is identical for the deterministic γ(t) model and for both the Brownian and gamma bridge γt models and is given in (4.7). The price- loading functionsσ(t) andh(t) do not appear in the deterministic γ(t) model but are the same for both the Brownian and gamma bridge models and are given in (5.20) and (5.10). Fig. 2 shows the price-loading functions σ(t), h(t), and ζ(t) for diﬀerent values ofp and ¯p. The signs of σ(t),h(t), and ζ(t) are all positive (from (5.9), (5.10), and Remark 3.1.2). We note that the greater the penalty severity κ(t) is, the more 38 Figure 1: Examples of penalty severity functions κ(t) in (7.2). The lines are: p := 0 (——), p := 0.1 (−−), p:= 0.5 (−·− ), p:= 0.99 (−··− ). 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 t 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 κ(t) sensitive prices are to shocks in the amount ϵBt driving the hedger trading demand, which the targeted investors must provide. The values ζ(t) and h(t) converge to ϕ0 and ϕ1 as t↑ 1, which in these numerics are, for simplicity, taken to be zero. Our second topic is the equilibrium stock holdings. Fori∈{ 1,...,M}, the optimal VWAP strategies for i∈{ 1,...,M} in (5.7) and (5.16) give expected holdings over the day E[ˆθi,t|σ(˜ai, ˜aΣ)] =α1(t)E[γt−]˜aΣ +α2(t)ϵE[Bt] +α3(t)E[γt−]˜ai =α1(t)t˜aΣ +α3(t)t˜ai. (7.3) Consequently, from (7.3), trader i∈{ 1,...,M} expects ex ante to deviate from her target trajectory ˜aiγt− by E[ˆθi,t− ˜aiγt−|σ(˜ai, ˜aΣ)] =α1(t)t˜aΣ + ( α3(t)− 1 ) t˜ai =α1(t)t˜aΣ, (7.4) where the last equality follows from inserting the competitive values (4.2) into the expression for α3 given in (3.7), which gives α3(t) = 1 here. Fig. 3 shows the coeﬃcient on ˜aΣ in the expected deviations between targeted investor i’s holdings up through time t∈ [0, 1] relative to her corresponding target. Similarly, for hedger i∈{M + 1,...,M +M}, the optimal strategies (5.7) and (5.16) give ex ante expected 39 Figure 2: Equilibrium price functions σ(t),h (t) and ζ(t) in (5.20), (5.10), and (4.7) for the competitive equilibrium (4.2). The parameters are given by (7.1)-(7.2), ϵ := 1, and the discretization divides the day t∈ [0, 1] into 1,000 trading rounds. The lines arep = ¯p = 0 (——),p = 0.5, ¯p = 0 (−−), p= 0, ¯p = 0.5 (−·−), p= ¯p = 0.5 (−··−). 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 t 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 σ(t) 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 t 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 h(t) 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 t 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 ζ(t) hedger target deviations E[ˆθi,t−ϵBt|σ(˜aΣ)] = ¯α1(t)t˜aΣ. (7.5) Finally, we illustrate that when p⁄= ¯p, the targeted investors’ and hedgers’ soft target constraints can become hard constraints. In other words, if the targeted in- vestor penalty severity κ(t) explodes faster as t↑ 1 than the hedger penalty severity κ(t), the targeted investors hit their targets ˜ ai with probability one at the end of trading. To see this, we use (4.8) to compute the limit. Because γ1 = 1, the terminal 40 Figure 3: ˜aΣ-coeﬃcients in the conditional expected deviations (7.4) and (7.5) for the competitive equilibrium (4.2). The parameters are given by (7.1)-(7.2), ϵ := 1, and the discretization divides the day t∈ [0, 1] into 1,000 trading rounds. The lines are: p = ¯p = 0 (——), p = 0.5, ¯p = 0 (−−), p= 0, ¯p = 0.5 (−·− ), p= ¯p = 0.5 (−··− ). 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 t -0.08 -0.06 -0.04 -0.02 α1(t)t 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 t -0.08 -0.06 -0.04 -0.02 α1(t)t deviation for targeted investors i∈{ 1,...,M} is ˆθi,1− ˜ai =    0, ¯p<p, − ˜aΣ+MϵB1 M+M , ¯p =p, − ˜aΣ+MϵB1 M , ¯p>p. (7.6) For hedgersi∈{M + 1,...,M +M}, the terminal deviation is ˆθi,1−ϵB1 =    − ˜aΣ+MϵB1 M , ¯p<p, − ˜aΣ+MϵB1 M+M , ¯p =p, 0 ¯ p>p. (7.7) 8 Extension to inhomogeneous investors We can allow for inhomogeneity within the realtime hedgers. To illustrate this, we split the group of real-time hedgers into two homogenous subgroups with respectively 41 ¯M and M◦ investors. Therefore, we replace (1.4) with hedger penalties Li,t :=    ∫t 0κ(s) ( θi,s−ϵBs )2 ds, i ∈{M + 1,...,M + ¯M}, ∫t 0κ◦(s) ( θi,s−ϵ◦Bs )2 ds, i ∈{M + ¯M + 1,...,M + ¯M +M◦}, (8.1) for t∈ [0, 1]. In the penalty processes in (8.1), the two subgroups’ penalty-severity functions κ◦(t) and ¯κ(t) can diﬀer and their scalars ϵ◦ and ϵ can diﬀer. Up to minor modiﬁcations, the equilibrium structure in Theorem 3.2 continues hold, but for this model extension there are now three free perceived price-impact parameters (ν3, ¯ν3,ν◦ 3). The equilibrium stock-price drift in (3.2) becomes ˆµt =− (M + ¯M +M◦)C ¯CC◦(2κ +ν4) 2 ( (M + ¯M +M◦)2− 1 ) (κ−ν3)(M◦C ¯C + ¯MCC◦ +M ¯CC◦)γ˜aΣ − 2C( ¯M ¯κC◦ϵ +M◦κ◦ ¯Cϵ◦) M◦C ¯C + ¯MCC◦ +M ¯CC◦Bt, (8.2) where C(t) := 2(M + ¯M +M◦)κ(t)− (1 +M + ¯M +M◦)ν3(t), ¯C(t) := 2(M + ¯M +M◦)¯κ(t)− (1 +M + ¯M +M◦)¯ν3(t), C◦(t) := 2(M + ¯M +M◦)κ◦(t)− (1 +M + ¯M +M◦)ν◦ 3(t), ν4 :=−4κ2 + 2(1 +M + ¯M +M◦)(−2 +M + ¯M +M◦)κν3 (M + ¯M +M◦)C . (8.3) 42 Likewise, the optimal investor holdings in (3.6) become ˆθt =− (M + ¯M +M◦) ¯CC◦(2κ +ν4) 2(1 +M + ¯M +M◦)(κ−ν3)(M◦C ¯C + ¯MCC◦ +M ¯CC◦)γ˜aΣ − 2(−1 +M + ¯M +M◦)( ¯M ¯κC◦ϵ +M◦κ◦ ¯Cϵ◦) M◦C ¯C + ¯MCC◦ +M ¯CC◦ Bt + (M + ¯M +M◦)(2κ +ν4) 2(1 +M + ¯M +M◦)(κ−ν3)γ˜ai, ˆ¯θt =− (M + ¯M +M◦)CC◦(2κ +ν4) 2(1 +M + ¯M +M◦)(κ−ν3)(M◦C ¯C + ¯MCC◦ +M ¯CC◦)γ˜aΣ + 2(−1 +M + ¯M +M◦)(¯κ(MC◦ +M◦C)ϵ−M◦κ◦Cϵ◦) M◦C ¯C + ¯MCC◦ +M ¯CC◦ Bt, ˆθ◦ t =− (M + ¯M +M◦)C ¯C(2κ +ν4) 2(1 +M + ¯M +M◦)(κ−ν3)(M◦C ¯C + ¯MCC◦ +M ¯CC◦)γ˜aΣ + 2(−1 +M + ¯M +M◦)(κ◦(M ¯C + ¯MC )ϵ◦− ¯M ¯κCϵ) M◦C ¯C + ¯MCC◦ +M ¯CC◦ Bt. (8.4) We conjecture that the model structure scales linearly with as many free perceived hedger price-impact coeﬃcients ¯ν3 as there are heterogenous hedger subgroups. 9 Discussion Two features of the mathematical structure of our model are particularly important for tractability. The ﬁrst is that the aggregate target ˜ aΣ is inferable at time t = 0 and so, as a result, there is no need for investors to ﬁlter trading data over time to estimate the other investors’ private targets. The second is the linear preference structure, which leads to the optimal controls ˆθi,t at time t∈ [0, 1] being solutions to pointwise optimization problems. There are good reasons to think the qualitative properties of our analysis are ro- bust even though the speciﬁc functional forms of prices and trading strategies depend on our modeling assumptions (e.g., Brownian motion dynamics). First, investor per- ceptions about how prices respond to oﬀ-equilibrium orders are likely a key factor determining the equilibrium form. Second, the absence of manipulative predatory trading is still likely with rational forward-looking liquidity provision. Third, intra- day liquidity is likely to be reduced by intraday trading target penalties relative to just terminal end-of-day target penalties. 43 Lastly, we comment on numerical implementation. The model is characterized by low dimensional state-processes that makes numerics fast to perform. Furthermore, the model’s linear structure makes the numerics stable (coupled linear ODEs). We have experimented extensively with the numerics and have not found any instability concerns. 10 Conclusion This paper has solved for continuous-time Subgame Perfect Nash equilibria with endogenous liquidity provision and intraday trading targets. We show how TWAP, VWAP, and other trading benchmarks induce intraday patterns in investor positions and in price dynamics. There are also potential extensions of our model. First, it would be interesting to extend the model to allow for more heterogeneity in the in- vestor optimization problems. For example,γ(t) andϵ could be replaced with diﬀerent ratiosγi(t) for targeted investors andϵi or a stochastic processϵt for hedgers. Second, perhaps the most pertinent extension would be to allow for additional randomness such that the initial equilibrium stock price ˆS0 cannot fully reveal the aggregate tar- get ˜aΣ. Such an extension would require ﬁltering to learn about trading-demand imbalances. Third, the Brownian motion driving hedger demands might be private information rather than publicly observable. A Proofs Lemma A.1 (Traderj’s optimal response) . Let ν0(t)⁄= 0, ¯ν0(t)⁄= 0, and assume that (2.3) holds. Fix an exogenous state-process with c` agl` ad pathsY = (Yt)t∈[0,1] and ﬁx a trader index j∈{ 1,...,M +M}. When the stock price S in the wealth (1.2) and ﬁltrationFi,t in (1.12) isS :=SY with drift (2.2) and martingale (2.4), the optimizer for (1.1) overAj is θY j,t :=    1 2 ( κ(t)−ν3(t) ) ( ν0(t)Yt +ν1(t)γ(t)˜aΣ +ν2(t)Bt + ( ν4(t) + 2κ(t) ) γ(t)˜aj ) , j ∈{ 1,...,M}, 1 2 ( κ(t)−¯ν3(t) ) ( ¯ν0(t)Yt + ¯ν1(t)γ(t)˜aΣ + ( ¯ν2(t) + 2ϵκ(t) ) Bt ) , j ∈{M + 1,...,M +M}, (A.1) provided that θY j,t satisﬁes the integrability condition (2.1). 44 Proof of Lemma A.1: Because utilities are linear, we have the following representation for an arbitrary control θj∈A j for targeted investors j∈{ 1,...,M} E[Xj,1−Lj,1|Fj,0] =Xj,0 + E [∫ 1 0 ( θj,s ( ν0(s)Ys +ν1(s)γ(s)˜aΣ +ν2(s)Bs +ν3(s)θj,s +ν4(s)γ(s)˜aj ) −κ(s) ( θj,s−γ(s)˜aj )2) ds ⏐⏐⏐Fj,0 ] . (A.2) For hedgersj∈{M + 1,...,M +M}, we have a similar representation E[Xj,1−Lj,1|Fj,0] =Xj,0 + E [∫ 1 0 ( θj,s ( ¯ν0(s)Ys + ¯ν1(s)γ(s)˜aΣ + ¯ν2(s)Bs + ¯ν3(s)θj,s ) −κ(s) ( θj,s−ϵBs )2) ds ⏐⏐⏐Fj,0 ] . (A.3) The martingale property of ∫ θjdN is used to eliminate E[ ∫ 1 0 θj,sdNs] in both (A.2) and (A.3). The integrands in the ds-integrals are quadratic in θj,s. Consequently, the supremum in (1.1) is achieved by maximizing the integrands in (A.2) and (A.3) pointwise over θj,s at each state and at each time s∈ [0, 1]. This gives the optimal holdings in (A.1). The left-continuity ofY ’s paths allows investorj to inferY from past and current observations of SY and (D,B ). To see this, it suﬃces to show that observing ∫ t 0 ν0(s)Ysds for j∈{ 1,...,M} and ∫ t 0 ¯ν0(s)Ysds for j∈{M + 1,...,M +M}, (A.4) over time t∈ [0, 1) is suﬃcient for investor j to infer Yt. The integrals in (A.4) are well-deﬁned because ν0(s) and ¯ν0(s) are continuous on [0 , 1) and Y has c` agl` ad paths (hence, Y ’s paths are locally bounded). The ability to infer Yt from (A.4) follows directly from computing the time derivative from the left of (A.4). This left- derivative isν0(t)Yt forj∈{ 1,...,M} and ¯ν0(t)Yt forj∈{M + 1,...,M +M} by the left-continuity requirement placed on Y ’s paths. Consequently, Yt isFi,t measurable when S := SY in (1.12) where SY is deﬁned using (2.2). Therefore, Yt can be used 45 as a state-variable for investor j in (A.1). ♦ Comment: Because our traders are penalized for deviations of their holdings from intraday targets, investor optimal stock holdings are given in terms of levels rather than trading rates. This property allows our investors to absorb trading noise with only ﬁnite quadratic variation such as the Brownian motion dynamics in, e.g., Kyle (1985). Proof of Lemma 2.2. We deﬁne the state-process Yθi t :=    2κ(¯ν3−κ)−(κ−¯ν3) ( (M−1)ν1+ν4 ) +M ¯ν1(ν3−κ) (M−1)ν0(κ−¯ν3)+M ¯ν0(κ−ν3) γ˜aΣ− (M−1)ν2(κ−¯ν3)+M(κ−ν3)(¯ν2+2κϵ) (M−1)ν0(κ−¯ν3)+M ¯ν0(κ−ν3) Bt − 2(κ−ν3)(κ−¯ν3) (M−1)ν0(κ−¯ν3)+M ¯ν0(κ−ν3)θi,t + (κ−¯ν3)(2κ+ν4) (M−1)ν0(κ−¯ν3)+M ¯ν0(κ−ν3)γ˜ai, i ∈{ 1,...,M}, − 2κ(κ−¯ν3)+(κ−¯ν3)(Mν1+ν4)+(M−1)¯ν1(κ−ν3) Mν0(κ−¯ν3)+(M−1)¯ν0(κ−ν3) γ˜aΣ + Mν2(¯ν3−κ)−(M−1)¯ν2(κ−ν3)−2κ(M−1)ϵ(κ−ν3) Mν0(κ−¯ν3)+(M−1)¯ν0(κ−ν3) Bt − 2(κ−ν3)(κ−¯ν3) Mν0(κ−¯ν3)+(M−1)¯ν0(κ−ν3)θi,t, i ∈{M + 1,...,M +M}, (A.5) so that the corresponding drift process (2.2) perceived by investor j⁄=i becomes    ν0(t)Yθi t +ν1(t)γ(t)˜aΣ +ν2(t)Bt +ν3(t)θj,t +ν4(t)γ(t)˜aj, j ∈{ 1,...,M}, ¯ν0(t)Yθi t + ¯ν1(t)γ(t)˜aΣ + ¯ν2(t)Bt + ¯ν3(t)θj,t, j ∈{ 1 +M,...,M +M}. (A.6) Thus, trader j’s optimal response holdings θYθi j,t to Yθi t are given by (A.1) in Lemma A.1. By summing these holdings, we see that (2.5) holds. ♦ Proof of Theorem 3.2: We ﬁrst insert Sθi from (2.6) into the objective (1.1) to get E [∫ 1 0 ( θi,tµθi t −κ(t) ( θi,t−γ(t)˜ai )2) dt ] , i ∈{ 1,...,M}, E [∫ 1 0 ( θi,tµθi t −κ(t) ( θi,t−ϵBt )2) dt ] , i ∈{M + 1,...,M +M}, (A.7) whereµθi t is deﬁned in (2.7). In (A.7), the expectation E[ ∫ 1 0 θi,tdNt] drops out because θi∈A i ensures that the stochastic integrals ∫ θidN are martingales. The integrands in (A.7) are quadratic functions of θi,t and the quadratic terms produce the second- 46 order conditions (κ−ν3)((M + 1)ν0(κ− ¯ν3) +M ¯ν0(κ−ν3)) (M− 1)ν0(κ− ¯ν3) +M ¯ν0(κ−ν3) > 0, (κ− ¯ν3)(Mν 0(κ− ¯ν3) + (M + 1)¯ν0(κ−ν3)) Mν 0(κ− ¯ν3) + (M− 1)¯ν0(κ−ν3) > 0. (A.8) Provided (A.8) holds, the pointwise maximizers of the integrands in (A.7) are given by ˆθi,t :=    ( ˜aiγ(2κ +ν4)(Mν0(κ− ¯ν3) +M ¯ν0(κ−ν3)) + ˜aΣγ ( 2κν0(¯ν3−κ)−κν0ν4 +ν0ν4¯ν3 +M(κ−ν3)(ν1¯ν0−ν0¯ν1) ) +BtM(κ−ν3)(ν2¯ν0−ν0(¯ν2 + 2κϵ)) ) /( 2(κ−ν3)((M + 1)ν0(κ− ¯ν3) +M ¯ν0(κ−ν3)) ) , i ∈{ 1,...,M}, ˜aΣγ ( Mν0¯ν1−¯ν0(2κ+Mν1+ν4) ) +BtM(ν0¯ν2−ν2¯ν0+2κν0ϵ) 2(Mν0(κ−¯ν3)+(M+1)¯ν0(κ−ν3)) , i ∈{M + 1,...,M +M}. (A.9) Summing (A.9) over i∈{ 1,...,M +M} shows that the stock market clears in the sense that (1.5) holds when ¯ν0 := ν0(κ− ¯ν3) κ−ν3 . (A.10) Deﬁnition (A.10) allows us to re-write the second-order conditions in (A.8) as (κ−ν3)(M +M + 1) M +M− 1 > 0, (κ− ¯ν3)(M +M + 1) M +M− 1 > 0. (A.11) Because we have assumed (2.3), the second-order conditions (A.11) hold. Conse- quently, the pointwise optimizers are given in (A.9). To ensure that the resulting stock-price drift processes µ ˆθi t are the same for all investorsi∈{ 1,...,M +M} and, in particular, ensuring that the individual private 47 targets (˜a1,..., ˜aM) do not appear in µ ˆθi t , we deﬁne the deterministic functions ν4 :=− 2κ ( 2κ+(M+M−2)(1+M+M)ν3 ) (M+M) ( 2(M+M)κ−(1+M+M)ν3 ), ¯ν1 := (κ−¯ν3)ν1 κ−ν3 + (κ−¯ν3)(ν3−¯ν3−(M+M)(2κ−2κ−ν3+¯ν3))(2κ+ν4) (κ−ν3)(MM(2(κ+κ)−ν3)+M(2Mκ−(1+M)ν3)+M2(2κ−¯ν3)−M(1+M)¯ν3), ¯ν2 := (κ−¯ν3)ν2 κ−ν3 + 2ϵκ(−2M(M+M)(κ−κ)−2κ+M(1+M+M)ν3+2¯ν3−((M−1)M+3MM+2M2)¯ν3) MM(2(κ+κ)−ν3)+M(2Mκ−(1+M)ν3)+M2(2κ−¯ν3)−M(1+M)¯ν3 . (A.12) By inserting (A.10) and (A.12) into (A.9) and simplifying, gives ˆθi,t =    2(M+M−1) M ( M(˜aΣγκ−BtκMϵ) M2(2κ−¯ν3)+MM(2(κ+κ)−ν3)−M(M+1)¯ν3+M(2κM−ν3(M+1)) + γκ(˜aiM−˜aΣ) 2κ(M+M)−ν3(M+M+1) ) , i ∈{ 1,...,M}, 2(M+M−1)(BtκMϵ−˜aΣγκ) M2(2κ−¯ν3)+MM(2(κ+κ)−ν3)−M(M+1)¯ν3+M(2κM−ν3(M+1)), i ∈{M + 1,...,M +M}. (A.13) Because the remaining functions ν0,ν 1, and ν2 do not appear in (A.13), these func- tions are irrelevant in the sense that diﬀerent ν0,ν 1, and ν2 functions all produce the same equilibrium prices and investor holdings provided ν0⁄= 0. The functions α1,α 2,α 3, ¯α1, ¯α2 in (3.7) are found by matching (˜ aΣ,Bt, ˜ai) coeﬃcients in (A.13), which also produces the expression for ˆθi,t in (3.6). At this point, the stock-price drift processes µ ˆθi t are all identical, and we deﬁne ˆµt as their common value. The representation (3.8) of ˆµt follows from inserting (A.13) into µ ˆθi t and matching (˜aΣ,Bt) coeﬃcients. The resulting functions µ1(t) and µ2(t) are given in (3.5), which, we show next, are integrable. The bounds (3.11) produce |µ1|≤ min {2κ M, 2(2(M +M)κ− (1 +M +M)¯ν3) M } , |µ2|≤ min { 2κ, 2M(2(M +M)κ− (1 +M +M)ν3) M } . (A.14) The integrability (3.3) assumed of κ and κ ensure integrability of the upper bounds in (A.14). Therefore, the ODEs (3.4) can be solved by integrating. To see that the 48 functions α1,α 2,α 3, ¯α1, ¯α2 in (3.7) are uniformly bounded we again use (A.14): |α1|≤ M +M− 1 κ |µ1|≤ 2(M +M− 1) M , |α2|≤ 2M(M +M− 1) M , |α3|≤ 2(M +M− 1), |¯α1|≤ 2(M +M− 1) M , |¯α2|≤ M(M +M− 1) Mκ |µ2|≤ 2M(M +M− 1) M . Becauseα1,α 2,α 3, ¯α1, ¯α2 are bounded functions, the process ˆθi,t in (3.6) is admissible in the sense of Deﬁnition 2.1, and its optimality follows. The last step of the proof establishes the terminal price condition (1.8). Itˆ o’s lemma produces the dynamics of ˆSt in (3.1) to be d ˆSt =g′(t)˜aΣdt +dDt +ζ′(t)ϵBtdt +ζ(t)ϵdBt = ˆµtdt +dDt +ζ(t)ϵdBt, (A.15) where the last equality uses (3.4). The terminal conditions in (3.4) produce the terminal price restriction (1.8). ♦ Proof of Theorem 4.1: The Cauchy-Schwartz inequality ensures that when M ≥ 2 and (˜a1,..., ˜aM) are not perfectly correlated, we have M M∑ i=1 E[˜a2 i ]> E[˜a2 Σ]. (A.16) We can rewrite (4.4) as M+M∑ i=1 E[CEi] = ∫ 1 0 F ( ν3(t), ¯ν3(t) ) dt, (A.17) 49 where the function F : R2↦→ R is deﬁned by F ( ν3(t), ¯ν3(t) ) : = M∑ i=1 E [ˆθi,tˆµt−κ(t) ( γ(t)˜ai− ˆθi,t )2] + M+M∑ i=M+1 E [ˆθi,tˆµt−κ(t)(ˆθi,t−ϵBt)2] =− M∑ i=1 E [ κ(t) ( γ(t)˜ai− ˆθi,t )2] − M+M∑ i=M+1 E [ κ(t)(ˆθi,t−ϵBt)2] , (A.18) where ˆθi,t is as in Theorem 3.2. The equality in (A.18) follows from ∑M+ ¯M i=1 ˆθi,t = 0. Therefore, our goal is to ﬁnd the maximum point of F (ν3, ¯ν3) under the restrictions ν3 <κ and ¯ν3 <κ. We observe that ∂ ∂¯ν3 F (ν3, ¯ν3) =− 4M(M+M−1)(M+M+1)(E[˜a2 Σ]γ2κ2+M2tϵ2κ2) ( M(1+M+M)¯ν3+M(1+M+M)ν3−2Mκ−2Mκ ) ( M ( 2(M+M)κ−(1+M+M)ν3 ) +M ( 2(M+M)κ−(1+M+M)¯ν3 ))3 . (A.19) Because the denominator in (A.19) is positive by (3.11), we have ∂F ∂¯ν3 (ν3, ¯ν3)> 0, (A.20) for (ν3, ¯ν3) satisfying ν3 < 2κ 1 +M +M− M(M +M− 1)κ M(1 +M +M) and ¯ν3 <κ. (A.21) Therefore, sup ¯ν3<κ F (ν3, ¯ν3) =F (ν3,κ) when ν3 < 2κ 1 +M +M− M(M +M− 1)κ M(1 +M +M) . (A.22) Long, but elementary computations produce ∂ ∂ν3 F (ν3,κ)> 0, for ν3 < 2κ 1 +M +M− M(M +M− 1)κ M(1 +M +M) . (A.23) 50 From (A.22) and (A.23), we conclude that the maximum point of F satisﬁes the inequalityν3≥ 2κ 1+M+M− M(M+M−1)κ M(1+M+M) , which is equivalent to 2Mκ + 2Mκ−M(1 +M +M)ν3 M(1 +M +M) ≤κ. (A.24) Under the restriction in (A.24), the derivative (A.19) implies that we have sup ¯ν3<κ F (ν3, ¯ν3) =F (ν3, 2Mκ + 2Mκ−M(1 +M +M)ν3 M(1 +M +M) ). (A.25) Taking the derivative with respect to ν3 of F in (A.18) produces ∂ ∂ν3 F (ν3, 2Mκ+2Mκ−M(1+M+M)ν3 M(1+M+M) ) =− 4(M ∑M i=1 E[˜a2 i ]−E[˜a2 Σ])(M+M−1)(1+M+M)γ2κ2 ( (1+M+M)ν3−2κ ) M ( 2(M+M)κ−(1+M+M)ν3 )3 . (A.26) Because of (A.16), we can conclude that F (ν3, 2Mκ+2Mκ−M(1+M+M)ν3 M(1+M+M) ) is maximized at ν∗ 3 = 2κ 1+M+M , and the corresponding ¯ν∗ 3 is 2κ 1+M+M . This maximizer is unique by the previous arguments. Finally, inserting (ν∗ 3, ¯ν∗ 3) into F in (A.18) produces the total welfare sup ν3(t),¯ν3(t) M+M∑ i=1 E[CEi] =− ∫ 1 0 κ(t)κ(t) ( γ(t)2E[˜a2 Σ] +ϵ2M 2 t ) Mκ(t) +Mκ(t) dt, (A.27) the optimal holding strategies in (4.5), and the common drift in (4.6). ♦ Proof of Theorem 5.2: This proof is similar to the proof of Theorem 3.2, so here we only outline the key diﬀerence. Itˆ o’s product rule produces the dynamics of the right-hand-side of (5.4) to be h′(t)˜aΣdt +dDt +ζ′(t)ϵBtdt +ζ(t)ϵdBt + ˜aΣ ( σ(t)dγt +γtσ′(t)dt ) = ( h′(t)˜aΣ +ζ′(t)ϵBt + ˜aΣ ( σ(t)1−γt 1−t +σ′(t)γt )) dt +dDt +ζ(t)ϵdBt +σ(t)˜aΣdZt = ˆµtdt +dDt +ζ(t)ϵdBt +σ(t)˜aΣdZt, (A.28) 51 where the last equality uses the ODEs (5.5). The terminal conditions in (5.5) produce the terminal price restriction (1.8). By computing the derivative in formula (5.9), we see that the ODE for σ in (5.5) holds. The zero terminal condition for σ follows from |σ(t)|≤ 1 1−t ∫ 1 t (1−u)|µ1(u)|du≤ ∫ 1 t |µ1(u)|du, t ∈ [0, 1), which converges to zero as t↑ 1 because µ1(u) is integrable over u∈ [0, 1]. To see that σ(t) 1−t is integrable, the representation (5.9) produces ∫ 1 0 |σ(t) 1−t|dt≤ ∫ 1 0 ∫ 1 t 1−u (1−t)2|µ1(u)|dudt = ∫ 1 0 u|µ1(u)|du< ∞, (A.29) where the equality uses Tonelli’s theorem. ♦ Proof of Theorem 5.4: This proof is similar to the proofs of Theorems 3.2 and 5.2, so here we only outline the key diﬀerence. Itˆ o’s product rule produces the dynamics of the right-hand-side of (5.4) to be ˜aΣh′(t)dt +dDt +ζ′(t)ϵBtdt +ζ(t)ϵdBt + ˜aΣ ( σ(t)dγt +σ′(t)γt−dt ) = ( h′(t)˜aΣ +ζ′(t)ϵBt + ˜aΣ ( σ(t) 1−γt− 1−t +σ′(t)γt− )) dt +dDt +ζ(t)ϵdBt +σ(t)˜aΣ ( dγt− 1−γt− 1−t dt ) = ˆµtdt +dDt +ζ(t)ϵdBt +σ(t)˜aΣ ( dγt− 1−γt− 1−t dt ) , (A.30) where the last equality uses the ODEs (5.5). The terminal conditions in (5.5) produce the terminal price restriction (1.8). ♦ References [1] R. Almgren and N. Chriss (1999): Value under liquidation, Risk 12, 61–63. [2] R. Almgren and N. Chriss (2000): Optimal execution of portfolio transactions , Journal of Risk 3, 5–39. 52 [3] M. Baldauf, C. Frei, and J. Mollner (2018): Contracting for ﬁnancial execution , working paper, University of Alberta. [4] Y. Barardehi and D. Bernhardt (2018): Re-appraising intraday trading patterns: What you didn’t know you didn’t know , working paper, Chapman University. [5] S. Berkowitz, D. Logue, and E. Noser (1988): The total cost of transactions on the NYSE, Journal of Finance 43, 97–112. [6] D. Bertsimas and A. Lo (1998): Optimal control of execution costs. Journal of Financial Markets 1, 1–50. [7] B. Bouchard, M. Fukasawa, M. Herdegen, and J. Muhle-Karbe (2018): Equilib- rium returns with transaction costs , Finance and Stochastics 22, 569–601. [8] A. Boulatov, D. Bernhardt, and I. Larionov (2016): Predatory and defensive trad- ing in a dynamic model of optimal execution by multiple traders. Working paper, University of Illinois. [9] M. K. Brunnermeier and L. H. Pedersen (2005): Predatory trading, Journal of Finance 60, 1825–1863. [10] B. I. Carlin, M. S. Lobo, and S. Viswanathan (2007): Episodic liquidity crises: Cooperative and predatory trading, Journal of Finance 62, 2235–2274. [11] J. H. Choi, K. Larsen, and D. Seppi (2018): Information and trading targets in a dynamic market equilibrium , Journal of Financial Economics 132, 22–49. [12] J. Cvitani´ c and D. Cuoco (1998): Optimal consumption choices for a ”large” investor, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 22, 401–436. [13] I. Domowitz and H. Yegerman (2005): The cost of algorithmic trading: A ﬁrst look at comparative performance, In Brian R. Bruce (Ed.): Algorithmic Trading: Precision, Control, Execution (Institutional Investor London), 30–40. [14] S. Du and H. Zhu (2017): What is the optimal trading frequency in ﬁnancial markets? Review of Economic Studies 84, 1606–1651. [15] D. Duﬃe (2001): Dynamical asset pricing theory , 3rd Ed., Princeton University Press. [16] M. ´Emery and M. Yor (2004): A parallel between Brownian bridges and gamma bridges, Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci. 40, 669–688. 53 [17] R. Engle, R. Ferstenberg, and J. Russell (2012): Measuring and modeling execu- tion cost and risk , Journal of Portfolio Management 38, 14–28. [18] Financial Insights (2006): Marching up the learning curve: The second buy side algorithmic trading survey, Financial Insights Special Report, December 2006. [19] C. Frei and N. Westray (2015): Optimal execution of a VWAP order: A stochastic control approach, Mathematical Finance 25, 612–639. [20] N. Gˆ arleanu and L. H. Pedersen (2016):Dynamic portfolio choice with frictions , Journal of Economic Theory 165, 487–516. [21] M. B. Garman (1976): Market microstructure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 257–275. [22] J. Gatheral and A. Schied (2011): Optimal trade execution under geometric Brownian motion in the Almgren and Chriss framework , International Jour- nal of Theoretical and Applied Finance 14, 353–368. [23] J. Gatheral and A. Schied (2013): Dynamical models for market impact and algorithms for optimal order execution , In: Handbook on Systemic Risk (Eds.: J.-P. Fouque and J. Langsam), Cambridge University Press, 579–602. [24] S. J. Grossman and M. H. Miller (1988): Liquidity and market structure, Journal of Finance 43, 617–633. [25] S. J. Grossman and J. E. Stiglitz (1980): On the impossibility of informationally eﬃcient markets, American Economic Review 70, 393–408. [26] B. Hagstr¨ omer and L. Nord´ en (2013):The diversity of high-frequency traders , Journal of Financial Markets 16, 741–770. [27] J. Hasbrouck (1991): Measuring the information content of stock trades , Journal of Finance 46, 179–207. [28] I. Karatzas and S. E. Shreve (1998): Methods of mathematical ﬁnance, Springer- Verlag, New York. [29] V. van Kervel and A. Menkveld (2018): High-frequency trading around large institutional orders, Journal of Finance 74, 1091–1137. [30] V. van Kervel, A. Kwan, and J. Westerholm (2018): Order splitting and searching for a counterparty, Working paper, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Cat´ olica de Chile. 54 [31] R. A. Korajczyk and D. Murphy (2019): High-frequency market making to large institutional trades, Review of Financial Studies 32, 1034–1067. [32] A. Kyle (1985): Continuous auctions and insider trading , Econometrica 53, 1315–1336. [33] D. Madan, P. Carr, and E. Chang (1998): The variance gamma process and option pricing, European Finance Review 2, 79–105. [34] A. Madhavan (2002): VWAP strategies, Transaction Performance, Spring 2002, 32–38. [35] H. M. Markowitz (1952): Portfolio selection, Journal of Finance 7, 77–91. [36] T. McInish and R. Wood (1999): An analysis of intraday patterns in bid/ask spreads for NYSE stocks , Journal of Finance 47, 753–764. [37] A. Menkveld (2013): High frequency trading and the new market makers, Journal of Financial Markets 16, 712–740 . [38] M. O’Hara (2015): High frequency market microstructure , Journal of Financial Economics 116, 257–270. [39] A. F. Perold (1988): The implementation shortfall: Paper versus reality , Journal of Portfolio Management 14, 4–9. [40] S. Predoiu, G. Shaikhet, and S. E. Shreve (2011): Optimal execution in a general one-sided limit-order book, SIAM Journal of Financial Mathematics 2, 183–212. [41] P. E. Protter (2004): Stochastic integration and diﬀerential equations , 2nd Ed., Springer. [42] Y. Sannikov and A. Skrzypacz (2016): Dynamic trading: Price inertia and front- running. Working paper, Stanford University Graduate School of Business. [43] U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2010): Concept release on equity market structure #34–61358. [44] H. R. Stoll (1978): The pricing of security dealer services: An empirical study of NASDAQ stocks, Journal of Finance 33, 1153–1172. [45] D. Vayanos (1999): Strategic trading and welfare in a dynamic market , Review of Economic Studies 66, 219–254. 55 [46] B. Weller (2013): Intermediation chains and specialization by speed: Evidence from commodity futures markets. Working paper, University of Chicago. 56