Mean Field Games with Partial Information for Algorithmic Trading ∗ Philippe Casgrain† and Sebastian Jaimungal‡ Abstract. Financial markets are often driven by latent factors which traders cannot observe. Here, we address an algorithmic trading problem with collections of heterogeneous agents who aim to perform optimal execution or statistical arbitrage, where all agents ﬁlter the latent states of the world, and their trading actions have permanent and temporary price impact. This leads to a large stochastic game with heterogeneous agents. We solve the stochastic game by investigating its mean-ﬁeld game (MFG) limit, with sub-populations of heterogeneous agents, and, using a convex analysis approach, we show that the solution is characterized by a vector-valued forward-backward stochastic diﬀerential equation (FBSDE). We demonstrate that the FBSDE admits a unique solution, obtain it in closed-form, and characterize the optimal behaviour of the agents in the MFG equilibrium. Moreover, we prove the MFG equilibrium provides an ϵ-Nash equilibrium for the ﬁnite player game. We conclude by illustrating the behaviour of agents using the optimal MFG strategy through simulated examples. 1. Introduction. Financial markets are incredibly complex systems that have a signiﬁ- cant impact on how our society functions. One main source of complexity is the continuous interaction of millions of traders (agents) all interacting simultaneously. Another is the eﬀect of latent factors which drive prices and hence optimal decisions. To analyse such systems through the lens of a model, we must consider how interactions among agents aﬀect decisions of each individual market participant. Furthermore, the population of market participants may be heterogeneous in their trading objectives and their behaviour types. To perform op- timally, each agent must formulate a model of asset prices which takes into account latent information sources, as well as the trading decisions of other market participants. How agents should optimally process this large amount of information into trading de- cisions is a question that the algorithmic trading literature has long attempted to answer. Classically, algorithmic trading models only consider a single agent interacting with a stochas- tically evolving asset price, as in [1]. Later works such as [10] study algorithmic trading where other (multiple) agents interact with the price, but not necessarily in an optimal manner, nor directly with the agent’s actions. To eﬀectively model the interaction of agents in electronic markets, we instead turn to- wards a mean-ﬁeld game (MFG) approach, which, in general, aims at approximating the optimal actions of large populations of non-corporative interacting agents in game-like set- tings. A large body of research has already been devoted to the study of MFGs. The original works stem from [20], [19], and [24]. Among the many extensions and generalizations which ∗SJ would like to acknowledge the support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), [funding reference numbers RGPIN-2018-05705 and RGPAS-2018-522715] †Department of Statistical Sciences, University of Toronto, Canada (p.casgrain@utoronto.ca). ‡Department of Statistical Sciences, University of Toronto, Canada (sebastian.jaimungal@utoronto.ca, http:// sebastian.statistics.utoronto.ca.) 1 arXiv:1803.04094v2 [q-fin.MF] 31 Mar 2019 2 CASGRAIN, P. AND JAIMUNGAL, S. explore the broad theory of MFGs as well as their applications, we highlight the following works: [18], [17], [27], and [6]. This theory has seen application in various ﬁnancial contexts, such as [8] and [22] who use it to model systemic risk, [23] show use it for algorithmic trading in the presence of a major agent and a population of minor agents, [5] who investigate MFG in the context of optimal execution, and [13] who look at mean-ﬁeld games in algorithmic trading with partial information on states. [3] study a model for mini-ﬂash crashes where agents interact, but each agent optimizes a problem that ignores the optimal actions of other agents, while realized prices incorporate the actions of all agents. In contrast to other work on MFGs, as well as its speciﬁc application to algorithmic trading, here, motivated by [11], we include latent states so that agents do not have full information about the system dynamics. Under a very general speciﬁcation for the asset price dynamics, and allowing for heterogeneity in behaviours and objectives, we provide an optimal strategy for all participating agents. This strategy is able to make eﬀective use of market price path data to ﬁlter out information about latent processes, and simultaneously account for the actions of all other (heterogenous) market participants. Our work sets itself apart from the current literature by approaching the algorithmic trading problem using a MFG approach, as well, we avoid the assumption that each agent observes the strategies of other agents, and due to the latent factor, agents do not have complete knowledge of the model driving asset returns. We also take a novel approach to solving the MFG by applying convex analysis techniques directly to the problem, rather than relying on the Stochastic Maximum Principle or the dynamic programming principle. Our approach yields powerful results such as a single optimality equation that directly characterizes the optimal control without the use of auxiliary processes. Furthermore, we include a latent structure in our model, causing agents to have incomplete information on the dynamics of the market. The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents our stochastic game model for the ﬁnite-population market. Section 3 begins by formulating a MFG version of the inﬁnite player limit. The section continues by applying convex analysis tools to characterize the optimal trading strategy as an inﬁnite system of Forward-Backward Stochastic Diﬀerential Equations (FBSDEs) coupled through a collection of mean-ﬁeld processes. The system of FBSDEs is then solved, where we provide closed-form solutions of both the individual agent’s optimal control and for the mean-ﬁeld processes. In Section 4, we show that the optimal solution to the MFG satisﬁes an ϵ-Nash equilibrium property for the ﬁnite population model. Lastly, Section 5 explores some of the optimal strategy’s behaviour by analyzing simulated games. Section 6 concludes, and the appendices contain most proofs of the results presented in the body of the paper. MFG WITH PARTIAL INFORMATION FOR ALGORITHMIC TRADING 3 2. Model Setup and Motivation. In this section, we present a stochastic game where a collection of agents all trade a single asset 1. Agents interact with one another by aﬀecting the price of the asset through their buying and selling decisions. The model assumes agents trade at a continuous rate over a speciﬁed time period, and mark-to-market the value of their position at the end of the trading horizon. In contrast to most other works, we allow for agent heterogeneity by deﬁning sub-populations of players each with their own unique behavioural parameters. Each agent seeks to maximize a functional which measures their performance over the course of the trading period. The ﬂow of information available to each agent contains (i) the asset price, but not latent processes which drive the price, (ii) their own state, and (iii) their own actions (in particular we exclude the information about other agents inventories or trading strategies). This section concludes by presenting the agent’s optimization problem and by formally describing the Nash equilibrium we seek. 2.1. The Agent’s State Processes. Deﬁne the ﬁltered probability space( Ω,G, G ={Gt}t∈[0,T ], P ) , whereT >0 is a ﬁxed and ﬁnite time horizon. All processes deﬁned in this section are adapted to the ﬁltration Gt unless otherwise stated. We assume that the population of traders is composed of N ∈ N individual agents, each indexed by an integer j∈ N :={1,...,N }, and all agents are trading in a single asset. To allow for diﬀerent trading behaviour within this large population, the population is divided into K≤ N disjoint sub- populations indexed by k∈K :={1,...,K }, where all traders within a sub-population are assumed to behave homogeneously. Let us deﬁne (2.1) K(N) k ={j∈ N : agent j is in sub-population k} to represent the collection of agents that belong to sub-population k, where the superscript (N) is included to show explicit dependence on the total number of agents. We also deﬁne N (N) k = #K(N) k to be the total number of agents within sub-population k, and assume the proportion of the total population contained in each sub-population remains ﬁnite in the limit as N becomes large, so that (2.2) lim N↗∞ N (N) k N =pk∈ (0, 1). Each agent j controls the rate at which they buy or sell the traded asset via the process (νj t )t∈[0,T ], where νj t > 0 indicates buying and νj t < 0 indicates selling. The agents keep track of the net amount of shares they have accumulated via their (controlled) inventory process qj,νj = (qj,νj t )t∈[0,T ] which satisﬁes (2.3) qj,νj t = Qj 0 + ∫ t 0 νj udu, 1It is possible to generalize to trading multiple assets which have fairly arbitrary dynamics. We, however, opt to restrict the analysis to the single asset case to ensure the key insights on how agents interact, and on how latent information is incorporated, are not obfuscated by the interaction of multiple assets. 4 CASGRAIN, P. AND JAIMUNGAL, S. where{Qj 0}N j=1 is a collection of independent random variables representing agent-j’s inventory at the start of the trading period. We further assume the initial inventory positions of traders have a bounded variance, so that ∃ C > 0 (independent of N) such that E[ ( Qj 0 )2 ] < C, ∀j∈ N. For a ﬁxed strategy νj, the deﬁnition of qj,νj t in equation (2.3) corresponds to each agent j buying or selling roughly ϵ×νj t units of the traded asset in any small time interval [t,t +ϵ]. Finally, we assume the mean of each agent’s starting inventory is the same within a given sub-population so that E[Qj 0] =mk 0,∀j∈K (N) k . The amount of cash any agent has accumulated through their trading is represented via their (controlled) cash process{(Xj,νj t )t∈[0,T ]}j∈N. When buying or selling the asset, we assume each trader pays an instantaneous transaction cost that is linearly proportional to the amount of shares transacted. This instantaneous cost is expressed through the controlled dynamics of the cash process which, for agent j, is given by (2.4) Xj,νj t =Xj 0− ∫ t 0 ( Sν(N) u −akνj u ) νj udu, ∀j∈K (N) k , where ak > 0 is a parameter unique to sub-population k, and Sν(N) = (Sν(N) t )t∈[0,T ] is the (controlled) price process of the traded asset. We assume the midprice process Sν(N) t can be written as (2.5) Sν(N) t =S0 + ∫ t 0 ( λν(N) u +Au ) du +Mt, where A = (At)t∈[0,T ] is aG-predictable process, M = (Mt)t∈[0,T ] is aG-adapted martingale with M0 = 0, and ν(N) u = 1 N ∑N j=1νj u is the average trading rate of all agents. Additionally, we make the technical assumption that A∈ H2 T and M∈ L2 T , where (2.6) H2 T = { ν : Ω× [0,T ]→ R, E [∫T 0 ν2 udu ] <∞ } is the set of P-square integrable processes on [0,T ], and where (2.7) L2 T = { ν : Ω× [0,T ]→ R, E [ ν2 t ] <∞,∀t∈ [0,T ] } is the set of processes with ﬁnite P-second-moment on the interval [0,T ]. We also assume the components driving the price process A andM are independent of{Qj 0}N j=1, the initial values of the agent’s inventories and that the quantity EPk [∫T 0 Audu ] is invariant to any agent’s choice of trading strategy νj∈ H2 T . Note that, beyond the integrability conditions on A andM there are no a-priori speciﬁca- tions on the dynamics of these processes. We allow enough ﬂexibility so that S may have very general semi-martingale dynamics which may incorporate jumps or even be non-Markovian. The only binding assumption is that order-ﬂow from agents’ trading have linear price impact. MFG WITH PARTIAL INFORMATION FOR ALGORITHMIC TRADING 5 Having such a general class of models allows us to obtain optimal controls that are robust to speciﬁc model choices. The processA characterizes the ‘alpha’ or mean trajectory of the asset price process, while M represents the noise surrounding this drift, and both can be thought of as incorporating the eﬀects of information sources not available to the agents, i.e., they can be latent. The parameterλ controls the scale of the (permanent) price impact of the agent’s strategies. The average population price impactν(N) t admits an alternative representation in terms of averages over sub-populations, (2.8) ν(N) t = ∑ k∈K N(N) k N νk,(N) t , where νk,(N) t := 1 N(N) k ∑ j∈K(N) k νj t . This representation will be useful in the inﬁnite population size limit studied in Section 3. 2.2. Information Restriction. In our model, we restrict the ﬂow of information to the agents by allowing agent j to only have access to information about the paths of the price process Sν(N) t and their own inventory, but not others. More explicitly, we allow an agent j to choose a control νj from the space of admissible controls (for agent- j) (2.9) Aj := { ν isFj-predictable, ν∈ H2 T } , where for each j∈ N we deﬁne the ﬁltrationFj = (Fj t )t∈[0,T ], where Fj t =σ ( (Sν(N) u )u∈[0,t] ) ∨σ ( Qj 0 ) is the sigma algebra generated by the paths of the asset midprice process and agentj’s starting inventory level2. If ν∈A j, then Xj,ν t and qj,ν t areFj-adapted as well, therefore we omit the sigma algebras generated by these processes from the deﬁnition of Aj andFj. Let us also deﬁne the ﬁltration F = (Ft)0≤t≤T , such that Ft = σ ( (Sν(N) u )0≤u≤t ) , to be the ﬁltration generated solely by the paths of the asset midprice process. To understand the implications of the above restriction, we can take a close look at the dynamics of Sν(N) t in equation (2.5). Firstly, since agent- j is restricted to information in Fj, they will be unable to observe theG-adapted components A andM, and they are also unable to observe the inventory levels of other agents. Consequently, they are unable to observe the trading strategies of all other agents. Instead, the trader must reconstruct the values of each of these individual components only through observations of the paths of Sν(N) t . Both A and M can be regarded as latent processes which, potentially, must be estimated to account for the eﬀect of price movements. We now provide a simple example that illustrates this framework in the single agent case, along the lines of the latent alpha models that [11] study. To this end, assume there is a latent 2Note: Although we do not consider it in this paper, the deﬁnition of F can just as easily be generated to include paths of additional sources of information to the agents. 6 CASGRAIN, P. AND JAIMUNGAL, S. Markov chain Θ = (Θt)t∈[0,T ] unobservable to any agent, and further assume that (2.10) Sν(N) t =S0 +λ ∫ t 0 ν(N) u du + ∫ t 0 f(Θu)du +σWt. In this example, the large ﬁltration G is given by Gt = σ ( (Θt,Wt)t∈[0,T ] ) ∨σ({Qj 0}N j=1). By restricting agent-j to trade on the ﬁltration Fj, they may only trade based on the observed path of the asset price and not its individual components. In an algorithmic trading setting, it is important for agents to have a predictive model for the asset price process. Since the dynamics ofSν(N) are not fully known to the agents, they will have to infer values of Θt based on the ﬁltration at time t in order to make predictions on the future value of the asset price. Our set-up allows for more general latent models than this one example, but it is useful to keep this example in mind when thinking about a concrete case. We refer the reader to [11] for more details on latent alpha models such as the example presented here. 2.3. The Agent’s Optimization Problem. Each agent wishes to maximize an objective functional which measures their trading performance over the trading period [0 ,T ]. For each j∈ N, letA−j :=×i∈N,i⁄=jAi, we assume that agent-j within a sub-population k∈K chooses a control νj∈A j to maximize a functional Hj :Aj×A−j→ R, which is deﬁned as (2.11) Hj(νj,ν−j) = E [ Xνj T +qj,νj T ( Sν(N) T − Ψkqj,νj T ) −φk ∫ T 0 ( qj,νj u )2 du ] , where φk≥ 0, Ψk > 0 are constants that may vary by sub-population k, and where ν−j :=( ν1,...,ν j−1,νj+1,...,ν N) indicates the dependence of the objective on the controls of all other agents. The agent’s objective is composed of three distinct parts. The ﬁrst component, Xνj T , is the agent’s total accumulated cash. The second component, qj,νj T ( Sν(N) T − Ψkqj,νj T ) , represents the mark-to-market value of the terminal inventory and includes a liquidation penalty. Indeed, as Ψk→∞ , the agent completely liquidates their inventory by the end of the trading interval, since, in this limit, the cost of holding non-zero inventory at time T goes to inﬁnity. Lastly, −φk ∫T 0 ( qj,νj u )2 du represents a running penalty that penalizes an agent for holding large long or short inventory positions throughout the trading period. The parameterφk can be regarded as controlling the risk appetite of the agent, since for large values of φk, agent j will have a great dis-incentive to take on any market exposure. This penalty can also be understood from the perspective of the agent accounting for model uncertainty as analysed in [9]. Agents interact through the price impact term ν(N), which appears implicitly in the dy- namics of Sν(N) . Agents within the same sub-population have the same objective functional, this implies that sub-populations act in a similar manner, albeit each individual agent’s strat- egy is adapted to their own inventory (in addition to the midprice), and hence agents’ strategies are not identical. MFG WITH PARTIAL INFORMATION FOR ALGORITHMIC TRADING 7 Substituting qj,νj T , Xj T , and ST using (2.3), (2.4), and (2.5), respectively into deﬁni- tion (2.11), using integration by parts, and taking expectations, we obtain the alternative form of the objective functional: (2.12) Hj(νj,ν−j) = E [ Xj 0 + Qj 0 ( S0− ΨQj 0 ) + ∫ T 0 { qj,νj t dSν(N) t − ( νj t qj,νj t )⊺( ak Ψk Ψk φk )( νj t qj,νj t ) dt }] . This representation makes the inﬂuence of the parameter triplet ( ak,φk, Ψk) on the objective function explicit. The triplet, which is shared amongst all members of sub-population k, will have a direct impact on the agent’s behaviour. The variation of this triplet across sub- populations allows us to incorporate heterogeneous agents. Remark 2.1. The model presented above is designed so that agents are incentivized to gradually bring their inventory levels qj, t towards zero over the course of the trading period. In particular, an agent-j in sub-population k is penalized for non-zero exposure by the terminal liquidation penalty−Ψk (qj,νj T )2 and the running penalty −φk ∫T 0 (qj,νj t )2dt which both appear in the expression for the objective function (2.11). It is possible to generalize this model to instead pressure agents to bring their inventory levels towards some stochastic trading target {Qj T}N j=1, so that agent-j is instead penalized for deviating from its trading target Qj T at time T , rather than deviating from 0. This can be achieved by replacing the former terminal liquidation and running penalties with −Ψk(qj,νj T − Qj T )2 and−φk ∫T 0 (qj,νj t − Qj t)2dt, respectively. Because of the linear structure in the midprice model, it is easy to show that this modiﬁcation to the objective function is exactly equivalent to modifying the initial condition of the process qj, fromqj,νj 0 = Qj 0 to qj,νj 0 = Qj 0− Qj T for each j∈ N. If we impose the conditions that {Qj 0− Qj T}T j=1 are independent, that E(Qj 0− Qj T )2< C∀ j∈ N, and that E[Qj 0− Qj T ] = mk 0∀ j∈K (N) k , then all of the results that follow in the remainder of the paper apply for the generalized model with stochastic trading targets, which is done by simply replacing the initial condition of each inventory process with Qj 0− Qj T . 2.4. The Stochastic Game. As mentioned earlier, all agents seek to maximize their own objective function, and we seek the optimal strategy for all agents. More formally, we seek a collection of controls{ωj∈A j :j∈ N} such that (2.13) ωj = arg sup ω∈Aj Hj(ω,ω−j), ∀j∈ N. Identifying this collection of controls is no easy feat, since the objective functional for each agent is aﬀected by the controls of all agents. Furthermore, the set of admissible controls diﬀers between agents – recall each agent has access to the ﬁltration generated by the midprice and their inventory only. This latter observation posses diﬃculties since the set of optimal controls 8 CASGRAIN, P. AND JAIMUNGAL, S. we are searching for, and the random processes present in the objective function (2.11), are adapted to diﬀerent ﬁltrations. This fact prevents us from (directly) applying the standard set of dynamic programming or stochastic maximum principle tools to solve the problem. 3. Solving the Mean-Field Stochastic Game. The stochastic game we aim to solve presents a number of obstacles which prohibit it from being solved directly. In this sec- tion, we overcome these obstacles by instead solving a MFG version of the stochastic game. To construct the MFG, we take the limit as the population size tends to inﬁnity. In the limit, the ﬁnite player game becomes a (stochastic) MFG where agents no longer interact directly with one another, but instead interact through a set of mean-ﬁeld processes (one for each sub-population). In the remainder of this section, we present the MFG that results from the inﬁnite population limit, provide a closed-form representation of each agent’s optimal strat- egy, and a closed-form representation of the mean-ﬁeld processes within the game. Although we do not explicitly solve the ﬁnite player game presented in Section 2, by establishing an ϵ-Nash equilibrium property in Section 4, we show that the equilibrium solution obtained for the MFG provides an good approximation to the ﬁnite population game, provided that the population size is large enough. We begin the section by taking the population limit of the stochastic game, and of each agent’s objective functional as N → ∞, to yield a new limiting objective function and a (stochastic) MFG. Focusing on this limiting objective functional, we proceed by applying tools from convex analysis to obtain the optimal action for each agent in the form of the solution to a vector-valued forward-backward stochastic diﬀerential equation (FBSDE). Next, we obtain the equilibrium in the MFG by explicitly solving the FBSDE. 3.1. The Limiting Mean-Field Game. From (2.12), we see the only term that depends on the population size N, within each objective functional, is the average trading rate of all agents (ν(N) t )t∈[0,T ]. Moreover, this dependence appears only through the midprice dynamics Sν(N) . To formulate the limiting problem, we make some additional assumptions regarding the existence of a limit of the average trading rate. Let us assume that there exist processes νk = (νk t )t∈[0,T ] for k∈K so that νk∈ H2 T and νk isF-predictable, where (3.1) lim N↗∞ νk,(N) t =νk t , P×µ a.e., µ is the Lebesgue measure on the Borel sigma algebra on [0 ,T ], and P×µ is the canonical product measure of P and µ. Remark 3.1. The assumption that each νk isF-predictable can be relaxed to being pre- dictable w.r.t to the ﬁner ﬁltration ∨j∈NFj without any change to the results that follow. We call each of the processes{νk}k∈K the sub-population mean-ﬁelds, where each component represents the limiting average trading rate within a given sub-population. Due to the as- sumptions on the relative size of the sub-populations (see (2.2)), in the limit as N→∞ , the MFG WITH PARTIAL INFORMATION FOR ALGORITHMIC TRADING 9 total average rate of trading ν(N) exists. More speciﬁcally, let us deﬁne the population mean- ﬁeld to be the process ν = (νt)t∈[0,T ] where νt = limN↗∞ν(N) t , then νt exists and admits the representation (3.2) νt = ∑ k∈K pkνk t , P×µ a.e., where{pk}k∈K represent the limiting proportions of each sub-population as deﬁned in equa- tion (2.2). With these assumptions, the limiting dynamics of the asset price process satisﬁes the (controlled) SDE (3.3) dSν t = ( At +λ ∑ k∈K pkνk t ) dt +dMt, where we replace all of the price impact terms with their limits. Since we restrict agent-j to trading actionsνj from the admissible setAj⊂ H2 T , asN→∞ , each agent’s individual contribution to ν(N) t vanishes. Furthermore, upon inspection of the deﬁnition of agent-j’s objective functional in equation (2.12), we see the dependence on ν−j appears only through the process ν(N), which converges toνt in the limit. These two remarks imply that as N→∞ , each agent’s objective functional no longer depends directly on ν−j, but rather it depends on the population statistic νt, representing the average price impact of all agents in the limit. For ease of notation, we therefore suppress the second argument of the objective functional in the limit. Hence, an agent j in sub-population k, seeks to maximize the functional Hj :Aj→ R, (3.4) Hj(νj) = E [∫ T 0 { qj,νj t dSν t− ( νj t qj,νj t )⊺( ak Ψk Ψk φk )( νj t qj,νj t )} dt ] , which we obtain using representation (2.12) and omitting the constant terms. This above ob- jective function implicitly depends on the processes{νk}K k=1, which we will need to determine when proceeding with the agent’s optimization problem. We next aim to solve the mean-ﬁeld stochastic game by identifying a set of strategies which form a Nash equilibrium. In other words, we seek a collection of controls {νj}∞ j=1 so that (3.5) νj = arg sup νj∈Aj Hj(ν), for all j∈ N. Because of the deﬁnition of νt, we require the collection of controls to simulta- neously satisfy the consistency condition (3.6) νt = lim N↗∞ 1 N N∑ j=1 νj t . 10 CASGRAIN, P. AND JAIMUNGAL, S. This optimal control problem is of a similar form to the discrete population game, with the main diﬀerence lying in the consistency condition imposed on the collection of controls at the optimum. The model we use here falls into the class of extended mean-ﬁeld games of controls, such as in in [16, 7]. The particular ‘ﬁxed-point’ formulation of the mean-ﬁeld which appears through the consistency condition (3.6) follows the approach to mean-ﬁeld games of [19, 27, 13], amongst others. 3.2. Solving the Agent’s Optimization Problem. In this section, we solve for the collec- tion of controls that form a Nash equilibrium for the MFG. To achieve this, we use techniques from the convex analysis literature in a similar in spirit to the approach used in [2] for the problem of optimal hedging. We conclude by demonstrating that the agent’s optimal control can be represented as the solution to a particular linear vector-valued FBSDE. Solving for an optimal control for objective function Hj, deﬁned in (3.4), presents some challenges due to the latent information structure, stemming from the agents inability to observe the individual components of the midprice process. Each agent aims to ﬁnd an Fj- adapted control to maximize an objective function containing costs that are adapted to the ﬁltrationG⊇F j. These G adapted processes appear solely in the dynamics of the midprice process Sν t . Due to this latent information, it is not possible to directly apply standard stochastic control techniques to obtain the agent’s optimal behaviour. Instead of taking a direct approach, we ﬁrst represent the midprice process in terms of a pair ofF-adapted processes. This will allow us to re-write Hj in terms of processes that are Fj-adapted, thus resolving the issue of latent information. This can be achieved by applying the result in the following lemma. Lemma 3.2. Deﬁne the process ˆA = (ˆAt)t∈[0,T ] where ˆAt = E [At|F t]. Then ˆA is an H2 T , F-adapted process. Furthermore, there exists an F-adapted L2 T martingale ˆM = (ˆMt)t∈[0,T ] such that (3.7) Sν t =S0 + ∫ t 0 ( ˆAu +λνu ) du +ˆMu. The process ˆM is known as the innovations process for the ﬁlter ˆA. Proof. The proof is found in A.1 SinceA andM are independent of the agent’s initial inventories{Qj 0}∞ j=1, the projection of the dynamics ofSν onto the ﬁltrationF will be identical to the projection ontoFj. Moreover, sinceFt⊆F j t , the processes ˆA and ˆM are adapted to the each individual agent’s ﬁltration. Lemma 3.2 provides us with a representation of Sν in terms of F-adapted processes rather than theG-adapted version in 2.5. Plugging in these F-dynamics into the expression for Hj in (2.12), and noticing that the martingale terms vanish under the expectation, we obtain an MFG WITH PARTIAL INFORMATION FOR ALGORITHMIC TRADING 11 objective functional entirely in terms of Fj-adapted processes, (3.8) Hj(νj) = E [∫ T 0 { qj,νj t ( ˆAt +λνt ) − ( νj t qj,νj t )⊺( ak Ψk Ψk φk )( νj t qj,νj t )} dt ] . In this representation, the partial information problem is cast into a full information prob- lem, and we can now apply convex analysis tools to this objective functional. The essence of the steps used to obtain the solution resembles very closely those used in elementary calculus to ﬁnd critical points of functions. First, show that the objective function is ‘diﬀerentiable’ and strictly concave. Since the argument of Hj is a stochastic process, we refer to ‘diﬀerentia- bility’ in the sense of the Gˆ ateaux directional derivative3. Next, identify where the Gˆ ateaux derivative vanishes to characterize the objective functional’s critical points. Finally, knowing that the objective function is strictly concave, guarantees that the critical point is unique and that it is a maximum. The lemmas that follow show that H j is both concave and everywhere Gˆ ateaux diﬀerentiable inAj. Lemma 3.3. The functional Hj deﬁned in equation (2.11) is strictly concave in Aj. Proof. The proof is found in A.2. Lemma 3.4. The objective function Hj is everywhere Gˆ ateaux diﬀerentiable inAj. Its Gˆ ateaux derivative at a pointν∈A j in a direction ω∈A j can be expressed as ⟨ DHj(ν),ω ⟩ = E [∫ T 0 ωt E [ − 2akνt− 2 Ψkqj,ν T + ∫ T t { ˆAu +λνu− 2φkqj,ν u } du ⏐⏐⏐⏐Fj t ] dt ] . (3.9) Proof. The proof is found in A.3. Since the objective functionalHj is concave and Gˆ ateaux diﬀerentiable, an elementν∈A j that makes the Gˆ ateax derivative vanish in an arbitrary direction ω∈A j is guaranteed to be a maximizer. Moreover, since the concavity of Hj is strict, the maximizer is unique. The explicit form of the derivative in expression (3.9) allows us to ﬁnd a representation of the agent’s optimal strategy. The following proposition uses these last two results to represent the trader’s optimal strategy as the solution to an FBSDE. Proposition 3.5. The collection of controls { νj,∗} j∈N forms a Nash equlibrium if and only if for each agent-j in sub-population k, νj,∗∈ H2 T and νj,∗ is the unique strong solution to the FBSDE (3.10)    −d(2akνj,∗ t ) = ( ˆAt +λνt− 2φkqj,νj,∗ t ) dt−dMj t, 2akνj,∗ T =−2 Ψkqj,νj,∗ T , 3For more information on the Gˆ ateaux derivative and its role in convex optimization, see [12, Section 5]. 12 CASGRAIN, P. AND JAIMUNGAL, S. whereMj∈ H2 T is anFj-adapted martingale and νt := lim N→∞ 1 N ∞∑ j=1 νj,∗ t . Proof. The proof is found in A.4. Equation (3.10) is an FBSDE since it has a forward component coming from the processes qj,νj,∗ and ˆA, as well as a backward component νj,∗, which must be solved simultaneously. A solution to equation (3.10) is the unique optimal control for agent- j and maximizes their ob- jective functional. Note that all agent’s optimal strategies are coupled through these FBSDEs via the mean-ﬁeld process ν which appears in the driver of equation (3.10), and they must all satisfy the consistency condition. As well, the parameters in the performance criteria depend on the speciﬁc sub-population to which the agent belongs. 3.3. Solving the Mean Field Equations. In the MFG limit, the inﬁnite dimensional stochastic game is reduced to solving the FBSDE (3.10) system. The FBSDE for agent- j’s optimal control shows there is no direct dependence on any other individuals’ choice of strategy. Instead, the eﬀect of all other agents appear through the mean ﬁeld process ν. Hence, rather than having the explicit dependence of one νj,∗ on ν−j,∗, we have an implicit dependence on ν−j,∗ through the mean ﬁeld process ν. Furthermore, since the FBSDE (3.10) depends on a particular agent’s sub-population, it is necessary to separate the problem across sub-populations and solve for each of their mean-ﬁelds and optimal controls. In the remainder of the section we solve the FBSDE (3.10). The main obstacle in solving the FBSDE is that the mean-ﬁeld process ν depends on the solution of each νj and vice versa, through the driver of the FBSDE. To overcome this obstacle, we ﬁrst decompose the mean- ﬁeld process as the average of the sub-population mean ﬁelds, i.e., write νt = ∑ k∈Kpkνk t . Next, we formulate an ansatz for each νk t , which we then use to ﬁnd a corresponding ansatz of the solution to νj. We then conclude by demonstrating that the ansatz solutions for both {νj}j∈N and{νk}k∈K indeed form the unique solution to the FBSDE problem (3.10). 3.3.1. An Ansatz for the Mean-Field Processes. Our ﬁrst task is to propose an ap- propriate form of each sub-population mean-ﬁeld process νk. Our proposed ansatz for each sub-population mean-ﬁeld is denoted by the process ˜νk = (˜νk t )t∈[0,T ],∀k∈K , and solves the FBSDE (3.11)    −d(2ak ˜νk t ) = ( ˆAt +λ∑ k′∈Kpk′ ˜νk′ t − 2φk ˜qk,˜νk t ) dt−dM k t , 2ak ˜νk T =−2 Ψk ˜qk,˜νk T , where the (controlled) forward processes ˜ qk,˜νk = (˜qk,˜νk t )t∈[0,T ] are given by ˜qk,˜νk t = mk 0 +∫t 0 ˜νk udu, mk 0 = E[Qj 0], and where M k = (M k t )t∈[0,T ] is a suitable F-adapted martingale satisfyingM k ∈ H2 T . It is worth pointing out that the martingales appearing here are all F-adapted, and not Fj-adapted as in (3.10). We will nonetheless see that the ansatz does indeed provide a solution to our original problem. MFG WITH PARTIAL INFORMATION FOR ALGORITHMIC TRADING 13 The FBSDEs in (3.11) can be viewed as resulting from taking the average over all j∈K k of the FBSDEs (3.10), and explicitly splitting the overall mean-ﬁeld in terms of the sub- population mean-ﬁelds. Since the system is an average over an inﬁnite number of objects, there is no guarantee that the solution to this ‘average’ FBSDE will exactly match the sub- population mean-ﬁeld process νk. We show in Theorem 3.9 that the solution to (3.11) does indeed provide us with the mean ﬁeld process νk t = limN↗∞ 1 N(N) k ∑ j∈K(N) k νj t , where νj is the solution to the FBSDE (3.10). We now solve the collection FBSDEs (3.11) using an approach similar to (but not the same as) the ‘four-step method’ of [26]. The linear structure of the coupling of the FBSDEs plays a key role, and we re-write the collection as a single vector-valued equation. First, let ˜ν˜ν˜νt = ( ˜νk t ) k∈K be the column vector of the ansatzes for each sub-population mean-ﬁeld. Stacking each of the mean-ﬁeld FBSDE (3.11) results in the vector valued equation, (3.12)    −d(2aaa ˜ν˜ν˜νt) = ( ˆAt 111(K×1) + ΛΛΛ ˜ν˜ν˜νt− 2φφφ ˜q˜q˜qt ) dt−dMMMt, 2aaa ˜ν˜ν˜νT =−2ΨΨΨ ˜q˜q˜qT, whereaaa,φφφ,ΨΨΨ and ΛΛΛ are all real-valued K×K matrices deﬁned as aaa = diag ({ak}k∈K) , φ φφ = diag ({φk}k∈K) , ΨΨΨ = diag ({Ψk}k∈K) , ΛΛΛ =   λp 1 ... λp K ... ... λp 1 ... λp K   , ˜q˜q˜qt = m0 + ∫t 0 ˜ν˜ν˜νudu, andMMMt = (M k t )K k=1 is a column vector of F-adapted martingales with M k t∈ H2 T ,∀k∈K . Due to the linear structure of the vector-value FBSDE (3.12), we make the further ansatz that there are twoF-adapted processesggg1 = (ggg1,t)t∈[0,T ] andggg2 = (ggg2,t)t∈[0,T ], whereggg1,t∈ RK andggg2,t∈ RK×K, such that the solution to (3.12) can be expressed as (3.13) 2 aaa ˜ν˜ν˜νt =ggg1,t +ggg2,t ˜q˜q˜qt. Applying Itˆ o’s lemma to the above expression, inserting the result back into (3.12), and grouping terms by ˜q˜q˜q, yields (3.14) 0 = { dggg1,t + ( 111(K×1)ˆAt + (ΛΛΛ +ggg2,t) (2aaa)−1 ggg1,t ) dt−dMMMt } + { dggg2,t + ( (ΛΛΛ +ggg2,t) (2aaa)−1ggg2,t− 2φφφ ) dt } ˜q˜q˜qt. Equation (3.14) must hold P×µ almost everywhere for all ˜q˜q˜qt, hence, the terms within each curly brace vanish independently. Moreover, we can apply the same argument to the boundary 14 CASGRAIN, P. AND JAIMUNGAL, S. condition of ˜ν˜ν˜ν to yield two coupled BSDEs forggg1 andggg2 which no longer depend on the forward process ˜q˜q˜qt. The ﬁrst of these is a linear BSDE for ggg1, (3.15)    −dggg1,t = ( 111(K×1)ˆAt + (ΛΛΛ +ggg2,t) (2aaa)−1 ggg1,t ) dt−dMMMt, ggg1,T = 000(K×1), and a matrix-valued ODE for the value for ggg2, (3.16)    −dggg2,t = ( (ΛΛΛ +ggg2,t) (2aaa)−1ggg2,t− 2φφφ ) dt, ggg2,T =−2ΨΨΨ. There is a one-way dependence structure in these equations. Equation (3.15) is a linear BSDE that depends on the solution for ggg2, while equation (3.16) is a matrix-valued non- symmetric Riccati equation that is independent of ggg1. Let us also note that equation (3.16) is an ordinary diﬀerential equation which is deterministic since it has no Martingale term and has a deterministic boundary condition. Such vector and matrix-valued BSDEs are reminiscent of those appearing in [4]. The solutions to (3.15) and (3.16) are presented in the proposition that follows. Proposition 3.6. There exists a unique solution ggg2,t to the matrix valued ODE (3.16) that is bounded over the interval [0,T ]. Moreover, letYYYt : [0,T ]→ R2K×K be deﬁned as (3.17) YYYt =e(T−t)BBB ( III(K×K),−2ΨΨΨ )⊺ , whereBBB∈ R2K×2K is the block matrix (3.18) BBB = ( 000(K×K) −(2aaa)−1 −2φφφ ΛΛΛ(2aaa)−1 ) . If we deﬁne the matrix partition YYYt = (YYY 1,t,YYY 2,t)⊺, where YYY 1,t,YYY 2,t∈ RK×K, then ggg2,t can be expressed as (3.19) ggg2,t =YYY 2,tYYY−1 1,t . Furthermore, the BSDE (3.15) admits a closed form solution, (3.20) ggg1,t = ∫ T t :::e ∫u t (ΛΛΛ+ggg2,s)(2aaa)−1ds ::: 111(K×1) E [Au|Ft] du, where :::e ∫u t ·ds ::: represents the time-ordered exponential 4. Moreover, E[ ∫T 0 ggg⊺ 1,tggg1,tdt]<∞. 4We deﬁne the time-ordered exponential of a matrix-valued functionfff : [0,T ]→ RK×K,ηηηt,u = :::e ∫u t fffsds :::, with t≤u, to be the unique solution to the matrix-valued ODE dηηηt,u =ηηηt,ufffudu with the initial condition ηηηt,u =III(K×K). MFG WITH PARTIAL INFORMATION FOR ALGORITHMIC TRADING 15 Proof. The proof is found in B.1. The processes ggg1 andggg2 found in the above proposition provide us with a solution to the vector-valued FBSDE (3.12). We summarize the results in the proposition that follows. Proposition 3.7. Deﬁne the process ˜ν˜ν˜ν = (˜ν˜ν˜νt)t∈[0,T ], where ˜ν˜ν˜ν∈ RK and (3.21) ˜ ν˜ν˜νt = (2aaa)−1 (ggg1,t +ggg2,t ˜q˜q˜qt) . whereggg1,t andggg2,t are the functions given in the statement of Proposition 3.6, i.e., equations (3.20) and (3.19). Then ˜ν˜ν˜νt is the unique solution to the FBSDE (3.12). Furthermore, let ˜νk t be thekth element of the vector ˜ν˜ν˜νt, then for each k∈K , ˜νk∈⋂∞ j=1Aj and{˜νk t}k∈K form the solution to the collection of FBSDEs (3.11). Proof. The proof is found in B.2. Furthermore, since ˜ν˜ν˜νt represents the ansatz vector for each sub-population mean-ﬁeld, we may represent the total mean-ﬁeld eﬀect implied by the ansatz ˜ν˜ν˜νt as ˜νt =∑ k∈K pk ˜νk t . 3.4. An Ansatz for Agent’s Optimal Control. We now use the ansatz derived in sec- tion 3.3.1 to derive an optimal control for each individual agent under the assumption that νt = ˜νt (we show that indeed the solution is optimal in the next subsection). Consider the FBSDE (3.10) for the optimal trading rate of an agent j in sub-population k. Replacing the true mean ﬁeld νt with our ansatz ˜νt in the optimality equation (3.10), we obtain the FBSDE (3.22)    −d(2akνj t ) = ( ˆAt +λλλ⊺ ˜ν˜ν˜νt− 2φkqj,νj t ) dt−dMj t, 2akνj T =−2 Ψkqj,νj T , where λλλ = (λpk)k∈K andMj t is some square-integrable Fj-adapted martingale. By solving this FBSDE, we ﬁnd each agent’s optimal control, assuming that the mean-ﬁeld process is exactly equal to the ansatz derived in section 3.3.1. We solve the FBSDE (3.22) along similar lines as the approach we took in solving (3.12). Doing so leads to the following proposition. Proposition 3.8. Let agent−j be a member of sub-population k, then the solution to the FBSDE (3.22) is (3.23) νj t = ˜νk t + 1 2ak hk 2,t ( qj,νj t − ˜qk,˜νk t ) , where ˜νk t is deﬁned in Proposition 3.7 and hk 2,t : [0,T ]→ R is deﬁned as (3.24) hk 2,t =−2ξk (Ψk cosh (−γk(T−t) )−ξk sinh (−γk(T−t) ) ξk cosh (−γk(T−t) )− Ψk sinh (−γk(T−t) ) ) , where we the constants γk = √ φk/ak and ξk =√φkak. Moreover, hk 2,t≤ 0 for all t∈ [0,T ], and νj∈A j. Proof. The proof is found in B.3 16 CASGRAIN, P. AND JAIMUNGAL, S. 3.5. Showing the Solution is Optimal. At this point we have solved the optimality equa- tion (3.10) under the assumption that the mean-ﬁeldν equals the ansatz mean-ﬁeld process ˜ν. To show that the solution provided in Proposition 3.8 indeed solves the optimality equation, we need to demonstrate that ˜ν is the true mean-ﬁeld, i.e., that ˜νt =νt = limN→∞ 1 N ∑N j=1νj t . To this end, we consider the error within a sub-population k∈K , ∆k t =νk t− ˜νk t and demonstrate that it equals zero. The result is summarized in the following theorem. Theorem 3.9. Let νj t be the processes deﬁned in Proposition 3.8, and ˜νk t be the processes deﬁned in Proposition 3.7. Then for each k∈K (3.25) ˜ νk t = lim N→∞ 1 N (N) k ∑ j∈K(N) k νj t , P×µ-almost everywhere . Hence, the process (3.26) νj,∗ t = ˜νk t + 1 2ak hk 2,t ( qj,νj,∗ t − ˜qk,˜νk t ) is the solution to the optimality equation (3.10), where ˜νk t =νk t P×µ a.e. and (3.27) νj,∗ = arg sup ν∈Aj Hj(ν). Proof. The proof is found in B.4. This theorem guarantees that the ansatz for the mean-ﬁeld processes and each agent’s control are indeed correct. Hence, for the MFG version of our stochastic game, we have closed-form solutions for the optimal strategy of each individual agent, the sub-population mean-ﬁelds, and the overall population mean-ﬁeld. 3.6. Properties of the Agent’s Optimal Control. From Proposition 3.7 (and Theorem 3.9), the mean-ﬁeld trading rates within a sub-population can be written (3.28) νννt = (2aaa)−1 (ggg1,t +ggg2,t ¯q¯q¯qt ) , where ¯q¯q¯qt =µµµ0 + ∫t 0νννtdt. The general structure of this mean-ﬁeld strategy closely corresponds to the structure obtained for the single agent latent alpha model in [11]. The within sub-population mean-ﬁelds can be decomposed into two parts. The ﬁrst part, (2aaa)−1ggg1,t, represents the portion of the mean ﬁeld trading rate that can be attributed to trading on alpha. This is evident from the representation of ggg1 in equation (3.20), which shows that ggg1 is the weighted average of the expected future drift of the asset. Moreover, this expected future drift is computed by conditioning on the agent’s visible ﬁltration only, meaning that the agent obtains the best possible estimate of the asset’s alpha based on the information they have. The second part, (2aaa)−1ggg2,t ¯q¯q¯qt, consists of a deterministic function multiplied by the vector of ‘mean-ﬁeld inventories’. It admits the interpretation that the sub-population mean-ﬁeld MFG WITH PARTIAL INFORMATION FOR ALGORITHMIC TRADING 17 trading rates each induce the sub-population mean inventories towards zero (so that the terminal liquidation penalty is minimized), while simultaneously being conscious of the ‘mean- ﬁeld inventories’ of all other sub-populations. From the result in Theorem 3.9, an agent j in sub-population k, follows the strategy (3.29) νj,∗ t =νk t + 1 2ak hk 2,t ( qj,νj,∗ t − ¯qk t ) . Thus, each agent trades at the sub-population mean-ﬁeld rate plus a correction term. Since hk 2,t is strictly negative, this correction term tends to push the agent’s inventory towards the sub-population’s mean-ﬁeld inventory. To formally show this, recall that dqj,νj t = νj t dt for anyνj∈A j. Hence, from (3.29), we have (3.30) d ( qj,νj,∗ t − ¯qk t ) = 1 2ak hk 2,t ( qj,νj t − ¯qk t ) dt. This admits the solution (3.31) ( qj,νj,∗ t − ¯qk t ) = ( qj 0− ¯qk 0 ) e 1 2ak ∫t 0hk 2,udu . Since hk 2,t< 0, it is clear that |qj,νj,∗ t − ¯qk t| is a monotonically decreasing function of time. 4. The ϵ-Nash Equilibrium Property. In the previous section, we explicitly constructed the unique optimal trading actions of all agents in inﬁnite population limit – the optimal actions in the MFG. In this section, we explore the properties resulting from applying the MFG optimal controls to the ﬁnite player game. More speciﬁcally, we show that the controls satisfy the ϵ-Nash equilibrium property. Deﬁnition 4.1. A set of controls { ωj∈A j :j∈ N } forms an ϵ-Nash equilibrium with a collection of objective functionals {Jj(·,·) : j∈ N}, if there exists ϵ> 0, s.t. (4.1) Jj(ωj,ω−j)≤ sup ω∈A Jj(ω,ω−j)≤Jj(ωj,ω−j) +ϵ, ∀j∈ N. The deﬁnition of an ϵ-Nash equilibrium characterizes a collection of controls that deviates no farther than ϵ from the Nash equilibrium of the collection of objective functions. We will prove that the optimal MFG controls obtained in section 3 satisﬁes the ϵ-Nash property for any ﬁnite game with a large enough population size. In particular, we show that for any given ϵ> 0, there exists a population size Nϵ so that the ϵ-Nash property holds for any population of size N >Nϵ. Theorem 4.2 ( ϵ-Nash equilibrium). Consider the collection of objective functions{Hj :j∈ N} deﬁned in equation (2.11) and the set of optimal mean-ﬁeld controls {νj,∗}∞ j=1 deﬁned in equa- tion (3.29). Suppose that there exists a sequence {δN}∞ N=1 such that δN→ 0 and (4.2) ⏐⏐⏐⏐ N(N) k N −pk ⏐⏐⏐⏐ =o(δN) 18 CASGRAIN, P. AND JAIMUNGAL, S. for all k∈K , then (4.3) Hj(νj,∗,ν∗,−j)≤ sup ν∈A Hj(ν,ν∗,−j)≤Hj(νj,∗,ν∗,−j) +o( 1 N ) +o(δN) for each j∈ N. Proof. The proof is found in Appendix C.1. Theorem 4.2 implies that for any ﬁxed value ofϵ, we can identify the minimum population size, Nϵ, so that the ϵ-Nash property holds for all N > Nϵ. More speciﬁcally, the theorem states that the size of the quantity Nϵ will grow as ϵ→ 0 at a super-linear rate that is a function of the sequence δN. The special case where the rate of growth of Nϵ is exactly linear occurs when o(δN)≤o( 1 N ). From a more intuitive standpoint, Theorem 4.2 simply tells us that the mean-ﬁeld optimal controls are always a ‘good enough’ substitute for the optimal ﬁnite-game controls provided that the population size is large enough. It is important to note that in the ﬁnite payer game, agents cannot use the empirical mean- ﬁeld in their individual strategies, since it is not measurable with respect to each agent’s visible ﬁltration. They instead generate a ‘ﬁctitious’ mean-ﬁeld inventory process (¯ q¯q¯qt)t∈[0,T ] which trades at the rate of (νννt)t∈[0,T ] according to (3.28). These ﬁctitious mean-ﬁeld inventories then feed into the individual agent’s trading strategy νj,∗ according to the result in Theorem 3.9. 5. Numerical Experiments. In this section we study the behaviour of the mean-ﬁeld optimal controls through simulations of the ﬁnite player game. We consider a model where the asset price process is a mean-reverting pure-jump process with a latent (unobservable) process driving the dynamics. Agents must ﬁlter the value of the latent process from observed paths of the asset price, and to use this ﬁlter to make predictions on the future (expected) value of the asset price process. We conclude by exploring some of the properties of the agent’s trading decisions by interpreting simulation results. We begin by deﬁning the un-impacted asset price process F = (Ft)t∈[0,T ]. The process Ft is deﬁned as (5.1) Ft =α ( L+ t −L− t ) , where L± = (L± t )t∈[0,T ] are counting processes each with respective stochastic intensity pro- cesses γ± = (γ± t )t∈[0,T ], and the constant α >0 represents the tick size for the asset price. The process F is deﬁned so that it may only jump up or down by a single tick during any small instant in time. As previously mentioned, we wish the asset price process to be mean reverting and to include some latent component in its dynamics. To achieve this, we deﬁne each intensity process so that (5.2) γ± t =σ +κ (Θt−Ft)± , MFG WITH PARTIAL INFORMATION FOR ALGORITHMIC TRADING 19 where (· )± represents the positive or negative part of its argument and Θ = (Θ t)t∈[0,T ] is a latent process. This speciﬁcation causes the un-impacted asset price F to mean-revert to Θ. Lastly, we deﬁne the process Θ to be an M-state continuous time Markov chain with generator matrix5 CCC, taking values in the set {θi}M i=1. We also assumed that the initial value of the latent process, Θ 0, has prior distribution πππ ={πm}M m=1, where πm = P(Θ0 = θm). The un-impacted asset price process can be viewed as a pure-jump analogue to an Ornstein- Uhlenbeck process. The parameter κ controls the strength of the mean reversion ofF towards Θ, while the parameter σ controls the base level of noise in the paths of F . We point the reader to [11, Section 6] for further exposition of this model. As before, we assume there is a total population of N players divided into K sub- populations all trading the same asset S. The asset price process S is assumed to be given by (5.3) Sν(N) t =Ft +λ ¯q(N) t , which can also be recast in the semi-martingale representation as in equation (2.5). Each agent chooses their trading strategy according to the mean-ﬁeld optimal control derived in Section 3. Each of the terms that need to be computed for this control can be obtained in closed form up to inverses and the computation of inverses, matrix exponentials and ordered exponentials. We set the initial inventory values of all agents to i.i.d. Gaussian random variables. More speciﬁcally, for an agent j in sub-population k, we assume that (5.4) Qk 0∼N (mk 0, ¯σk 0) for constants{mk 0}K k=1 and{¯σk 0}K k=1. Each agent participating in the game must compute the values of{νk}K k=1 and{¯qk}K k=1 to be able to determine their own trading strategy. The agents achieve this by using the results of Propositions 3.6 and 3.8 to compute νννt and to evolve the value of the ‘ﬁctitious’ mean-ﬁeld inventory process ¯ q¯q¯qt. To compute ggg1,t, each agent must compute the conditional expected value E [ Au ⏐⏐Ft ] , where At =κ (Ft− Θt). To achieve this, agents use the observed path of Sν(N) up until time t to compute the posterior distribution of the current value of the latent process Θ t, which they use to compute the expected future return on the asset price. The expected value can be computed in closed form for this latent alpha model and its solution is presented and discussed in detail in [11, Section 6]. We perform simulations of a game with K = 2 distinct (unequal) sub-populations and a total of N = 30 agents. We allow agents to trade in the ﬁnite time interval ending at T = 1, representing the length of one whole trading day. The Table 1 below lays out the parameters for the starting distribution of inventories and for the objective function for each sub-population. 5The generator matrix CCC∈ RM×M of a M-state continuous time Markov chain Θ has non-diagonal entries CCCi,j≥ 0 if i⁄=j and diagonal entries CCCi,i =−∑ j⁄=iCCCi,j. CCC is deﬁned so that P (Θt =θj|Θ0 =θi) = ( etCCC) i,j, where ( etCCC) i,j is element (i,j ) of the matrix exponential of tCCC. 20 CASGRAIN, P. AND JAIMUNGAL, S. k mk 0 ¯σk 0 Nk Ψk φk ak 1 100 50 20 100 10 −2 10−4 2 0 50 10 100 10 −3 10−4 Table 1: Simulation Parameters for the two sub-population of agents. We set the ﬁrst sub-population of agents to be long the asset on average at the start of the game, whereas the second starts oﬀ holding no inventory on average. We also make sub- population 2 more inclined to trade on alpha by making their φ1 parameter (which controls their risk appetite) considerably smaller than for sub-population 1. Both sub-populations have the same instantaneous transaction cost parameter ak, and we set the size of sub-population 2 to be twice that of sub-population 1. Lastly, we set the Ψ k parameter to be very large to force agents to fully liquidate their inventories by t =T . In the simulation, we assume that the latent process can take M = 2 possible states and that Θt∈{ 4.95, 5.05}. This causes the price to either mean-revert up or down depending on the state of Θt. The remaining asset price process parameters are presented in Table 2 below. F0 = $5, α = $0.01 πππ = ( 0.5 0.5 ) CCC = [−1 1 1 −1 ] , κ = 360, σ = 120.24, λ = $10−3. Table 2: The parameters used for the asset price dynamics and for the latent process. The asset price is set to start at $5 and can mean-revert to either $4 .95 or $5.05 over the course of the trading period. We set the tick value , α, in this model to be 1 cent so that the un-impacted asset price may only jump by increments of this size. The values of πππ are chosen speciﬁcally so that agents have no particular preference for the starting value of the latent process. Furthermore, because of the choice of the generator matrix CCC, the agent expects that the latent process will switch states (on average) once over the course of the trading period t∈ [0, 1]. The values of κ and σ are chosen to be relatively close to re-scaled values obtained from calibrating the model to market prices in [11]. Lastly, the permanent impact parameter λ is chosen to be 10 times larger than the temporary impact parameter ak – which is line with the empirical studies in [10]. During the simulation, we set a ﬁxed path for Θt to be able to observe the agents’ ﬁltering performance. More speciﬁcally, we let Θ t start oﬀ at Θ 0 = 4.95, and then make it jump to Θt = 5.5 at time t = 0.5 and let it remain there until the end of the trading period. We show an example simulated path for the asset price and latent process, the agent’s posterior distribution for the value of Θt, and the individual agents’ inventory paths over the course of the trading period in Figure 1. MFG WITH PARTIAL INFORMATION FOR ALGORITHMIC TRADING 21 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 t 4.8 4.85 4.9 4.95 5 5.05 5.1 5.15 5.2 Price Price Processes and Latent Process St Ft #t 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 Time 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 Posterior Probability Posterior Model Probabilities Model 1 Model 2 Figure 1: Simulated paths for the price process, latent process, the agent’s ﬁlter, and the individual agent’s inventory paths. In the right most panel: the red lines represents sub- population 1 and the blue lines represent sub-population 2. The thin lines represent the paths of an agent’s inventory, the thick dashed lines represent the average of inventories for all agents within a sub-population. The thick crossed lines represent the mean-ﬁeld process for a given sub-population. The left panel in Figure 1 shows how the asset price ﬁrst mean-reverts downwards when Θt is in its lower state, and then mean reverts back up towards $5 .05 after Θt switches states at t = 0.5. We also see from the centre panel of Figure 1 that agents are able to correctly learn the value of the latent process just by observing the paths of the asset price. The agents’ posterior begins without a preference for the state, but then evolve to realize that the initial state of the latent process is at Θ t = 4.95. After t = 0.5, the agent also identiﬁes the switch in Θt and adjusts their posterior distribution accordingly. The price impact caused by the trading activity of agents can be seen in the left panel of Figure 1 as the diﬀerence between Ft and St, which varies over time. The right panel of Figure 1 displays the inventory values of agents over the trading period. Agents from sub-population 1 (red) start with (on average) a higher inventory value than those in sub-population 2 (blue). Agents in sub-population 1 have inventories that very quickly converge towards the sub-population mean-ﬁeld, which itself tends to zero quickly. Agents in sub-population 2 also have inventories that mean-revert to their sub-population mean- ﬁeld, but at a much slower rate than those in sub-population 1. This behaviour is consistent with the observation in Section 3.6 that an individual agent’s inventory and trading rate will always tend towards their sub-population’s mean-ﬁeld levels. Furthermore, the speed of the reversion towards the sub-population mean is controlled by the function hk 2,t, which is deﬁned in Proposition 3.8. Larger values of the parameter φk increase the magnitude of hk 2,t, and an increase in the magnitude of hk 2,t increases the speed of the reversion towards the mean-ﬁeld as pointed out in Section 3.6. Therefore, the diﬀerence in the speed of mean-reversion for the two sub-populations can be explained by diﬀerences in the value of the parameter φk. Moreover, agents in sub-population 2 trade on the latent alpha considerably more than those in sub-population 1. Members of sub-population 1 seek to liquidate their inventories 22 CASGRAIN, P. AND JAIMUNGAL, S. quickly, while members of sub-population 2 are more inclined to take on inventory exposure due to deviation of the asset price from its ﬁltered mean-reversion level. This also ties back to the value of the parameter φk, which controls the agent’s risk appetite. Since a lower value of φk corresponds to a higher risk tolerance, we see more alpha trading stemming from sub-population 2. The latent alpha trading observed in sub-population 2 also matches the posterior proba- bilities (center panel of Figure 1). When the agents estimate that the latent process is in the lower mean-reversion state, they begin taking on a long position in anticipation of a switch from the lower state to the upper state, which they expect will occur at least once before the end of the trading period. After the switch occurs, they begin reversing their position to a net short, expecting the reverse behaviour. The net short that agents take has a lower magnitude than the net long that agents previously took because less time remains until the end of the trading period, since it is both less likely that they will witness another switch and there is less time remaining before they are forced to completely liquidate their inventories. As the trading period nears its end, we see agents gradually reduce their exposure to zero so that they are ﬂat by the end of the trading period. 6. Conclusion. In this paper, we presented a stochastic game model for a market in which a ﬁnite population of players divided into heterogenous sub-populations trades a single asset. Agents have access to incomplete information of the market and of the actions of other agents, and we derive the mean-ﬁeld game in the limit of inﬁnite number of players. Using techniques from convex analysis allows us to obtain closed-form solutions for the mean-ﬁeld of each sub- population and the optimal action for each individual agent. We then show that the solution obtained by solving the mean-ﬁeld game in fact satisﬁes the ϵ-Nash property in the ﬁnite player version of the game. Lastly, we present a simulated example of the ﬁnite stochastic game and analyze some of the agent’s behaviour. There are a number of future directions for this research. Here we outline a few directions, which is by no means exhaustive. One direction, which we have already begun investigating, is account for model-heterogeneity. That is, to allow agents in diﬀerent sub-population to belief in diﬀerent models, in addition to having heterogeneous preferences. Another direction of research is to restrict agents to trade at stopping times, rather than continuously as done here. Lastly, accounting for model uncertainty/ambiguity aversion along the lines of [10] and [21] would be a very interesting direction to explore so that agents’ strategies become more robust. MFG WITH PARTIAL INFORMATION FOR ALGORITHMIC TRADING 23 Appendix A. Proofs for Section 3 – The Optimal Control Problem. A.1. Proof of Lemma 3.2. Proof. First, let us deﬁneFt =Sν t− ∫t 0 λνudu. Since νt∈ H2 T andνt isF-adapted, it is clear thatFt∈ H2 T and that Ft isF-adapted. Let ˆAt = E [At|F t]. By it’s deﬁnition, ˆAt isF-adapted. Furthermore, by Jensen’s inequality, E ∫ T 0 E [At|F t]2 dt≤ E ∫ T 0 E [ A2 t|F t ] dt.(A.1) since the integrand is non-negative, we may apply Fubini’s theorem and the tower property, E [ E [∫ T 0 A2 tdt|F t ]] = E [∫ T 0 A2 tdt ] <∞,(A.2) therefore ˆA∈ H2 T . Next, let us deﬁne (A.3) ˆMt =Ft− ∫ T 0 ˆAtdt. Since ˆA and F areF-adapted, M is alsoF-adapted. Furthermore, for any t∈ [0,T ] E[ˆM2 t ]≤ 4 ( E[F 2 t ] + E [∫T 0 ˆA2 udu ]) ≤ 32 E [∫T 0 ( A2 u +M2 u ) du ] <∞,(A.4) which demonstrates that ˆM∈ L2 T . Using the dynamics of F , for 0≤t≤u≤T E [ ˆMu−ˆMt|F t ] = E [ (Fu−Ft)− ∫t u ˆAsds ⏐⏐⏐Ft ] (A.5) = E [∫t u(As− ˆAs)ds + (Mu−Mt) ⏐⏐⏐Ft ] = E [∫t u(As− ˆAs)ds ⏐⏐⏐Ft ] ,(A.6) applying Fubini’s theorem and the tower property E [∫t u(As− ˆAs)ds ⏐⏐⏐Ft ] = E [∫ t u E [ As− ˆAs ⏐⏐⏐Fs ] ds ⏐⏐⏐⏐Ft ] = 0.(A.7) Therefore, (A.8) E [ ˆMu|F t ] = ˆMt which shows thatˆM is a martingale. From the deﬁnitions ofˆM and ˆA, it is easy to verify that (3.7) is satisﬁed. A.2. Proof of Lemma 3.3. Proof. To show that the functionals Hj are strictly concave, we must show that for any 0 < ρ <1, and ν,ω∈A j where (P×µ)(νt⁄=ωt)> 0, that (A.9) Hj(ρν + (1−ρ)ω)−ρHj(ν)− (1−ρ)Hj(ω)> 0. First, observe that qj,· is linear in controls: qj,ρν+(1−ρ)ω t =ρqj,ν t + (1−ρ)qj,ω t , for all 0 <ρ< 1 and ν,ω∈A j. If we let ΓΓΓk = ( ak Ψk Ψk φk ) , 24 CASGRAIN, P. AND JAIMUNGAL, S. and expand the left side of the inequality (A.9), we may use the linearity of qj to cancel out constant terms and qj,· t (ˆAt +λνt) terms. This yields left part of (A.9) = E [∫ T 0 ρ ( νt qj,ν t )⊺ ΓΓΓk ( νt qj,ν t ) + (1−ρ) ( ωt qj,ω t )⊺ ΓΓΓk ( ωt qj,ω t ) − ( ρ ( νt qj,ν t ) + (1−ρ) ( ωt qj,ω t ))⊺ ΓΓΓk ( ρ ( νt qj,ν t ) + (1−ρ) ( ωt qj,ω t )) dt ] (completing the square) = E [∫ T 0 ρ (1−ρ) (( νt qj,ν t ) − ( ωt qj,ω t ))⊺ ΓΓΓk (( νt qj,ν t ) − ( ωt qj,ω t )) dt ] . expanding the above, and letting ∆t =νt−ωt and since q∆ t =qj,ν t −qj,ω t , (A.10) = ρ (1−ρ) E [∫ T 0 { ak∆2 t +φk ( q∆ t )2 + 2Ψk∆tq∆ t } dt ] . Since 0≤ρ≤ 1, we only need to demonstrate that the inside of the expected value is greater than zero. Since φk≥ 0, we can guarantee that the middle term in (A.10) is ≥ 0. Next, we may look at the right-most term in equation (A.10). Since we can write q∆ t = ∫t 0 ∆udu, integrating by parts yields (A.11) E ∫ T 0 2∆tq∆ t dt = E [( q∆ T )2] ≥ 0. Since Ψk ≥ 0, this last result implies that the right-most term in (A.10) is ≥ 0. Lastly, notice that if (P×µ)(νt⁄=ωt)> 0, then (A.12) E [∫ T 0 ∆2 t dt ] > 0. Since ak > 0, this last comment shows that (A.10) is strictly greater than zero. A.3. Proof of Lemma 3.4. Proof. Using the deﬁnition of the Gˆ ateaux derivative, (A.13) ⟨ DHj(ν),ω ⟩ = lim ϵ↘0 Hj(ν +ϵω )−Hj(ν) ϵ we will show that this limit exists and is equal to the result provided in the lemma. Using the representation for the objective Hj (3.8) and canceling out the t = 0 terms and using the linearity of the process qj,ν t −qj,ν 0 in the variable ν, we have Hj(ν +ϵω )−Hj(ν) =ϵ E [∫ T 0 { (qj,ω t −qj,ω 0 )(ˆAt +λνt)− 2 ( νt qj,ν t )⊺ ΓΓΓk ( ωt qj,ω t −qj,ω 0 ) dt }] (A.14) −ϵ2E [∫ T 0 ( ωt qj,ω t −qj,ω 0 )⊺ ΓΓΓk ( ωt qj,ω t −qj,ω 0 ) dt ] ,(A.15) where ΓΓΓk = ( ak Ψk Ψk φk ) . Dividing by ϵ and taking the limit yields (A.16) ⟨ DHj(ν),ω ⟩ = E [∫ T 0 { (qj,ω t −qj,ω 0 )(ˆAt +λνt)− 2 ( νt qj,ν t )⊺ ΓΓΓk ( ωt qj,ω t −qj,ω 0 )} dt ] . MFG WITH PARTIAL INFORMATION FOR ALGORITHMIC TRADING 25 Expanding the right part of the integrand in (A.16) and re-grouping terms, (A.17) ⟨ DHj(ν),ω ⟩ = E [∫ T 0 (qj,ω t −qj,ω 0 ) ( ˆAt +λνt− 2(φkqj,ν t + Ψkνt) ) dt− 2 ∫ T 0 ωt ( akνt + Ψkqj,ν t ) dt ] . Since ν,ω ∈A j and ν, ˆA∈ H2 T , the suﬃcient conditions for Fubini’s theorem are met. Applying Fubini’s theorem and the tower property ⟨ DHj(ν),ω ⟩ = ∫ T 0 E [ ωt ( −2akνt− 2Ψkqj,ν T + ∫ T t { ˆAt +λνt− 2φkqj,ν u } du )] dt(A.18) = ∫ T 0 E [ ωt E [ −2akνt− 2Ψkqj,ν T + ∫ T t { ˆAt +λνt− 2φkqj,ν u } du ⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐Ft ]] dt(A.19) = E [∫ T 0 ωt E [ −2akνt− 2Ψkqj,ν T + ∫ T t { ˆAt +λνt− 2φkqj,ν u } du ⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐Ft ] dt ] ,(A.20) which gives the desired result. A.4. Proof of Proposition 3.5. Proof. By using lemmas 3.3 and 3.4 we may apply the results of [12, Section 5] which state that if (A.21) ⟨DHj(νj,∗),ω⟩ = 0 for all ω∈A j if and only if (A.22) νj,∗ = arg sup νj,∗∈Aj Hj(ν), the strict concavity of H implies that νj,∗ must be unique up to P×µ null sets. Therefore all we need to demonstrate is that the derivative vanishes if and only if it is the solution to the stated FBSDE. Suﬃciency: Let us suppose that νj,∗ is the solution to the FBSDE in the statement of the proposition and that νj,∗∈ H2 T . We need to show that νj,∗∈A j and that it makes the Gˆ ateaux derivative vanish. First, let us note that we may represent the solution to the FBSDE implicitly as (A.23) 2 akνj,∗ t = E [ −2 Ψkqj,νj,∗ T + ∫ T t { ˆAu +λνu− 2φkqj,νj,∗ u } du ⏐⏐⏐Fj t ] , which demonstrates that νj,∗ isFj-adapted. Therefore, since νj,∗∈ H2 T and νj,∗ isFj-adapted, we have that νj,∗∈A j. Lastly we show that νj,∗ makes the Gˆ ateaux derivative vanish. By plugging (A.23) into the expression for the Gˆ ateaux derivative from lemma 3.4 and using the tower property, we ﬁnd that it vanishes almost surely. Necessity: Let us suppose that ⟨DHj(νj,∗),ω⟩ = 0 for all ω∈A j. This implies that (A.24) E [ −2akνj,∗ t− 2Ψkqj,νj,∗ T + ∫ T t { ˆAu +λνu− 2φkqj,νj,∗ u } du ⏐⏐⏐Fj t ] = 0 P×µ almost everywhere. To see this, suppose that ⟨DHj(νj,∗),ω⟩ = 0 for all ω∈A j, but (A.24) does not hold. Then, choose (A.25) ωt = E [ −2akνj,∗ t− 2Ψkqj,νj,∗ T + ∫ T t { ˆAu +λνu− 2φkqj,νj,∗ u } du ⏐⏐⏐Fj t ] . First, it is clear that this choice of ω isFj t adapted by its very deﬁnition. Second, using the fact that νk∈ H2 T , by using Jensen’s inequality and the triangle inequality on (A.25), we can obtain the bound E ∫ T 0 (ωt)2dt≤ 4 ( a2 k +T Ψ2 k +T 2φ2 k ) E ∫ T 0 (νj,∗ t )2dt + E ∫ T 0 ( ˆA2 t +λ2ν2 t ) dt <∞, 26 CASGRAIN, P. AND JAIMUNGAL, S. which implies that ω∈ H2 T and therefore ω∈A j. When we plug this choice of ω into the expression for the Gˆ ateaux derivative, we see that⟨DHj(νj,∗),ω⟩> 0, which contradicts the assumption that⟨DHj(νj,∗),ω⟩ = 0 for all ω∈A j. Using (A.24) and noting that νj,∗ t ∈F j t , we may write (A.26) 2 akνj,∗ t = E [ −2 Ψkqj,νj,∗ T + ∫ T t { ˆAu +λνu− 2φkqj,νj,∗ u } du ⏐⏐⏐Fj t ] , and (A.27) 2 akM j t = E [ −2 Ψkqj,νj,∗ T + ∫ T 0 { ˆAu +λνu− 2φkqj,νj,∗ u } du ⏐⏐⏐Fj t ] , which solves the FBSDE in the statement of the proposition. Appendix B. Proofs for Section 3 – Solving the BSDEs. B.1. Proof of Proposition 3.6. Proof. The proof will is split in the following parts: We show that (a) ggg2,t deﬁned in the statement of the proposition is a bounded and is the unique solution the Riccati ODE (3.16). (b) ggg1,t deﬁned in the statement of the proposition is the solution to the BSDE (3.15). (c) E [∫T 0 ggg⊺ 1,tggg1,tdt ] <∞. Part (a). Let us ﬁrst point out that the ODE (3.16) is a matrix-valued non-symmetric Riccati-type ODE. We prove the claims concerning the ODE (3.16) by applying theorems and tools for non-symmetric Riccati ODEs found in the set of papers [15] and [14]. First of all, let us deﬁne ˜ggg2,t =ggg2,T−t. We will show that all of the claims hold for ˜ggg2,t, and hence also for ggg2,t. From ODE (3.16), we ﬁnd that (B.1) { ∂t˜ggg2,t = ( ΛΛΛ + ˜ggg2,t ) (2aaa)−1 ˜ggg2,t− 2φφφ ˜ggg2,0 =−2ΨΨΨ rl . Our objective is now to apply [15, Theorem 2.3] on ˜ggg2,t to show the existence and boundedness of a solution. Using the notation of [15], we deﬁne (B.2) B11 = 000, B12 =−J, B21 =−2φφφ, B22 = ΛΛΛJ . andW0 =−2ΨΨΨ, whereJ = (2aaa)−1. To meet the requirements of theorem 2.3 in [15], we must ﬁndC,D∈ RK×K, C =C ⊺ so that L +L⊺≤ 0 and C +DW0 +W ⊺ 0D⊺ > 0, where (B.3) L = ( −2Dφφφ −CJ +DΛΛΛJ 0 −J ⊺D ) . Let D =III(K×K) and C = 5ΨΨΨ. With these choices of C,D , and using the fact that Ψ is a diagonal matrix with positive entries, we ﬁnd that (B.4) C +DW0 +W ⊺ 0D⊺ = ΨΨΨ> 0, which meets one of the necessary conditions. The choices of C and D also imply that the matrix L takes the form (B.5) L = ( −2φφφ −(5ΨΨΨ + ΛΛΛ)J 0 −J ) . Now, let us note that det(L) = det(−2φφφ)×det(−J). This directly implies that the set of eigenvalues ofL is the union of the set of eigenvalues of−2φφφ and those of−J. Since−2φφφ≤ 0 and−J <0, all of the eigenvalues of L are guaranteed to be non-positive and at least one of them is guaranteed to be non-zero, which implies that MFG WITH PARTIAL INFORMATION FOR ALGORITHMIC TRADING 27 L <0. Hence, L +L⊺ < 0 which meets the second condition of [15, Thm. 2.3], and guarantees the existence of a solution to the ODE B.1 and hence of (3.16). Since the solution to ggg2,t exists and is continuous on the interval [0 ,T ], it follows that it is also bounded on this interval. Furthermore, the existence and boundedness of the solution and [14, Thm 3.1] guarantees that the solution is also unique. Using the representation ˜ggg2,t =PtQ−1 t from [14] and solving the appropriate linear ODE system for each, we obtain the solution presented in the statement of the theorem. Part (b). In this part we show that ggg1 presented in the statement of the proposition solves the linear BSDE (3.15). First let us consider the process ξξξ = (ξξξt)t∈[0,T] withξξξt∈ RK×K, deﬁned as (B.6) ξξξt =:::e ∫t 0 (ΛΛΛ+ggg2,s)(2aaa)−1da :::, which is the unique solution to the matrix-valued ODE, (B.7) −dξξξt =−ξξξt (ΛΛΛ +ggg2,t) (2aaa)−1 dt, with the initial condition ξξξ0 =III(K×K), where III(K×K)∈ RK×K is the identity matrix. Using the above ODE and the BSDE (3.15) to compute the dynamics of the process ξξξtggg1,t, we ﬁnd that (B.8) d(ξξξtggg1,t) =ξξξt111(K×1)ˆAtdt−ξξξtd ˜M˜M˜Mt , with the boundary condition ξξξTggg1,T = 000(K×K). We may solve the BSDE above explicitly to yield (B.9) ξξξtggg1,t = E [∫ T t ξξξu111(K×1)ˆAudu ⏐⏐⏐Fj t ] . Sinceξξξt is guaranteed to be positive deﬁnite, we multiply by ξξξ−1 t on both sides to obtain the solution for ggg1,t, (B.10) ggg1,t = E [∫ T t ξξξ−1 t ξξξu 111(K×1)ˆAudu ⏐⏐⏐Fj t ] , where we may replace ξξξ−1 t ξξξu by the ordered exponential :::e ∫u t (ΛΛΛ+ggg2,s)(2aaa)−1da ::: to obtain the ﬁnal solution. Part (c). Let‖·‖ represent the euclidean norm in RK. Since ggg2,t is a bounded function, the time-ordered exponentialξξξt is positive deﬁnite and bounded over [0 ,T ]. Therefore there exists a constant c> 0 so that for any column vector xxx∈ RK (B.11) sup t,u∈[0,T] ‖ξξξ−1 t ξξξuxxx‖2≤c‖xxx‖2 . Applying Jensen’s inequality and Fubini’s theorem, along with this last result, to solution for ggg1,t, we ﬁnd E ∫ T 0 ‖ggg1,t‖2dt≤ E ∫ T 0 E [∫ T t ‖ξξξ−1 t ξξξu 111(K×1)ˆAu‖2du ⏐⏐⏐Fj t ] dt ≤cK E ∫ T 0 E [∫ T t (ˆAu)2du ⏐⏐⏐Fj t ] dt ≤cKT E ∫ T 0 (ˆAu)2du< ∞, as desired. B.2. Proof of Proposition 3.7. Proof. Plugging in the ansatz (B.12) ˜ ν˜ν˜νt = (2aaa)−1 (ggg1,t +ggg2,t ˜q˜q˜qt) into the FBSDE (3.12) yields the equation (3.14), which vanishes since ggg1 and ggg2 solve (3.15) and (3.16), respectively. By the deﬁnitions of ggg1 andggg2 the boundary condition is satisﬁed, and therefore ˜ν˜ν˜νt above solves the FBSDE (3.12). 28 CASGRAIN, P. AND JAIMUNGAL, S. Since the FBSDE (3.11) is just row k of the vector FBSDE (3.12), ˜νk is trivially the solution to (3.11). Lastly, we must show that ˜νk∈⋂∞ j=1Aj. Inspecting the deﬁnition of Aj andFj t , we ﬁnd that (B.13) ∞⋂ j=1 Aj = { ν isFt-predictable, ν∈ H2 T } . Therefore, we must show that ˜νk∈ H2 T and that ˜νk isF-predictable. First of all, since ggg2,t is deterministic andggg1,t isF-predictable, it is clear that ˜νk isF-predictable. Next, notice that ˜νk∈ H2 T if (B.14) E ∫ T 0 ˜ν˜ν˜ν⊺ t ˜ν˜ν˜νtdt< ∞. Using the fact that d˜q˜q˜qt = ˜ν˜ν˜νtdt, we ﬁnd that (B.15) d˜q˜q˜qt = (2aaa)−1 (ggg1,t +ggg2,t ˜q˜q˜qt) dt. Solving this SDE yields (B.16) ˜ q˜q˜qt = ˜q˜q˜q0ξξξt + (2aaa)−1 ∫ t 0 ξξξuggg1,udu where (B.17) ξξξt =IIIK×K + ∫ t 0 ξξξu (2aaa)−1ggg2,udu, for all t > 0. Since aaa is positive deﬁnite and ggg2,t is bounded, we ﬁnd that ξξξt must also be continuous and bounded over [0,T ]. Therefore, using the boundedness of ξξξ, the triangle inequality and Jensen’s inequality, there exists a constant C >0 such that ˜q˜q˜q⊺ t ˜q˜q˜qt≤C ( ˜q˜q˜q⊺ 0 ˜q˜q˜q0 + ∫ t 0 ggg⊺ 1,uggg1,udu ) ≤C ( ˜q˜q˜q⊺ 0 ˜q˜q˜q0 + ∫ T 0 ggg⊺ 1,uggg1,udu ) . Now, integrating and taking the expected value, E ∫ T 0 ˜q˜q˜q⊺ t ˜q˜q˜qtdt≤CT ( ˜q˜q˜q⊺ 0 ˜q˜q˜q0 + ∫ T 0 ggg⊺ 1,uggg1,udu ) . Noting that ˜q˜q˜q0 is bounded and that E ∫T 0 ggg⊺ 1,tggg1,tdt,∞, we ﬁnd that (B.18) E ∫ T 0 ˜q˜q˜q⊺ t ˜q˜q˜qtdt< ∞. Now using this result and applying the triangle inequality and Jensen’s inequality to the expression for ˜ν˜ν˜ν, E ∫ T 0 ˜ν˜ν˜ν⊺ t ˜ν˜ν˜νtdt≤ (2aaa)−2 ( E ∫ T 0 ggg⊺ 1,tggg1,tdt + E ∫ T 0 (ggg2,t˜q˜q˜qt)⊺(ggg2,t˜q˜q˜qt)dt ) ≤ ( E ∫ T 0 ggg⊺ 1,tggg1,tdt +C E ∫ T 0 ˜q˜q˜q⊺ t ˜q˜q˜qtdt ) <∞, where we use the boundedness ofggg2,t in the second line to obtainC >0, and thus obtaining the desired result. MFG WITH PARTIAL INFORMATION FOR ALGORITHMIC TRADING 29 B.3. Proof of Proposition 3.8. Proof. To prove the claims made in the statement of the proposition, we must show that the stated form of νj t solves the FBSDE (3.22). First, by plugging in the ansatz (B.19) νj t = ˜νk t + 1 2ak hk 2,t ( qj,νj t − ˜qk,˜νk t ) into the FBSDE, we obtain the simpliﬁcation −2akd˜νk t−dhk 2,t ( qj,νj t − ˜qk,˜νk t ) − 1 4a2 k ( hk 2,t )2( qj,νj t − ˜qk,˜νk t ) dt = ( ˆAt +λλλ⊺ ˜ν˜ν˜νt− 2φkqj,νj t ) dt−dMj t . Plugging in the FBSDE for ˜νk t from equation (3.11) and choosing Mj t =M k t , we can cancel out terms and obtain the equation (B.20) 0 = ( qj,νj t − ˜qk,˜νk t ){ dhk 2,t + ( 1 4a2 k ( hk 2,t )2 − 2φ ) dt } , which must hold almost surely for all values of ( qj,νj t − ˜qk,˜νk t ). Therefore, solving for hk 2,t which will make the terms inside of the curly brackets vanish will also solve FBSDE (3.22). Therefore, setting the terms inside of the curly brackets to zero and inserting the appropriate boundary condition, we get the ODE (B.21)    −dhk 2,t = ( 1 4a2 k ( hk 2,t )2 − 2φ ) dt hk 2,T =−2Ψk . This last ODE is of the well studied Riccati-type with the solution presented in the statement of the theorem. Next, we wish to demonstrate that hk 2,t ≥ 0. First, let us notice that since t < T and γk ≥ 0 that sinh(−γk(T−t))≤ 0 and cosh(−γk(T−t))≥ 1. Since ξk, Ψk≥ 0 we then get that (B.22) Ψk cosh (−γk(T−t) )−ξk sinh (−γk(T−t) ) ξk cosh (−γk(T−t) )− Ψk sinh (−γk(T−t) )≥ 0, and the desired result follows. Lastly, we wish to show that νj∈A j. First, note that νj it is suﬃcient to show that νj− ˜νk∈A j, since ˜νk t∈A j. First, let ∆ t =qj,νj t − ˜qk,˜νk t . From the statement of the proposition we get that (B.23) d∆t = hk 2,t 2ak ∆tdt, with the boundary condition ∆ 0 = Qj 0−mk 0. Since the hk 2,t 2ak is deterministic and the boundary condition is Fj-adapted, it is clear that ∆ t isFj-adapted. We may solve the SDE directly to yield the solution (B.24) ∆ t = ( Qj 0−mk 0 ) e ∫t 0 hk 2,u 2ak du . Since Qj 0 has a bounded variance and h2,t is a bounded function, it is clear that ∆ ∈ H2 T . Hence , ∆ ∈A j. Now because νj t− ˜νk t = hk 2,t 2ak ∆t, and h2,t is a bounded and deterministic function, we ﬁnd that νj− ˜νk∈A j. B.4. Proof of Theorem 3.9. We begin by introducing the following lemma, which will be used in the proof of Theorem 3.9. Lemma B.1. Let νj t be the ansatz mean-ﬁeld optimal control deﬁned in Proposition 3.7 for an agent j in sub-populationk. Then (B.25) qj,νj t − ˜qk,˜νk t = ( Qj 0−mk 0 ) e 1 2ak ∫t 0 hk 2,udu , where Qk 0 is the initial value of j’s inventory, mk 0 = EQj 0, and hk 2,t is the function deﬁned in proposition 3.8 satisfying the property h2,t < 0. 30 CASGRAIN, P. AND JAIMUNGAL, S. Proof. From Proposition 3.8, we have (B.26) νj t = ˜νk t +fk t ( qj,νj t − ˜qk,˜νk t ) , where we let fk t = hk 2,t 2ak . Using the above equation and noting that ∂t ( qj,νj t − ˜qk,˜νk t ) =νj t− ˜νk t , we get that (B.27) ∂t ( qj,νj t − ˜qk,˜νk t ) =fk t ( qj,νj t − ˜qk,˜νk t ) . Solving the above ODE with the initial condition qk 0 = Qk 0 and ˜qk 0 =mk 0 yields the desired result. Now we proceed with the proof of Theorem 3.9. Proof. To prove the ﬁrst result of the theorem, we study the diﬀerence νk t− ˜νk t , where (B.28) νk t = lim N→∞ 1 N(N) k ∑ j∈K(N ) k νj t . Using the ansatz for νj t from Proposition 3.8, we get (B.29) νj t−νk t = hk 2,t 2ak ( qj,νj t − ˜qk,˜νk t ) . Using the result from Lemma B.1, this becomes (B.30) νj t−νk t = ( Qj 0−mk 0 ) fk t , where fk t = hk 2,t 2ak e 1 2ak ∫t 0 hk 2,udu is a bounded, continuous function. Taking the average over all j∈K N k and taking the limit, we see that (B.31) lim N→∞   1 N(N) k ∑ j∈K(N ) k νj t  − ˜νk t =fk t lim N→∞   1 N(N) k ∑ j∈K(N ) k ( Qj 0−mk 0 )   . Since the collection{Qj 0}j∈K(N ) k is a collection of independent random variables with EQj 0 =mk 0 and bounded variance, we may apply the law of large numbers which makes the right limit in (B.31) vanish almost surely and in L2. Therefore computing the left limit we have that (B.32) νk t− ˜νk t = 0, almost surely for all t∈ [0,T ]. Which implies that ˜ν˜ν˜νt =νννt almost surely for all t∈ [0,T ]. Since ˜ν˜ν˜νt =νννt, we ﬁnd that ˜νt = νt = limN→∞ 1 N ∑N j=1νj,∗ t . Since the proposed form of νj,∗ t also solves the FBSDE (3.11), ˜νt = νt almost surely and νj,∗∈A j, we ﬁnd that νj,∗ t also solves the optimality FBSDE from Theorem (3.5). Hence, applying Theorem (3.5), the collection {νj,∗}∞ j=1 is optimal and satisﬁes (B.33) νj,∗ = arg sup ν∈Aj Hj(ν), for all j. Appendix C. Proofs for Section 4 – ϵ-Nash Property. C.1. Proof of Theorem 4.2. We begin the proof of Theorem 4.2 by introducing two lemmas. The ﬁrst is a lemma provides a closed-form expression for the diﬀerence of an agent’s mean-ﬁeld optimal control and it’s own sub-population’s mean-ﬁeld inventory. The second is a lemma regarding the distance between the mean-ﬁeld game objective Hj and the ﬁnite player game objective Hj. MFG WITH PARTIAL INFORMATION FOR ALGORITHMIC TRADING 31 Lemma C.1. Letνj,∗ be the mean-ﬁeld optimal control for an agent j in sub-population k. Then (C.1) qj,νj,∗ t − ¯qk t = ( Qj 0−mk 0 ) e 1 2ak ∫t 0 h2,udu , where Qk 0 is the initial value of j’s inventory, mk 0 = EQj 0, and h2,t is the function deﬁned in proposition 3.8 satisfying h2,t < 0. Proof. The result is found by using Lemma B.1 along with Theorem 3.9. Lemma C.2. Let ν∈A j be some arbitrary admissible control and ν∗,−j∈A−j be the collection ν−j,∗ :=( ν1,∗,...,ν j−1,∗,νj+1,∗,...,ν N,∗) of mean-ﬁeld optimal controls for all agents except for j. Then (C.2) ⏐⏐⏐Hj(ν,ν−j,∗)−Hj(ν) ⏐⏐⏐ =o(δN) +o( 1 N ). Proof. We will show that the claim holds by instead demonstrating the equivalent claim that (C.3) ⏐⏐Hj(ν,ν−j,∗)−Hj(ν) ⏐⏐2 =o(δ2 N) +o( 1 N 2 ). Using the representation for Hj (3.8) and the representation for Hj (2.12), we ﬁnd that the square of their diﬀerence is equal to (C.4) ⏐⏐⏐Hj(ν,ν−j,∗)−Hj(ν) ⏐⏐⏐ 2 =λ2 E [∫ T 0 (ν(N) t −νt)dt ]2 . Therefore it is suﬃcient for us to show that quantity on the right side of the equation is o(N−2) +o(δ2 N). If we consider the expected value appearing in equation (C.4), we can apply the deﬁnition of ν(N) to decompose it as (C.5) E [∫ T 0 (ν(N) t −νt)dt ] = E [∫ T 0 1 N ( νt−νj,∗ ) + 1 N N∑ i=1 ( νi,∗−νt ) dt ] , where νj,∗ t is the mean-ﬁeld optimal control for agent j. Using the triangle inequality and Jensen’s inequality on the left, we ﬁnd that (C.6) (C.4) ≤ λ N2 E [∫ T 0 ( νt−νj,∗ t )2 dt ] +λ E [∫ T 0 1 N N∑ i=1 ( ν∗,i−νt ) dt ]2 . ν,νj∈A j⊂ H2 T implies that E [∫T 0 ( νt−νj,∗ t )2 dt ] <∞, and so (C.7) λ N2 E [∫ T 0 ( νt−νj,∗ t )2 dt ] =o(N−2). At this point, all that remains is to investigate the term (C.8) E [∫ T 0 1 N N∑ i=1 ( νi,∗ t −νt ) dt ]2 . Using the notation p(N) k = N (N ) k N and νk,(N) t = 1 N (N ) k ∑ i∈K(N ) k νi,∗ t , we may write 1 N N∑ i=1 ( νi,∗ t −νt ) = K∑ k=1 { p(N) k νk,(N) t −pkνk t } = K∑ k=1 { νk,(N) t ( p(N) k −pk ) +pk ( νk,(N) t −νk t )} . 32 CASGRAIN, P. AND JAIMUNGAL, S. Using this last result and the triangle inequality, we get (C.9) lhs of (C.8) ≤ K∑ k=1 { E [∫ T 0 νk,(N) t dt ]2( p(N) k −pk )2 +pk E [∫ T 0 ( νk,(N) t −νk t ) dt ]2} . First, by plugging in the result Lemma C.1 taking the average over all i∈K (N) k to compute νk,(N)−νk we get E [∫ T 0 ( νk,(N) t −νk t ) dt ] = (∫ T 0 e ∫t 0 h2,s 2ak ds dt ) 1 N(N) k ∑ i∈K(N ) k E [ Qj 0−mk 0 ] (C.10) = 0,(C.11) which implies that E [∫T 0 νk,(N) t dt ] = E [∫T 0 νk t dt ] . Applying this to (C.9), and noting that νk t∈ H2 T we get (C.12) (C.9) ≤C0 K∑ k=1 ( p(N) k −pk )2 =o(δ2 N) for some C >0. Putting this all back together, we ﬁnd that (C.13) ⏐⏐Hj(ν,ν−j)−Hj(ν) ⏐⏐2 =o(δ2 N) +o(N−2), for some other constant C1 > 0. Taking the root of both sides, and noting that (C.14) √ o(δ2 N) +o(N−2) =o(δN) +o(N−1) we obtain the ﬁnal result. C.2. Proof of Theorem 4.2. Proof. We prove the result of the theorem by using the Lemma C.1. First, let us note that by the deﬁnition of the supremum, (C.15) Hj(ω,ν−j,∗)≤ sup ν∈Aj Hj(ν,ν−j,∗) holds for all ω∈A j, and therefore the left-most inequality in the statement of Theorem 4.2 holds. Next, we must show that the right-most inequality in the statement of Theorem 4.2 also holds. First let us note that by Lemma C.1, for any ν∈A j, Hj(ν,ν−j,∗)≤Hj(ν) +o(δN) +o(N−1)(C.16) ≤Hj(νj,∗) +o(δN) +o(N−1),(C.17) where we use the fact that Hj(νj,∗) = supν∈AjHj(ν). Applying Lemma C.1 again, we ﬁnd that (C.18) Hj(ν,ν−j,∗)≤Hj(νj,ν−j,∗) + 2o(δN) + 2o(N−1). Since the above inequality holds for all ν∈A j we may take the supremum on the left, and cancel out the constant terms multiplying the little-o terms to yield the ﬁnal result, (C.19) sup ν∈Aj Hj(ν,ν−j,∗)≤Hj(νj,ν−j,∗) +o(δN) +o(N−1). MFG WITH PARTIAL INFORMATION FOR ALGORITHMIC TRADING 33 REFERENCES [1] R. Almgren and N. Chriss , Optimal execution of portfolio transactions , Journal of Risk, 3 (2001), pp. 5–40. [2] P. Bank, H. M. Soner, and M. Voß, Hedging with temporary price impact, Mathematics and Financial Economics, 11 (2017), pp. 215–239. [3] E. Bayraktar and A. Munk, Mini-ﬂash crashes, model risk, and optimal execution , (2017). [4] B. Bouchard, M. Fukasawa, M. Herdegen, and J. Muhle-Karbe , Equilibrium returns with trans- action costs, Preprint, (2017). [5] P. Cardaliaguet and C.-A. Lehalle, Mean ﬁeld game of controls and an application to trade crowding, arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.09904, (2016). [6] R. Carmona and F. Delarue, Probabilistic analysis of mean-ﬁeld games, SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 51 (2013), pp. 2705–2734. [7] R. Carmona and F. Delarue , Probabilistic Theory of Mean Field Games with Applications I-II , Springer, 2018. [8] R. Carmona, J.-P. Fouque, and L.-H. Sun , Mean ﬁeld games and systemic risk , (2013). [9] ´A. Cartea, R. Donnelly, and S. Jaimungal, Algorithmic trading with model uncertainty, SIAM Jour- nal on Financial Mathematics, 8 (2017), pp. 635–671. [10] ´A. Cartea and S. Jaimungal , Incorporating order-ﬂow into optimal execution , Mathematics and Fi- nancial Economics, 10 (2016), pp. 339–364. [11] P. Casgrain and S. Jaimungal , Trading algorithms with learning in latent alpha models , by Philippe Casgrain, Sebastian Jaimungal :: SSRN, (2016), https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract id=2871403. [12] I. Ekeland and R. Temam , Convex analysis and variational problems , SIAM, 1999. [13] D. Firoozi and P. E. Caines , ε-nash equilibria for partially observed lqg mean ﬁeld games with major agent: Partial observations by all agents , in Decision and Control (CDC), 2015 IEEE 54th Annual Conference on, IEEE, 2015, pp. 4430–4437. [14] G. Freiling, A survey of nonsymmetric riccati equations , Linear algebra and its applications, 351 (2002), pp. 243–270. [15] G. Freiling, G. Jank, and A. Sarychev , Non-blow-up conditions for riccati-type matrix diﬀerential and diﬀerence equations, Resultate der Mathematik, 37 (2000), pp. 84–103. [16] D. A. Gomes, S. Patrizi, and V. Voskanyan , On the existence of classical solutions for stationary extended mean ﬁeld games , Nonlinear Analysis: Theory, Methods & Applications, 99 (2014), pp. 49– 79. [17] O. Gu´eant, J.-M. Lasry, and P.-L. Lions, Mean ﬁeld games and applications , Paris-Princeton lectures on mathematical ﬁnance 2010, (2011), pp. 205–266. [18] M. Huang, Large-population LQG games involving a major player: the nash certainty equivalence prin- ciple, SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 48 (2010), pp. 3318–3353. [19] M. Huang, P. E. Caines, and R. P. Malham ´e, Large-population cost-coupled LQG problems with nonuniform agents: Individual-mass behavior and decentralized ϵ-Nash equilibria, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, 52 (2007), pp. 1560–1571. [20] M. Huang, R. P. Malham´e, P. E. Caines, et al. , Large population stochastic dynamic games: closed- loop mckean-vlasov systems and the nash certainty equivalence principle , Communications in Informa- tion & Systems, 6 (2006), pp. 221–252. [21] X. Huang and S. Jaimungal , Mean-ﬁeld games and ambiguity aversion , Available at https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024021, (2017). [22] X. Huang and S. Jaimungal , Robust stochastic games and systemic risk , Available at https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024021, (2017). [23] S. Jaimungal and M. Nourian , Mean-ﬁeld game strategies for a major-minor agent optimal execution 34 CASGRAIN, P. AND JAIMUNGAL, S. problem, (2015). [24] J.-M. Lasry and P.-L. Lions, Mean ﬁeld games, Japanese journal of mathematics, 2 (2007), pp. 229–260. [25] P. Letourneau and L. Stentoft , Improved greeks for american options using simulation , (2016). [26] J. Ma, P. Protter, and J. Yong, Solving forward-backward stochastic diﬀerential equations explicitly— a four step scheme , Probability theory and related ﬁelds, 98 (1994), pp. 339–359. [27] M. Nourian and P. E. Caines,ϵ-nash mean ﬁeld game theory for nonlinear stochastic dynamical systems with major and minor agents , SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 51 (2013), pp. 3302–3331. [28] Y. Wang and R. Caflisch , Pricing and hedging american-style options: a simple simulation-based approach, (2009).