VLSTM: VERY LONG SHORT-TERM MEMORY NETWORKS FOR HIGH-FREQUENCY TRADING Prakhar Ganesh∗ Research Engineer Advanced Digital Sciences Center, Singapore Puneet Rakheja Founder and CEO WealthNet Advisors, New Delhi ABSTRACT Financial trading is at the forefront of time-series analysis, and has grown hand-in-hand with it. The advent of electronic trading has allowed complex machine learning solutions to enter the ﬁeld of ﬁnancial trading. Financial markets have both long term and short term signals and thus a good pre- dictive model in ﬁnancial trading should be able to incorpo- rate them together. One of the most sought after forms of electronic trading is high-frequency trading (HFT), typically known for microsecond sensitive changes, which results in a tremendous amount of data. LSTMs are one of the most ca- pable variants of the RNN family that can handle long-term dependencies, but even they are not equipped to handle such long sequences of the order of thousands of data points like in HFT. We propose very-long short term memory networks, or VLSTMs, to deal with such extreme length sequences. We explore the importance of VLSTMs in the context of HFT. We compare our model on publicly available dataset and got a 3.14% increase in F1-score over the existing state-of-the-art time-series forecasting models. We also show that our model has great parallelization potential, which is essential for prac- tical purposes when trading on such markets. Index Terms — Deep Learning, LSTM, Time-Series Forecasting, Finance, High-Frequency Trading 1. INTRODUCTION The usage of predictive models to infer future prices of various commodities using historical data is not new in quan- titative ﬁnance, and is commonly referred to as algorithmic trading [1, 2]. Older methods of algorithmic trading includes mathematical modeling of the data, for example CAPM, Fama and French factors [3]. However, these models require precise modeling and are not capable of handling the noisy and irrational behaviour of the ﬁnancial markets. Deep learning methods are prophesied to revolutionize the ﬁeld of machine learning (ML) and represent a step towards building autonomous systems. These methods are generally more robust to noises and can learn to model based on the in- put data. Various advancements have been made in the ﬁeld of ∗The author performed the work during internship at WealthNet Advisors time-series analysis using deep learning, which includes sim- pler models like LSTMs [4] and RNNs, as well as more com- plicated additions like attention mechanism [5]. While these methods have gained success in the world of time-series anal- ysis, the requirements of algorithmic trading are very unique. High Frequency Trading (HFT) is one of the extreme forms of electronic trading. The special challenges for ML presented by HFT can be considered two fold : (i) Microsec- ond sensitive live trading - As the complexity of the model increases, it gets more computationally expensive to keep up with the speed of live trading and actually use the informa- tion provided by the model, and (ii) Tremendous amount and ﬁne granularity of data - The historical data available in HFT is extremely lengthy yet precise. However there is a lack of understanding of how the low-level data (changing every microsecond) and the high-level data (changing every few minutes) can together relate to actionable circumstances [6]. In this paper, we propose VLSTMs, a novel variant of LSTMs, which are capable of handling time-series sequences with length of the order of thousands. We achieve this by dealing with the input sequence at multiple frequencies, al- lowing us to separately process both low-level and high-level signals and then combine the information together for bet- ter ﬁnal performance. Since different levels of the signal are processed in parallel, this makes it easy to do them simul- taneously. Thus our model does not compromise its execu- tion speed, even though the computational requirements of our model has increased. Our contributions include : • A novel LSTM variant to efﬁciently combine long term and short term signals from the input sequence. • Improved scope of parallelization, as the model com- plexity is increased along the width and not the depth. • Tested on publicly available datasets and found 12.37% increase in F1 score over vanilla LSTMs and 3.14% in- crease over current state-of-the-art. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces ﬁnancial background and reviews related work in this ﬁeld. Section 3 introduces our VLSTM architecture. Section 4 presents extensive evaluation results to support our model design and Section 5 concludes the discussion. arXiv:1809.01506v3 [cs.LG] 22 Oct 2020 2. BACKGROUND 2.1. Tick Data and Bid-Ask Spread Tick data is the raw, uncompressed data of the trading behav- ior available from electronically traded markets. Every order request, change in the state of order book and trade informa- tion is registered as a ”tick” event. Bid and Ask are the prices that buyers and sellers are willing to transact at, the bid for buying, and the ask for selling. A transaction occurs when either a potential buyer is willing to pay the ask price, or a potential seller is willing to accept the bid price. The mid- price is the mean price of the top bid and top ask price [7]. 2.2. Mean Reversion Mean reversion is a ﬁnancial theory which suggests that the price of a stock tends to return towards its long running mean price over time [7] and such a behavior is seen in most of the stock markets across the world [8]. Trading on this strategy is done by noticing companies whose stock values have signif- icantly moved away in some direction from its long running mean and thus is now expected to move in the opposite direc- tion. Using mean reversion in stock price prediction involves both identifying the trading range for a stock (short-term in- formation) and the evolution of the mean around which the prices will be oscillating (long-term information). 2.3. Related Work The success of deep learning models has penetrated a lot of ﬁelds, including ﬁnance. However its reach in HFT is limited [9], primarily due to the computational constraints and prim- itive problem modeling methods. While there has been some work done on the algorithmic side [10], most of the work has been focused on feature engineering in HFT [6, 11, 12, 13, 14], with simpler models like linear regression, multiple ker- nel learning, maximum margin etc. [6, 15] Long short-term memory networks (LSTMs) [4] are one of the most commonly used deep learning models for time- series analysis. Multiple variations of LSTM have been pro- posed over time which deal with the multi-context and long sequence length problems. For example, Hierarchical LSTMs [16, 17] were proposed to make character level LSTMs in NLP feasible. In this architecture, the input to the upper LSTM is the output provided by the lower LSTM, thus form- ing a hierarchical structure. Similar networks of multi-scale LSTMs have also been proposed for applications in document modelling [18], wind speed forecasting [19], sound event de- tection [20], etc. These kind of architectures also provide better connections for back-propagation during training on longer sequences. There have also been other additions to the vanilla LSTM, like the attention mechanism [5], which improves its ability to handle longer sequences by allowing it to attend to only a part of the sequence at a time. 3. VLSTM We propose a novel variant of LSTM, which we call VLSTM, specialised to handle longer sequences. We ﬁrst explain the theoretical motivation behind our model design and then in- troduce the architecture of a VLSTM. 3.1. Motivation Model depth and width are two ways in which the complexity of a deep learning model can be increased. Recent advances have shown that analysing the input at varying context, which can be done by increasing the model width, can help us cre- ate a more accurate and robust model [21]. Thus, we aim to create a deep learning model that can provide multi-context features at every input time step. This can be achieved by us- ing multiple LSTM models simultaneously, each focused on extracting features from a different context level. LSTMs working at different levels (or context) can cap- ture a variety of information. For example, a lower-level LSTM can focus on the ﬁne-grained and most recent be- haviour of the market while a higher-level LSTM can focus on the long-term changes in the trend. However, existing vari- ations of multi-scale LSTM models use the output provided by lower-level LSTM as input to the higher-level LSTM. This means that the higher-level LSTM do not get access to the raw input sequence and is forced to work with the lower- level LSTM for feature creation. We hypothesize that due to this dependency, the lower-level LSTM is now focused on creating an input for the higher-level LSTM instead of cre- ating a good feature representation of ﬁne grained features. Similarly, the higher-level LSTM is now forced to create the ﬁnal feature representation of the sequence, instead of just focusing on long-term trends present in the sequence. We propose to decouple the functionality of LSTMs at various levels, thus allowing them to focus on only individual contexts. This can be achieved by running different LSTM levels on the raw input sequence independently, and combin- ing the ﬁnal features obtained from each level. Such a design also allows us to create a model which can provide output for every input time step, instead of only providing output at the frequency of the highest level LSTM, since at every time step atleast one of the LSTMs will update their features, thus updating the complete feature representation. Note : Since we are working with parallel LSTMs now, the terms lower-level and higher-level LSTM as used in multi- scale LSTMs have been adopted accordingly. Lower-level refers to LSTMs that work on the input signal at a higher fre- quency and are expected to provide short-term and more ﬁne grained information, and vice-versa for higher-level LSTMs. 3.2. Model Design Let the input signal be {x0,x 1,x 2....xn}, where xi rep- resents the input vector at timestep i, and let there be k Input Features LSTM Cell at Level 1 LSTM Cell at Level 5 Concatenate Previous hidden state Output Multi-Scale LSTM VLSTM Fig. 1. Multi-Scale LSTM{1, 5} (left) vs VLSTM{1, 5} (right). LSTMs working at levels {l1,l 2....lk}. For the pth LSTM working at level lp, denote the input, output, input cell state, and output cell state respectively for the ith timestep as{W p i,V p i ,C p ini,C p outi}. Based on the functioning of a conventional LSTM cell, generally we have {V,C out} = σ(W,C in), whereσ is the LSTM network. The input to an LSTM at levellp is sampled at a frequency of 1/lp from the original input sequence and the output ob- tained is copied for lp timesteps, i.e. until the next output is obtained. Thus, the output Y p i obtained from the LSTM at levellp at timestepi can be deﬁned as, Y p i =V p ⌊i/lp⌋, (1) {V p j ,C p outj} =σp(W p j,C p outj−1 ), W p j =xj∗lp, (2) Once we have feature outputs from every LSTM level, these features are concatenated and passed through a dense layer followed by softmax to produce ﬁnal classiﬁcation out- puts. We can deﬁne the ﬁnal output Yi at timestepi as, Yi =φC(DC(Y 1 i ⊕Y 2 i ⊕Y 3 i ,..,Y k i )), (3) where⊕ denotes feature concatenation, DC denoted the dense layer for classiﬁcation and φC denoted the ﬁnal soft- max activation. Thus we get outputs{Y0,Y 1,Y 2....Yn} which can be interpreted for predicted price movement. Refer to Fig 1 for differences between a multi-scale LSTM and VLSTM. 4. EV ALUA TION We use a publicly available limit order book data to test our model and some other baseline methods. First, we do an in- ternal ablation study of various levels in VLSTM to better un- derstand the nature of the dataset as well as our model archi- tecture. Next, we compare our model with existing state-of- the-art deep learning based time-series forecasting methods. 4.1. Dataset We test our model on a limit order book data by doing mid- price movement prediction [22]. Instead of using only the raw bid and ask values, several complicated hand-crafted features have also been provided by the authors, which are calculated using both static order book information as well as dynamic change in features across time. A total of 144 features are used to represent each tick [22]. We used the publicly avail- able version of the dataset 1. The dataset contains 10 days of data with a total of almost 400 thousand ticks. We use the z- score based standardization provided in the dataset for our ex- periments. We also use the label creation method as proposed by [23] in order to create 3 classes, i.e., upward and down- ward movement of mid-price which crosses the threshold, and movememnt of mid-price within the threshold. We use the threshold of 10% change in mid-price in order to maintain balance between data points attributed to the 3 classes. 4.2. Model and Experiment Settings We experiment with the following LSTM levels {1, 5, 20, 100}. Each level has 2 LSTM cells stacked on top of each other with 64 neurons each. The ﬁnal dense layer used for concatenated features contains 128 neurons. Activation func- tions used are ReLU at every hidden layer except the classi- ﬁcation layer. The error function used is Categorical Cross entropy with Adam optimizer. Out of the 10 days of data present in the dataset, we use the ﬁrst 6 days for training, next 1 day for validation and the ﬁnal 3 days for testing. We use sliding window method to augment the training dataset and use windows of length 5,000 ticks in order to generate enough inputs for the highest-level LSTM (lp = 100 ). We allow the model to run continuously 1https://etsin.fairdata.ﬁ/dataset/73eb48d7-4dbc-4a10-a52a- da745b47a649 on the test and validation datasets and use mean F1 score across all 3 classes to measure their performance. We also do not make prediction for the ﬁrst 5,000 ticks of the day, for the same reasons as mentioned above. We use 3 different pre- diction horizons h ={100, 200, 500} (measured in number of ticks) to compare models under varying prediction targets. 4.3. Baseline Methods We use 4 different models as baseline methods. First, we use a simple fully-connected multi-layer perceptron (MLP), with 3 hidden layers containing 64, 64 and 128 neurons respectively. Second, we use a vanilla LSTM model, with 2 LSTM cells of 64 neurons each stacked on top of each other, followed by a dense layer with 128 neurons. Next, we add the attention proposed by [5] on top of our vanilla LSTM model. Finally, we use a multi-scale LSTM model similar to one proposed in [18], with the same multi-level settings as our VLSTM. 4.4. Individual LSTMs and VLSTM We ﬁrst experimented with VLSTMs working at only one level at a time. A VLSTM working at only level ’i’ is sim- ply an LSTM working on the input signal collected with fre- quency ’1/i’. Since LSTM at every level needs to provide an output to every input timestep, the output of an LSTM work- ing at level ’i’ remains the same for ’i’ ticks until the next prediction is made (as detailed in Section 3). Results for these experiments are collected in Table 1. LSTMs working at lower levels have the advantage of changing their output more frequently but cannot process long-term information well enough to make accurate predic- tions. On the other hand, LSTMs working at higher levels have a lot of information on how the market has been evolv- ing for the past few hundred ticks (or even more), but their frequency of changing outputs is extremely low. Thus both extremes can cause a drop in F1 scores and makes the medium level LSTMs the best performing individual LSTMs. It can be noticed from the table that VLSTM at level 20 seems to outperform all other individual level VLSTMs. Being able to identify the best working individual VLSTM can also give us more insights into the market’s inherent periodicity. Model (l1,l 2,..l p) Mean F1 h=100 h=200 h=500 VLSTM{1} 57.33% 55.27% 51.63% VLSTM{5} 58.97% 57.86% 55.29% VLSTM{20} 63.36% 61.74% 58.78% VLSTM{100} 47.38% 46.69% 46.21% VLSTM{1, 5, 20, 100} 69.70% 68.41% 65.90% Table 1. Performance of LSTM at various levels Next, we combine all the individual LSTM levels to- gether to form our proposed VLSTM model. It can be seen that VLSTM outperforms the best performing individual LSTM (level 20) by 6.34% and the vanilla LSTM (level 1) by 12.37%. This shows that adding more levels increases the variety of contextual features available to the model, which in turns improves its F1 score. 4.5. Comparing against Baselines We compared our model performance against various time- series prediction baseline methods and collected the results in Table 2. As expected, MLP is the worst performing base- line as it does not process the input as a sequence, which is vital to the problem statement. Vanilla LSTM is easily out- performed by adding attention mechanism to better handle longer sequences. However, the biggest jump in F1 score is seen in the performance of Multi-Scale LSTMs, which goes to show the signiﬁcance of multi-context processing in such settings. Finally, our model outperforms the best perform- ing baseline Multi-Scale LSTMs by 3.14%, which empha- sizes that our method of multi-context feature processing is superior to Multi-Scale LSTMs. Model Mean F1 h=100 h=200 h=500 MLP 51.33% 50.97% 50.68% LSTM 57.33% 55.27% 51.63% LSTM + Attention [5] 60.20% 59.58% 56.36% Multi-Scale LSTM [18] 66.56% 63.98% 60.80% VLSTM 69.70% 68.41% 65.90% Table 2. Comparison with other baseline models 5. CHALLENGES AND FUTURE WORK LSTMs lead the ﬁeld of time series analysis but are not equipped to deal with extremely long input sequences. We proposed a novel modiﬁcation, VLSTMs, which can handle such extremely long sequences by simultaneously working at multiple levels. While our architecture is not restricted to just one domain, we do believe that it is designed to work in speciﬁc cases where gathering features from multiple con- texts (or levels) makes sense. Our model contains an inherent assumption of periodicity for higher level feature extraction and thus might not translate well to situations where such an assumption can hurt the performance. For example, it might not be directly feasible for use in NLP, since it doesn’t make any sense to read, say every 5th word in a document. How- ever, the core idea of VLSTMs is to do multi-context feature processing independently and thus with further research, the same idea can be translated to these domains too. 6. REFERENCES [1] Alain P Chaboud, Benjamin Chiquoine, Erik Hjalmars- son, and Clara Vega, “Rise of the machines: Algorith- mic trading in the foreign exchange market,” The Jour- nal of Finance, vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 2045–2084, 2014. [2] Terrence Hendershott, Ryan Riordan, et al., “Algorith- mic trading and information,”Manuscript, University of California, Berkeley, 2009. [3] Eugene F Fama and Kenneth R French, “Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds,” Journal of ﬁnancial economics, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 3–56, 1993. [4] Sepp Hochreiter and J ¨urgen Schmidhuber, “Long short- term memory,” Neural computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997. [5] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben- gio, “Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473 , 2014. [6] Michael Kearns and Yuriy Nevmyvaka, “Machine learn- ing for market microstructure and high frequency trad- ing,” High Frequency Trading: New Realities for Traders, Markets, and Regulators, 2013. [7] “Bid and ask, mean reversion, investopedia,” https://www.investopedia.com/terms. [8] Tanmoy Chakraborty and Michael Kearns, “Market making and mean reversion,” inProceedings of the 12th ACM conference on Electronic commerce. ACM, 2011, pp. 307–314. [9] Andr ´es Ar ´evalo, Jaime Ni ˜no, German Hern ´andez, and Javier Sandoval, “High-frequency trading strategy based on deep neural networks,” inInternational confer- ence on intelligent computing. Springer, 2016, pp. 424– 436. [10] Irene Aldridge, High-frequency trading: a practical guide to algorithmic strategies and trading systems, vol. 604, John Wiley & Sons, 2013. [11] Dat Thanh Tran, Martin Magris, Juho Kanniainen, Mon- cef Gabbouj, and Alexandros Iosiﬁdis, “Tensor rep- resentation in high-frequency ﬁnancial data for price change prediction,” in 2017 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI). IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–7. [12] Charles MC Lee and Mark J Ready, “Inferring trade direction from intraday data,” The Journal of Finance, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 733–746, 1991. [13] Rama Cont, Arseniy Kukanov, and Sasha Stoikov, “The price impact of order book events,” Journal of ﬁnancial econometrics, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 47–88, 2014. [14] Darryl Shen, Order imbalance based strategy in high frequency trading, Ph.D. thesis, oxford university, 2015. [15] Adamantios Ntakaris, Martin Magris, Juho Kanniainen, Moncef Gabbouj, and Alexandros Iosiﬁdis, “Bench- mark dataset for mid-price prediction of limit order book data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03233, 2017. [16] Junyoung Chung, Sungjin Ahn, and Yoshua Bengio, “Hierarchical multiscale recurrent neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.01704, 2016. [17] Akos K ´ad´ar, Marc-Alexandre Cˆot´e, Grzegorz Chrupała, and Afra Alishahi, “Revisiting the hierarchical multi- scale lstm,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03595, 2018. [18] Pengfei Liu, Xipeng Qiu, Xinchi Chen, Shiyu Wu, and Xuan-Jing Huang, “Multi-timescale long short-term memory neural network for modelling sentences and documents,” in Proceedings of the 2015 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing , 2015, pp. 2326–2335. [19] Ignacio A Araya, Carlos Valle, and H ´ector Allende, “Lstm-based multi-scale model for wind speed forecast- ing,” in Iberoamerican Congress on Pattern Recogni- tion. Springer, 2018, pp. 38–45. [20] Rui Lu, Zhiyao Duan, and Changshui Zhang, “Multi- scale recurrent neural network for sound event detec- tion,” in2018 IEEE International Conference on Acous- tics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 131–135. [21] Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Ser- manet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich, “Going deeper with convolutions,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2015, pp. 1–9. [22] Adamantios Ntakaris, Martin Magris, Juho Kanniainen, Moncef Gabbouj, and Alexandros Iosiﬁdis, “Bench- mark dataset for mid-price forecasting of limit order book data with machine learning methods,” Journal of Forecasting, vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 852–866, 2018. [23] Avraam Tsantekidis, Nikolaos Passalis, Anastasios Tefas, Juho Kanniainen, Moncef Gabbouj, and Alexan- dros Iosiﬁdis, “Using deep learning to detect price change indications in ﬁnancial markets,” in 2017 25th European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 2511–2515.