Order book model with herd behavior exhibiting long–range memory Aleksejus Kononovicius, Julius Ruseckas Institute of Theoretical Physics and Astronomy, Vilnius University Abstract In this work, we propose an order book model with herd behavior. The proposed model is built upon two distinct approaches: a recent empirical study of the detailed order book records by Kanazawaet al. [Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 138301] and ﬁnancial herd behavior model. Combining these approaches allows us to propose a model that replicates the long-range memory of absolute returns and trading activity. We compare the statistical properties of the model against the empirical statistical properties of the Bitcoin exchange rates and New York stock exchange tickers. We also show that the fracture in the spectral density of the high–frequency absolute return time series might be related to the mechanism of convergence towards the equilibrium price. 1 Introduction In the recent decades an increasing eﬀort by social scientists, physicists and broader interdisciplinary community has been applied to create agent–based models (ABMs) of diﬀerent social phenomena [1–8]. Notable part of these ABMs were created to explain various recurrent anomalous statistical patterns, collectively referred to as stylized facts, observed in the ﬁnancial markets [2–4,7]. Financial ABMs vary in complexity usually trading plausibility for analytical tractability [4]. Some of the more complex ﬁnancial ABMs seem to be reasonably plausible, but they are not analytically tractable. A well known example of such model is the Lux–Marchesi model [9]. Hence it signiﬁcantly harder to understand their dynamics and to build upon them to further improve their agreement with the empirical data. In the recent few years we have developed a reasonably plausible yet analytically tractable ﬁnancial ABM [10,11]. This ﬁnancial ABM was derived from a widely recognized behavioral model [12], which emphasizes imitation (herd) behavior among socially interacting individuals. This ﬁnancial ABM is able to rather precisely ﬁt the probability density functions (PDFs) and power spectral densities (PSDs) of the empirical absolute return time series. While the model has other desirable features, e.g., it scales well with change in the time scale, it also has some drawbacks. First of all it does not implement realistic trading strategies, though most of the ﬁnancial ABMs lack this feature [4]. But it is not the main issue we currently see. Our ﬁnancial ABM relies on a two assumptions, which are not fully and transparently justiﬁed. We have assumed the presence of the omnipotent market maker, who is able to clear the market instantaneously, (a rather common assumption in many ﬁnancial ABMs [2–4]) and the presence of the exogenous noise. In our previous papers we have speculated that exogenous noise is likely to originate from the order book dynamics. Consequently it seems that including order book dynamics in our ﬁnancial ABM could potentially resolve these two issues at once. Such approach has an additional perk, it would allow us to consider trading activity time series as well. Though the empirical order book data has become available at the same time as the empirical high–frequency ﬁnancial time series data, in the 1980’s, it took a longer time for detailed empirical studies of the order book dynamics to be undertaken [13–16]. Interestingly some of the observations were not as universal as the stylized facts discovered in the empirical time series. There are few recent empirical order book studies, which conﬁrm 1 arXiv:1809.02772v3 [q-fin.ST] 8 Apr 2019 Table 1: Comparison of the approaches reviewed in Section 2. Diﬀerences between our approach and the reviewed approaches are highlighted usingitalics. Approach Agent types Fixed/ﬂexible Strategies Volume Tractable [27] chartists, fundamen- talists ﬁxed sound strategic partly analytically [28] chartists, fundamen- talists ﬁxed simple unit only numerically [29–31] chartists, fundamen- talists ﬁxed sound random only numerically [32] chartists, fundamen- talists ﬁxed realistic unit only numerically [33,34] chartists, random traders ﬁxed simple random only numerically [35] chartists, fundamen- talists ﬁxed realistic strategic only numerically Our chartists, fundamen- talists ﬂexible simple unit possibly analytically some of the earlier ﬁndings, but fail to conﬁrm the other ﬁndings [17]. Similarly there is a variety of simple limit order book models (e.g., [18–20]), which are not mutually compatible, but are able to reproduce some of the empirical observations in the order book data. Some of the more recent order book modeling approaches, such as [21–24], are more sophisticated and able to reproduce a variety of empirical observations. The most recent approach by Kanazawaet al.[25,26] combines empirical and theoretical modeling approaches. Namely, Kanazawa et al. have observed the behavior of the high–frequency traders in a highly detailed order book level data set. Based on the observations a microscopic model inspired by the kinetic theory was proposed. Nevertheless most of these models have not considered a detailed reproduction of the stylized facts established for the time series data. In this paper our goal is to introduce the order book mechanics, similar to the ones introduced in [25,26], into our ﬁnancial ABM [10,11] thus producing a novel order book model with herd behavior, which would be able to reproduce power law statistical properties of the absolute return and trading activity time series. In Section 2 we will compare the order book modeling approach we will take here against a few similar recently published approaches [27–35]. In Section 3 we will brieﬂy introduce herd behavior model proposed by Kirman [12], which is the basis of our agent–based approach. In Section 4 we will discuss two diﬀerent ﬁnancial market models: the previously proposed herd behavior model with instantaneous clearing [10,11] and the order book model with herd behavior. We will show that under certain parameter values both of the models produce mostly identical statistical properties. Further in Section 5 we will compare the order book model with herd behavior against the empirical high–frequency Bitcoin and NYSE data. We will examine the sensitivity of the model to parameter value changes in Section 6. While we will provide concluding remarks and future outlooks in Section 7. 2 Review of the other similar order book modeling approaches Recently a few approaches similar to the one we will take here were published [27–35]. While these approaches are diﬀerent in many aspects, we will keep our review brief by highlighting only the most important similarities and diﬀerences between these approaches themselves and our approach to be taken in the next sections of this paper. The review is summarized in Table 1. First of all it is important to note that all of the models under our review are able to reproduce the main stylized facts of absolute return time series. Some of the models are also able to reproduce the features of price time series [27] or speciﬁc peculiarities observed in the modeled markets [33,34]. Neither of the considered approaches reports results on the reproducibility of the statistical properties of trading activity. Our goal will be to reproduce PDFs and PSDs of both absolute return and trading activity time series. Note that some of 2 the approaches reviewed here report auto–correlation functions of the return time series, while we prefer to use PSDs. This makes no signiﬁcant diﬀerence as PSD is directly related to the auto–correlation function via the Wiener–Khinchin theorem. All of the considered models assume that there are two types of traders. One type of traders relies on the internal market information. These traders are usually called chartists. Another type of traders use exogenous information. In most of the works exogenous information is some kind of parametrization of the fundamental price, hence such traders are called chartists. Among the considered works only Coccoet al. [33,34] make a diﬀerent assumption. Namely, Coccoet al.assume that exogenous information is related to the objective needs of traders, which are unknown and random, therefore it causes random trading. Our approach is similar to the most of these works, we will assume that the market is populated by the two types of agents: chartists and fundamentalists. Unlike in these models in our approach agents are ﬂexible, namely they are able to switch their trading strategies. It is quite a puzzle to explain why the models with ﬁxed and ﬂexible agent types are able to reproduce the main stylized facts. Most likely it is because these models rely on the heterogeneity of the agents within each type. Whenever this intra–type heterogeneity breaks down, the agents act similarly on the received information, and thus large ﬂuctuations emerge. In our approach large ﬂuctuations also emerge when most agents become chartists, i.e., when inter-type heterogeneity breaks down. In all cases ﬂuctuations will be the largest under heterogeneity breaking. The approaches also diﬀer on how the trading strategies are speciﬁed. Most realistic speciﬁcation can be found in [32,35] as the model proposed in these works utilize technical trading strategies which are actually used for trading in the real markets. A bit less practical, yet sound from an economic perspective, strategies can be found in [27,29–31]. These strategies are economically sound because they allow the agents to maximize their expected wealth, though these strategies are not necessarily common among the traders in the real markets. While our approach, and also [28,33,34], is the simplest in this context. Namely, trading strategies in this case are assumed to be highly stylized and do not necessarily guarantee wealth gain for the agents. In some sense it could be said that the agents under this approach have zero intelligence. We could categorize the approaches to the trading strategies from another point of view. The strategies also signiﬁcantly diﬀer on how the order volumes are treated. We ﬁnd three diﬀerent possible treatments: order volume is selected strategically in [27,35] (it is important to note that neither of these models uses order books), order volume is drawn from random distribution in [29–31,33,34] or it is set to be of unit size [28,32]. In [25,26], on which we will based our order book approach, order volumes are also assumed to be of unit size, this assumption is backed up by empirical analysis, which shows that around80% of completed transactions ﬁll a unit of volume. Although the diﬀerences in respect to trading strategies can be extremely important when trying to build a model for economic policy making [29–32,35], it does not help to make model more tractable, which is also a rather desirable feature. All of these models, with the exception of [27], are not analytically tractable and can be studied only via numerical simulation. Thus only limited knowledge about their dynamics can be obtained. Though our ﬁnancial ABM seems to be comparatively lacking in economic plausibility it makes up by being analytically tractable, though one has to rely on Stochastic Calculus for that. As the model in [27] our ﬁnancial ABM lacks order book clearing mechanism, but in this work we will introduce that in to our ﬁnancial ABM. As the order book modeling approach we will take in this work is analytically tractable [25,26], we can expect that the combination of the both approaches would also become analytically tractable at some point. 3 Kirman’s herd behavior model Let us start with discussion about Kirman’s herd behavior model [12], which is the base upon we build ﬁnan- cial market models in the following sections. In the seminal paper Kirman shared an observation that social 3 scientists and behavioral biologists observe remarkably similar patterns in rather distinct systems. In the exper- iments involving ants described by Kirman, entomologists observed the emergence of asymmetry in a symmetric experimental setup: despite having two identical food sources available, majority of the ants in the ant colony preferred to forage from a single food source at a time. Numerous references in Kirman’s paper suggest that humans also seem to prefer the more popular product over the less popular despite both being of a similar quality. To account for these empirical observations Kirman proposed a simple probabilistic herd behavior model in which the probability for an agent to switch to another state is proportional to the fraction of agents in that state: p (X→X + 1) = (N−X) ( σ1 +hX N ) ∆t, (1) p (X→X− 1) =X [ σ2 +hN−X N ] ∆t, (2) where X is a number of agents in the ﬁrst state,N – a total number of agents,σi – an idiosyncratic behavior parameter (encodes preferences for the states),h herd behavior parameter, ∆t – arbitrarily small time step. This formulation of the herd behavior model is often referred to as “local” or “extensive”, because the ﬂuctuations ofX quickly disappear asN becomes larger [36–39]. In other wordsX rapidly converges to a certain value and remains almost constant afterwards. What we described above in the literature is often referred to as theN-dependence problem [36–38]. This problem can be circumvented by assuming that the probability to switch is proportional to a total number of agentsX: p (X→X + 1) = (N−X) (σ1 +hX) ∆t, (3) p (X→X− 1) =X [σ2 +h (N−X)] ∆t, (4) To contrast the previous formulation of the model, this formulation of the herd behavior model is often referred to as the “non-extensive” or “global” formulation. In this formulationX no longer converges to a ﬁxed value even in the limit of inﬁniteN. This is desirable feature to have in the ﬁnancial market models as it is well-known that the stylized facts hold for small and large markets alike [40]. Hence there is a variety of the ﬁnancial ABMs, which were inspired by the non-extensive formulation of the Kirman’s model [9–11,41–44]. There are also papers in the opinion dynamics, which claim that the ﬂuctuating nature of opinion change can be explained by assuming the presence of collective peer-pressure instead of inter-personal communication [37–39,45,46]. Let us take the inﬁniteN limit and introduce an almost continuous state variablex = X N. This allows us to rewrite the model driven by Eqs. (3) and (4) as a stochastic diﬀerential equation [10,41,42]: dx =h [ε1 (1−x)−ε2x] dt + √ 2hx (1−x) dW, (5) where εi = σi h . From the Eq. (5) it is straightforward to conclude thatx is Beta distributed,x∼ Beta (ε1,ε 2). If we would setε1 = ε2 and ε1 < 1 then we would observe the same pattern entomologists did as the Beta distribution is multi modal in this case. One can derive a similar SDE, by taking ﬁnitely largeN limit under extensive formulation of the model. Yet in this case SDE becomes ordinary diﬀerential equation as with largerN the diﬀusion term becomes negligible and only the drift term remains: dx =h [ε1 (1−x)−ε2x] dt + √ 2hx (1−x) N dW≈ ≈h [ε1 (1−x)−ε2x] dt. (6) 4 In a special case,p (X→X− 1) = 0, one can also derive the well-known Bass diﬀusion equation [47]: dx = (1−x) (σ1 +hx) dt. (7) 4 Herd behavior model in the context of the ﬁnancial markets Kirman’s herd behavior model is in a sense a generic model. In the ﬁnancial market context it would be natural for these states to represent diﬀerent trading strategies. In the agent–based modeling literature one can ﬁnd the most common is to consider interaction between agents using fundamentalist and chartist trading strategies [4,6,35]. It is worth to note a couple approaches which consider modeling market sentiments instead [42,48,49]. In our previous works [10,11] we have used both of these approaches to build a highly sophisticated ABM which was able to ﬁt the empirical absolute return PDF and PSD rather well. Here we will start with the fundamentalist-chartist model under instantaneous clearing and later use it to build order book model. 4.1 Herd behavior model with instantaneous clearing Let us deﬁne the trading strategies in a rather stylized manner. One could in general deﬁne more sophisticated strategies (as discussed in [35]), but we would like to keep the model compatible with our earlier works. This will allow us to use some of the earlier analytically obtained results which would be impossible while using a more realistic trading strategies. In [10] we have assumed that excess demand by chartist traders is conditioned on their moodξ (t): Dc (t) =r0Nc (t)ξ (t), (8) where r0 is the relative impact of chartists’ trading activity andNc (t) is the number of chartists. In contrast fundamentalists’ demand is conditioned on their knowledge about the market fundamentals, which is quantiﬁed as the fundamental pricePf (which has a physical dimension of generic price units,p.u.): Df (t) =Nf (t) ln Pf P (t) = [N−Nc (t)] ln Pf P (t), (9) where Nf (t) is the number of fundamentalists andP (t) is the current price. Note that here we assume that the fundamental price is ﬁxed, which is not true for the real markets. Nevertheless adding variability to the fundamental price, e.g., by assuming that it follows Brownian motion, would not have a signiﬁcant impact on the statistical properties of the model. We have also assumed that a market maker instantaneously clears the market by setting the price to the Walras equilibrium price, which is obtained in the following manner: Df (t) +Dc (t) = 0 ⇒ Peq(t) =Pf exp ( r0· Nc (t) N−Nc (t)·ξ (t) ) . (10) If ξ (t) ﬂuctuates signiﬁcantly faster thanNc (t), then the absolute return |r (t)| = ⏐⏐⏐⏐ln P (t) P (t−T ) ⏐⏐⏐⏐∝ Nc (t) N−Nc (t) =y. (11) Through out our papers we have referred toy as modulating return as it describes longer-term ﬂuctuations of the absolute return, whileξ (t) dictates the rapid ﬂuctuations and changes in the sign of the return. In some of the earlier worksξ (t) was even modeled as a noise [41]. Previously [10] we have also extended the original herd behavior model by introducing the feedback of the 5 modulating returny on the switching dynamics: p (Nc→Nc + 1) = (N−Nc) [σfc +hNc] ∆t τ (Nc), (12) p (Nc→Nc− 1) =Nc [σcf +h (N−Nc)] ∆t τ (Nc), (13) where τ (Nc) = ( Nc N−Nc )−α ≡y−α. (14) That is,τ (Nc) adjusts the characteristic time scale of microscopic switching events according to the current global value of the modulating return. Such feedback scenario implements the coupling between returns and trading activity, which is well established empirical fact [50]. Note that in [10] switching dynamics were assumed to correlate with trading activity. Introduction of the feedback scenario enables us to obtain a more general form of the SDE fory, which has tunable noise multiplicativity exponent: dy =h [εfc + (2−εcf)y] 1 +y τ (y) dt + √ 2hy τ (y) (1 +y) dW = =h [εfc + (2−εcf)y] (1 +y)yα dt + √ 2hy1+α (1 +y) dW≈ (15) ≈h (2−εcf)y2+α dt + √ 2hy3+α dW. This SDE, assumingy≫ 1, belongs to a class of SDEs exhibiting power law statistics described in [51]. Thus it they time series should exhibit power law statistics [10]: P (y)∼y−εcf −α−1, S (f)∼f −1− εcf +α−2 1+α . (16) This simple model already reproduces two main stylized facts. In the later papers, e.g., [11], we have extended this model by describing the mood dynamics using the same herd behavior model. Though in order to ﬁt the empirical absolute return PDF and PSD we had to introduce exogenous noise, which we assumed to represent additional randomness arising from the order book dynamics and possibly an exogenous information inﬂow. In the next section we build the order book model to address this assumption. 4.2 Order book model with herd behavior Most of the ABMs, which consider statistical properties of the various ﬁnancial time series, directly or indirectly assume presence of the market maker [4]. While the real ﬁnancial markets are not cleared by an idealized market maker, most of the contemporary ﬁnancial markets implement trading by using the order books. Similarly to the market makers order books record and execute orders that the traders submit. The diﬀerence is that the orders in the order book are executed only if there is an overlap between the buy (bid) and the ask (sell) sides of the order book or if a market order is submitted. While there is a signiﬁcant body of literature considering order book modeling [19–26,28], most of these models consider reproducing patterns observed at the order book level and usually neglect stylized facts related to the ﬁnancial time series. It is worth to note that there are numerous papers in economics, which suggest that the prices in various auctions converge towards Walras equilibrium and that this convergence might be comparatively fast [52–57]. Yet this convergence is not instantaneous and we might observe some interesting eﬀects in the high–frequency ﬁnancial time series. Here, while building our order book model, we will partly rely on an empirically motivated order book model proposed by Kanazawaet al. [25,26]. As in [25,26] we assume that chartists as high–frequency traders submit unit volume limit orders to the both sides of the order book. The submitted quotes,Qask i and Qbid i , are placed by thei-th agent the same distance, 6 Figure 1: (color online) Full order book proﬁle (a) and a zoom in to5 best quotes present in the order book (b). Blue curve (a) and circles (b) denote bid (buy) limit orders, red curve (a) and circles (b) denote ask (sell) limit orders, while black circles (b) showVi for each of the best quoters. In sub ﬁgure (a) ask proﬁle is cumulative, giving number of limit orders willing to sell for a given price or larger, while bid proﬁle is inversely cumulative, giving the number of limit orders willing to buy at a given price or smaller. In subﬁgure (b) the arrow shows where the valuation would move if market ask order would be submitted. Si, away from the current valuation of the stock,Vi: Qask i (t) =Vi (t) +Si, (17) Qbid i (t) =Vi (t)−Si, (18) Si∼ Gamma (k,θ ), (19) where k is the shape parameter of the Gamma distribution andθ is the scale parameter of the Gamma distri- bution. Here physical dimension ofθ is p.u. (generic price units) as it is also the dimension ofQi, Vi and Si. Further in this paper we will use the empirically determined valuesk = 4 and θ = 15.5 p.u. (see [25,26]) unless speciﬁed otherwise. Note that these values were obtained speciﬁcally for USD/JPY exchange rate in Forex and they might take diﬀerent values for the other markets or exchange rates. Yet we will rely on these values as best available estimate at this point. Next we will replace the sophisticated trend following mechanism originally present in [25,26] with a simpler market order submission mechanism, which is similar to the one used in the herd behavior model with instan- taneous clearing. This simpliﬁcation leads to another simplifying assumption that valuations are homogeneous Vi (t) = V (t). Hence the valuation changes only after a market order is executed. After a market order is executed, the valuation is set to the value of realized quote. As in the original order book approach, after the valuation is reset chartists update their submitted quotes. An example of the full order book proﬁle is shown in Fig. 1 (a). Sub ﬁgure (b) of Fig. 1 provides zoomed in picture of the 5 best quotes, and shows the movement of valuation if market ask order would be submitted. Blue and red circles represent bid and ask quotes respectively, these circles are connected to show that the both quotes are submitted by the same agent, whose valuation is represented by the black circle. Note that under our simpliﬁcations the proﬁle is symmetric around quote equal to the current valuation, which is identical for all agents. This would not be the case for the original approach in [25,26]. Now let discuss the replacement of the trend following mechanism of [25,26] with a simpler one used in the herd behavior model with instantaneous clearing. Let the chartists submit unit volume market orders at rate λtC (t) = λe τ (Nc (t))λtcNc (t), (20) whereλe is the reference event rate (which has a physical dimension ofs−1) andλtc – the relative market order 7 submission rate by a single chartist agent. The submitted market order is bid order with probability: pbid (t) = 1 +ξ (t) 2 , (21) and ask market order is submitted otherwise,pask (t) = 1−pbid (t). Let us assume that the mood simply ﬂips its sign at rate λM (t) = λe τ (Nc (t))λm, (22) where λm is relative mood ﬂipping rate. As the sign ﬂip does not change the modulus the mood will take only two possible values,ξ (t)∈{−ξ0, +ξ0} (here ξ0 is initial value of the mood). Fundamentalists are not present in [25,26], so we can keep our earlier assumptions about their behavior. Namely, we assume that fundamentalists are willing to buy stock if there is such ask quote for whichQask j (t)<P f, and are willing to sell stock if there is such bid quote for whichQbid j (t)>P f. They will submit unit volume market orders, if there are suitable quotes in the order book, at rate: λtF (t) = λe τ (Nc (t))λtf [N−Nc (t)] ⏐⏐⏐⏐ln (P (t) Pf )⏐⏐⏐⏐, (23) where λtf is the relative market order submission rate by a single fundamentalist agent. Note that in [25,26] power law return distribution is obtained only after taking into account the fact that the number of high–frequency traders (chartists) changes over time. If the number of high–frequency traders (chartists) would be ﬁxed, then returns would be exponentially distributed. This intuition was conﬁrmed empirically by splitting the time series into two hour periods. For each of these periods returns were found to be approximately exponentially distributed, though the diﬀerent values of rates were found for the diﬀerent periods. The values of rates were found to be positively correlated with the average number of high–frequency traders (chartists) present during the same periods. Next let us include this variation to the current model by including switching behavior present in the herd behavior model with instantaneous clearing. It is straightforward to determine event rates for the trading strategy switching: the fundamentalist will switch to the chartist trading strategy at rate, λfc (t) = λe τ (Nc (t)) [N−Nc (t)] [εfc +Nc (t)], (24) while the chartist will switch to the fundamentalist trading strategy at rate, λcf (t) = λe τ (Nc (t))Nc (t) [εcf +{N−Nc (t)}]. (25) Note that these transition rates do not include parameterh, which is because it is equivalent toλe. As soon as chartist becomes fundamentalist his limit orders are canceled, also if fundamentalist becomes chartist, then he immediately submits his limit orders. As the number of agents in this model will always be ﬁnite, the probability ofτ(Nc) = 0 (or alternatively Nc (t) =N) andτ (Nf) =∞ (or alternativelyNc (t) = 0) will be non–zero, which would lead to “over–heating” or “freezing” of the strategy switching dynamics. To avoid these edge cases let us redeﬁne the feedback scenario as: τ −1 (Nc (t)) =λ0 +    if Nc (t) =N [2Nc (t)]α else [ Nc(t) N −Nc(t) ]α , (26) where λ0 is the relative minimum switching rate. In the above we have multiplied Nc by 2 when taking the Nc = N edge case into account, because the previous increase iny, number of chartists increasing from Nc =N− 2 to Nc =N− 1, is approximately double given largeN. We use the Gillespie algorithm [58,59] to implement the order book model. The main idea behind the Gillespie 8 Figure 2: (color online) Flowchart illustrating the order book model with herd behavior. algorithm is that we can sum all of the event rates to obtain the total event rate: λT =λcf +λfc +λM +λtF +λtC, (27) which enables us to generate random inter–event times, which are distributed exponentially: ∆ti∼ Exp ( λT) . (28) After each ∆ti one of the possible events happens. The probability for any of the possible events to happen is proportional to its rate: pcf = λcf λT , p fc = λfc λT , p M = λM λT , p tF = λtF λT , p tC = λtC λT . (29) As these probabilities sum to1, one of the ﬁve possible events is bound to happen: either randomly selected chartist switches to fundamentalist trading strategy (with probabilitypcf) or randomly selected fundamentalist switches to chartist trading strategy (with probabilitypfc) or the mood ﬂips its sign (with probabilitypM) or the randomly selected fundamentalist submits market order (with probabilityptF) and randomly selected chartist submits market order (with probabilityptC). The exact algorithm behind this model is summarized as a ﬂowchart in Fig. 2. The code implementing this model is publicly available onhttps://github.com/akononovicius/herding-OB-model. All of the parameters used in this model are summarized in Table 2. 9 Table 2: List of parameters used in the order book model with herd behavior. Symbol Meaning N number of agents λe reference event rate (has physical dimension of1/s) εcf relative idiosyncratic switching rate from chartists to fundamentalists εfc relative idiosyncratic switching rate from fundamentalists to chartists ξ0 absolute value of chartists’ mood λm relative rate at which mood ﬂips its sign λ0 relative minimum switching rate between chartists and fundamentalists α exponent of the feedback scenario k order book shape parameter θ order book scale parameter (has physical dimension of generic price units,p.u.) Pf fundamental price (has physical dimension of generic price units,p.u.) λtc relative market order submission rate for chartists λtf relative market order submission rate for fundamentalists 4.3 Comparison between the models It is possible to approximately estimate equilibrium prices for the order book model. From the discussion in the previous section we know that chartists submit unit volume market orders at rateλtC, with probabilitypbid they buy the stock and with probability1−pbid they sell the stock. Hence their excess demand (on average) is given by: ¯Dc =λtCpbid−λtC (1−pbid) = λe τ (Nc (t))λtcNc (t)ξ (t). (30) Note that the ﬁnal result is similar to Eq. (8). Fundamentalists on the other hand submit unit volume market orders at rateλtF, they submit ask orders if there is suchj for whichQbid j (t) > Pf and bid orders if there is such j for whichQask j (t)< Pf. Assuming thatPf is not in the spread, the excess demand of fundamentalists (on average) will be given by: ¯Df = λe τ (Nc (t))λtf [N−Nc (t)] ln (P (t) Pf ) . (31) Note that the ﬁnal result is similar to Eq. (9). Assuming that order book is non–empty and almost uniformly ﬁlled we can obtain the equilibrium price: ¯Dc + ¯Df = 0 ⇒ Peq(t) =Pf exp (λtc λtf · Nc (t) N−Nc (t)·ξ (t) ) . (32) As the expression for the equilibrium price has the same form as in Eq. (10), we can expect thaty and return will have similar statistical properties. The main condition we have to ensure for the similarity to be observable is that enough trades happen betweenNc changes, so that the equilibrium price could be reached. This means thatλtc andλtf have to be rather large. As you can see in Fig. 3 the agreement between the statistical properties of y and absolute return improves asλtc and λtf grow larger. In Fig. 4 we have shown sampley and absolute return time series, which can be seen to correlate in sub ﬁgure (a) and be almost uncorrelated in sub ﬁgure (b). Correlation betweeny and absolute return time series, see sample series in Fig. 4, also is stronger with larger λtc and λtf. For the series shown in Fig. 4 (a) correlation is strongρ≈ 0.7 (with λtc =λtf = 3· 104), while in Fig. 4 (a) correlation is negligibleρ≈ 0 (with λtc =λtf = 3). Similar intuition can be obtained from Fig. 5. As you can see in (a) and (c), for largeλtc and λtf (parameters the same as for the red curve in Fig. 3) the price tends to catch up with the changes in the equilibrium price. Though the following is far from being perfect as can be seen by zooming in on the series, (c). The correlation between the price and the equilibrium price time series is mild. While for smallλtc and λtf, (b) and (d), (parameters the same as for the green curve in Fig. 3) it is evident that the price does not manage to catch up 10 Figure 3: (color online) Comparison between the statistical properties, (a) PDFs and (b) PSDs, ofy time series (gray curves) and absolute return time series (red, blue and green curves), black curves show the expected slopes of the statistical properties, as per Eq. (16). For the best comparison all of the time series were normalized to unit standard deviation. The following parameter values were used in numerical simulations:N = 500, λe = 10−7 s−1, εcf =εfc = 1, ξ0 = 0.2, λm = 103, λ0 = 0.1, α = 1, k = 4, θ = 15.5 p.u., Pf = 3· 104 p.u. (all cases), λtc =λtf = 3· 104 (red curves), 300 (blue and gray curves),3 (green curves). Figure 4: (color online) Sample fragments of the absolute return (red curves) andy (gray curves) time series. Parameter values are identical to the ones used in Fig. 3 except: (a)λtc =λtf = 3· 104 (red curve in Fig. 3), (b)λtc =λtf = 3 (green curve in Fig. 3). The correlation coeﬃcients between the samples areρ = 0.67 (a) and 0.03 (b). 11 Figure 5: (color online) Sample fragments of the price (red curves) and the equilibrium price (gray curves) time series. Parameter values are identical to the ones used in Fig. 3 except: (a) and (c)λtc =λtf = 3·104 (red curve in Fig. 3), (b) and (d)λtc = λtf = 3 (green curve in Fig. 3).The correlation coeﬃcients between the samples are ρ = 0.54 (a) and 0.02 (b). with the changes in the equilibrium price. As expected, there is almost no correlation between the time series. Based on these results we would like to argue that the fracture in the PSD of the high–frequency absolute return time series happens due to order book dynamics. Namely, the absolute return PSD in the high frequency range is less sloped, because the markets are unable to discover the equilibrium price that fast. It seems that it could take a day or two (as the fracture is usually between10−5 and 10−4 Hz) for the markets to discover the new equilibrium price. 5 Comparison against the empirical data Before making a comparison against the empirical data let us state that neither order book model presented in [25,26] (which forms a basis of our order book approach) nor our ﬁnancial ABM [10,11] (which forms a basis of our agent–based approach) is able to reproduce all of the empirical statistical properties considered further in this Section. Our earlier ﬁnancial ABM [10,11] was shown to reproduce statistical properties of absolute return reasonably well, yet there was no way to consider trading activity in that model. While [25,26] has focused on reproduction of order book dynamics only brieﬂy touching upon statistical properties of absolute return. In this paper we use publicly available tick by tick trading data from12 diﬀerent Bitcoin exchanges. We have downloaded the data from bitcoincharts.com website on July 5, 2018. List of the considered Bitcoin time series is given in Table 3. Note that Coinbase and Kraken exchanges appear twice in the table, because they contribute more than one exchange pair. These time series were selected, because their data ﬁles were among top5% of the largest. Fisco’s BTC/JPY, Zaif’s BTC/JPY and Zyado’s BTC/EUR were also among top5% of the largest, but these time series were excluded, because their statistical properties were too diﬀerent from the rest of the time series. Note that for the same reason we have truncated some of the Bitcoin time series which remained under our consideration. For each of the considered Bitcoin time series we have produced one minute absolute return (normalized to 12 Table 3: List of the considered Bitcoin time series exchange exchange pair period available period used trades bitﬁnex BTC/USD 2013-03-31/2016-12-22 from 2013-05-01 10121872 (99.4%) bitﬂyer BTC/JPY 2017-07-04/2018-07-04 whole 30650659 bitstamp BTC/USD 2011-09-13/2018-07-04 except 2016-06-23 26065456 (99.9%) btcbox BTC/JPY 2014-04-09/2018-07-04 whole 8900784 btce BTC/USD 2011-08-14/2017-07-25 whole 32904793 btcn BTC/CNY 2011-06-13/2017-09-30 from 2013-04-01 114077056 (99.9%) btcoid BTC/IDR 2014-02-09/2018-07-04 whole 8037858 btctrade BTC/CNY 2013-05-19/2017-09-30 whole 19672943 coinbase BTC/EUR 2015-04-23/2018-07-04 whole 15012224 coinbase BTC/USD 2014-12-01/2018-07-04 from 2017-05-01 30553110 (67.5%) coincheck BTC/JPY 2014-10-31/2018-07-04 except 2017-08-07 102124064 (99.9%) kraken BTC/EUR 2014-01-08/2018-07-04 whole 21392263 kraken BTC/USD 2014-01-07/2018-07-04 whole 10462050 okcoin BTC/CNY 2013-06-12/2015-04-05 whole 99999546 the standard deviation) and trading activity (deﬁned as trades per time interval and normalized to the mean) time series. For each of the produced one minute time series we have calculated PDF and PSD. The obtained statistical properties were averaged to produce average proﬁle for each of the statistical properties. To select the model parameters we have used simulated annealing technique with a goal to reproduce these averaged statistical properties. As you can see in Fig. 6 the obtained agreement is rather good. Earlier works, such as the ones found in [60,61], has already carried out detailed analysis of the Bitcoin time series and established that the stylized facts for the Bitcoin are somewhat diﬀerent from the stylized facts established for the stocks. Namely, [61] has reported that the Bitcoin returns exhibit heavier tails than ordinary stock returns. Similar ﬁnding was also reported in [60]. Yet these works disagree on whether the tail index changes over time. In [61] it was reported that while the tail index has slightly increased, but not enough statistical evidence was found to formally claim that the tail index is increasing. In [60], on the other hand, a signiﬁcant change in the tail index is reported. Furthermore other statistical properties of absolute return, such as slope of the auto–correlation function, Hurst exponent and multi-scaling properties, seem to approach values observed for the ordinary stocks. This is interpreted as a sign that Bitcoin market is becoming “mature” market. In this paper we did not carry out a rigorous empirical analysis, at least as rigorous as in [60,61]. We have just checked whether PDFs and PSDs of absolute return and trading activity change over time and found that the change, if present, is negligible for the exchange rates that have remained under our consideration. While the return tail index seems to be similar to the one obtained for NYSE stocks under our consideration (λ≈ 3.7; analysis of NYSE stocks are discussed in the next paragraph). A thorough analysis of the Bitcoin time series or a meta analysis of the methods used in [60,61] would be due, but this topic is out of the scope of this paper. We have also considered the statistical properties of 26 tickers from NYSE. The considered tickers include: ABT, ADM, BA, BMY, C, CVX, DOW, FON, FNM, GE, GM, HD, IBM, JNJ, JPM, KO, LLY, MMM, MO, MOT, MRK, SLE, PFE, T, WMT and XOM. All their time frames are from January, 2005 to March, 2007. As with the Bitcoin time series, we have obtained averaged statistical properties for NYSE data set. Using simulated annealing technique we have obtained another best ﬁt parameter set for our model. To obtain a better ﬁt we had to divide absolute return time series generated by the model by factor of3. This indicates that the model still lacks something, though it seems to reproduce correct behavior for the tail of the distribution. As we can see in Fig. 7 after this correction the agreement between the model and the data appears to be rather good. The obtained parameter set is similar to the one obtained for the Bitcoin case. Though there are some diﬀerences. The mood swings seem to be larger in NYSE case (the respectiveξ0 is larger), while Bitcoin trading would seem to be more random (which is somewhat consistent with assumptions made in [33,34]). On the other hand chartists seem to submit less order in NYSE case (λtc is smaller), which would indicate prices in NYSE a more 13 Figure 6: (color online) Comparison between the empirical Bitcoin statistical properties (gray curves) and statistical properties generated by the model (red curves): (a) one minute absolute return PDF, (b) one minute absolute return PSD, (c) trading activity per one minute PDF, (d) trading activity per one minute PSD. The following parameter set was used in numerical simulations:N = 500,λe = 10−7 s−1,εfc = 5,εcf = 2,ξ0 = 0.2, λm = 10, λtc = 25, λtf = 75, λ0 = 0.4, α = 2, k = 4, θ = 15.5 p.u., Pf = 3· 104 p.u.. impacted by the market fundamentals. Base trading activity seems to be higher,λ0 is larger, for NYSE. The last two diﬀerences could potentially indicate that NYSE is a more mature market than Bitcoin exchanges, as is also noted based on empirical observations in [60]. 6 Impact of the model parameters In this section we check to see how changing the model’s parameter values impact the statistical properties of absolute return and trading activity generated by the model. In all ﬁgures in this section we will show three curves. Usually one will be generated with a larger parameter value than used to produce Fig. 6 (blue curve), one smaller (green curve) and one identical (red curve). Models built on the non–extensive formulation of the herd behavior model are known to avoid theN–dependence problem [10,11,36–39,41,42], but as we can see in Fig. 8 this model has some kind ofN–dependence. Yet the ﬂuctuations do not disappear with largerN, it seems that the model starts to exhibit even fatter tails. This is most likely occurs due to the implemented mood mechanism: the more agents and the more chartist agents, the more mood is reﬂected in the time series. We can partly eliminate this dependence be recalling that whiley dynamics are not inﬂuenced byN, but the number of trades per time window does depend onN. By requiring that Nλtc = const and Nλtf = const we eliminate this dependence. And as we can see in Fig. 9 then changingN does not inﬂuence the statistical properties of absolute return. ThoughN retains the impact on the trading activity. Changingλe parameter value seems to have a similar impact as changingh in the original herd behavior model (see Fig. 10). Namely the PSD of the absolute return shifts to the right as we increaseλe. Though due to the absolute return formula comparing log–prices at two diﬀerent points in time, the PDF of the absolute return might also be impacted: it seem that the PDF might obtain heavier tails asλe becomes larger. Interestingly 14 Figure 7: (color online) Comparison between the empirical NYSE stocks’ statistical properties (gray curves) and statistical properties generated by the model (red curves). Parameter values are identical to the ones used in Fig. 6 except:ξ0 = 1, λtc = 2, λ0 = 1.5. Figure 8: (color online) Inﬂuence ofN parameter on the model’s statistical properties. Parameter values are identical to the ones used in Fig. 6 except:N = 5000 (blue curve),N = 50 (green curve). 15 Figure 9: (color online) Inﬂuence ofN parameter on the model’s statistical properties, whenNλtc = const and Nλtf = const. Parameter values are identical to the ones used in Fig. 6 except:N = 5000,λtc = 2.5,λtf = 7.5 (blue curve),N = 50, λtc = 250, λtf = 750 (green curve). changing λe does not seem to have any qualitative eﬀect on the statistical properties of the trading activity. Most likely increasingλe simply increase the mean of trades per time window without changing anything else. Parameter εfc does not have signiﬁcant impact on the statistical properties of the model with instantaneous clearing, Eq. 16, but it seems that it is able to impact the statistical properties of the absolute return in the order book model (see Fig. 11). Asεfc increases the tails of the PDF becomes heavier and the PSD becomes ﬂatter. The statistical properties of the trading activity do not seem to change qualitatively, the tail of the PDF remains the same nor does the steepness of the PSD change. Most likely largerεfc simply increases mean trading activity. Parameter εcf seems to have the opposite eﬀect on the statistical properties of absolute return (see Fig. 12). As εcf increases the tail of the PDF become lighter, while the slope of the PSD becomes steeper. The impact on the statistical properties of the trading activity seems to be both quantitative, the mean number of trades per time window decreases asεcf increases, and qualitative, the tail of the PDF becomes lighter and the slope of the PSD becomes steeper. These eﬀects are most likely caused by the dynamics reﬂected by the model with instantaneous clearing as such dependence is predicted by Eq. 16. The mood dynamics,ξ0 andλmc, doesn’t seem to have a signiﬁcant impact on the statistical properties of both absolute return and trading activity (see Figs. 13 and 14). Though small eﬀect ofξ0 on the absolute return PDF and PSD are visible. Largerξ0 makes the tail of the PDF less fat and the PSD ﬂatter. Changingλmc would have a larger if the base value ofξ0 was larger. Increasingλmc would have similar eﬀect as decreasingξ0 as with largerλm the eﬀective mood (the average trend) would be smaller than than the true value ofξ0. As we have seen in the previous section largerλtc andλtf values force the realized prices to more closely follow the equilibrium prices. While looking at the statistical properties of the model we see thatλtf does not seem to have a noticeable eﬀect (see Fig. 16). This is because the fundamentalists activate only if the current price deviates far from the the fundamental price and their trades rapidly push the price back to the fundamental price. On the other handλtc seems to have a signiﬁcant eﬀect (see Fig. 15): larger values lead to the fatter tails of the PDFs, while the PSDs ﬂatten. 16 Figure 10: (color online) Inﬂuence ofλe parameter on the model’s statistical properties. Parameter values are identical to the ones used in Fig. 6 except:λe = 3· 10−7 s−1 (blue curve),λe = 3· 10−8 s−1 (green curve). Figure 11: (color online) Inﬂuence ofεfc parameter on the model’s statistical properties. Parameter values are identical to the ones used in Fig. 6 except:εfc = 15 (blue curve),εfc = 0.7 (green curve). 17 Figure 12: (color online) Inﬂuence ofεcf parameter on the model’s statistical properties. Parameter values are identical to the ones used in Fig. 6 except:εcf = 6 (blue curve),εcf = 0.7 (green curve). Figure 13: (color online) Inﬂuence ofξ0 parameter on the model’s statistical properties. Parameter values are identical to the ones used in Fig. 6 except:ξ0 = 0.6 (blue curve),ξ0 = 0.1 (green curve). 18 Figure 14: (color online) Inﬂuence ofλm parameter on the model’s statistical properties. Parameter values are identical to the ones used in Fig. 6 except:λm = 300 (blue curve),λm = 0.3 (green curve). Figure 15: (color online) Inﬂuence ofλtc parameter on the model’s statistical properties. Parameter values are identical to the ones used in Fig. 6 except:λtc = 250 (blue curve),λtc = 2.5 (green curve). 19 Figure 16: (color online) Inﬂuence ofλtf parameter on the model’s statistical properties. Parameter values are identical to the ones used in Fig. 6 except:λtf = 750 (blue curve),λtc = 7.5 (green curve). As we can see in Fig. 17 changingλ0 values does not have a signiﬁcant eﬀect besides increasing the overall level of trading activity. Changing the power of the feedback scenarioα seems to have an adverse eﬀect (see Fig. 18): with smaller values the tails of the PDFs become lighter and the slopes of the PSDs become steeper. Interestingly, as can be seen in Figs. 19 and 20, the parameters inﬂuencing the overall shape of the order book itself, k and θ, do not seem to have any eﬀect on the statistical properties obtained from the normalized time series. This is result could be attributed to the simplifying assumption about the homogeneity of the valuation. If valuation would be allowed to be heterogeneous as in [25,26], the order book shape parameters would likely have a more profound eﬀect on the observed statistical properties. 7 Conclusions Here we have proposed an order book model with herd behavior, which is able to reproduce the main stylized facts of the ﬁnancial markets. The order book model with herd behavior was built upon empirical insights by Kanazawaet al. [25,26], who have studied a very detailed records of the order book level events, and our previously proposed theoretical ABM [10,11], which is known to successfully reproduce the statistical properties of the high–frequency absolute return. Incorporating order book dynamics improves upon our previous work in numerous ways. First of all, we were able to scrap two not very realistic, but still common in the literature, assumptions: we no longer need to introduce an eﬃcient market maker to deﬁne the market price (introduced in [10]), we also no longer need to introduce the exogenous noise as was done in [11]. Another key improvement is that now we are able to consider statistical properties of the trading activity alongside the statistical properties of absolute return. Using simulated annealing, optimizing the root mean squared error of the worst match, we were able to calibrate the model parameters to match the Bitcoin’s statistical properties on one minute timescale. Calibrating the model to match the statistical properties observed in NYSE (one minute timescale) was not as successful, which indicates that the model still lacks something. We believe that introducing heterogeneity into chartist 20 Figure 17: (color online) Inﬂuence ofλ0 parameter on the model’s statistical properties. Parameter values are identical to the ones used in Fig. 6 except:λ0 = 4 (blue curve),λ0 = 0.04 (green curve). Figure 18: (color online) Inﬂuence ofα parameter on the model’s statistical properties. Parameter values are identical to the ones used in Fig. 6 except:α = 1 (blue curve),α = 0 (green curve). 21 Figure 19: (color online) Inﬂuence ofk parameter on the model’s statistical properties. Parameter values are identical to the ones used in Fig. 6 except:k = 16 (blue curve),k = 1 (green curve). Figure 20: (color online) Inﬂuence ofθ parameter on the model’s statistical properties. Parameter values are identical to the ones used in Fig. 6 except:θ = 100 p.u. (blue curve),θ = 2.5 p.u. (green curve). 22 and fundamentalist valuation of the stock might be the key, but this would further complicate the model introducing additional parameters. Another possibility would be to complicate the modeling of the chartist mood swings. Finally, the model structure itself suggests that some of the parameter values could be gleaned from the order book level data. Currently we are gathering publicly available Bitcoin order book level data in hopes to use the collected data to improve calibration of the model. To limit the complexity of the model and to allow for analytical tractability we have made few highly simplifying assumptions. Most restrictive of them are homogeneous valuation, unit order volume and mood dynamics assumptions. As relaxing these assumptions could enrich the dynamics of the proposed order book model with herding behavior, we consider doing so in the future works. Arelevantfuturegoalcouldbeimprovementeconomicsoundnessofthetradingstrategiesandswitchingbehavior of the agents. This would make model more easily comparable with the other recent approaches [27,29–32,35] as well as open up the possibility to provide a deeper insight for the economic policy makers. Similar transition was already undertaken by Biondo (starting from [28] and arriving to [29–31]). We could also extend our approach further by considering its dynamics analytically. This should be possible, because one of the underlying models can be alternatively described using stochastic diﬀerential equations, while the order book part of the model can also be approached analytically using Bogoliubov–Born–Green– Kirkwood–Yvon hierarchy. Though fully integrating the both parts could prove to be a challenging task. There could be a couple of possible approaches: a superstatistical or a coupled SDE approach as used in [62,63] or a coarse–grained approximation of the model as discussed in [64]. Acknowledgement This research was funded by the European Social Fund under the No 09.3.3–LMT–K–712 “Development of Competences of Scientists, other Researchers and Students through Practical Research Activities” measure. References [1] D. Helbing, “Pluralistic modeling of complex systems,”Science and Culture, vol. 76, no. 2, p. 315, 2010. [2] A. Chakraborti, I. M. Toke, M. Patriarca, and F. Abergel, “Econophysics review: I. Empirical facts,” Quantitative Finance, vol. 7, pp. 991–1012, 2011. [3] ——, “Econophysics review: II. Agent-based models,”Quantitative Finance, vol. 7, pp. 1013–1041, 2011. [4] M. Cristelli, L. Pietronero, and A. Zaccaria, “Critical overview of agent-based models for economics,” in Proceedings of the School of Physics "E. Fermi", Course CLXXVI, F. Mallnace and H. E. Stanley, Eds. Bologna-Amsterdam: SIF-IOS, 2012, pp. 235 – 282. [5] D. Sornette, “Physics and ﬁnancial economics (1776–2014): puzzles, Ising and agent-based models,”Reports on Progress in Physics, vol. 77, p. 062001, 2014. [6] F. Abergel, H. Aoyama, B. Chakrabarti, A. Chakraborti, N. Deo, D. Raina, and I. Vodenska, Eds.,Econo- physics and sociophysics: Recent progress and future directions. Springer, 2017. [7] T.-T. Chen, B. Zheng, Y. Li, and X.-F. Jiang, “New approaches in agent-based modeling of complex ﬁnancial systems,”Frontiers of Physics, vol. 12, no. 6, p. 128905, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11467-017-0661-2 [8] A. Flache, M. Mas, T. Feliciani, E. Chattoe-Brown, G. Deﬀuant, S. Huet, and J. Lorenz, “Models of social inﬂuence: Towards the next frontiers,”The Journal of Artiﬁcial Society and Social Simulation, vol. 20, no. 4, p. 2, 2017. [Online]. Available: http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/20/4/2.html 23 [9] T. Lux and M. Marchesi, “Scaling and criticality in a stochastic multi-agent model of a ﬁnancial market,” Nature, vol. 397, pp. 498–500, 1999. [10] A. Kononovicius and V. Gontis, “Agent based reasoning for the non-linear stochastic models of long-range memory,”Physica A, vol. 391, no. 4, pp. 1309–1314, 2012. [11] V. Gontis and A. Kononovicius, “Consentaneous agent-based and stochastic model of the ﬁnancial markets,” PLoS ONE, vol. 9, no. 7, p. e102201, 2014. [12] A. P. Kirman, “Ants, rationality and recruitment,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 108, pp. 137–156, 1993. [13] B. Biais, P. Hillion, and C. Spatt, “An empirical analysis of the limit order book and the order ﬂow in the Paris Bourse,”Journal of Finance, vol. 1995, pp. 1655–1689, 1995. [14] P. Gopikrishnan, V. Plerou, X. Gabaix, and H. E. Stanley, “Statistical properties of share volume traded in ﬁnancial markets,”Physical Review E, vol. 62, pp. 4493–4496, 2000. [15] J. P. Bouchaud, M. Mezard, and M. Potters, “Statistical properties of stock order books: empirical results and models,”Quantitative Finance, vol. 2, p. 251, 2002. [16] E. Smith, J. D. Farmer, L. Gillemot, and S. Krishnamurthy, “Statistical theory of the continuous double auction,”Quantitative Finance, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 481–514, 2003. [17] M. Alexandre, F. F. Ferreira, and C. R. Neto, “Order book, order ﬂow and returns: evidence from the Brazilian stock exchange,”Redeca, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 24–38, 2018. [18] P. Bak, M. Paczuski, and M. Shubik, “Price variations in a stock market with many agents,”Physica A, vol. 246, pp. 430–453, 1997. [19] S. Maslov, “Simple model of a limit order-driven market,”Physica A, vol. 278, pp. 571–578, 2000. [20] D. Challet and R. Stinchcombe, “Analyzing and modeling 1+1d markets,”Physica A, vol. 300, pp. 285–299, 2001. [21] T. Preis, S. Golke, W. Paul, and J. J. Schneider, “Multi-agent-based order book model of ﬁnancial markets,” EPL, vol. 75, no. 3, p. 510, 2006. [22] M. Cristelli, V. Alﬁ, L. Pietronero, and A. Zaccaria, “Liquidity crisis, granularity of the order book and price ﬂuctuations,”The European Physical Journal B, vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 41–49, 2010. [23] F. Abergel and A. Jedidi, “A mathematical approach to order book modeling,”International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance, vol. 16, no. 5, p. 1350025, 2013. [24] J. Donier and J. P. Bouchaud, “From Walras’ auctioneer to continuous time double auctions,”Journal of Statistical Mechanics, vol. 2016, p. 123406, 2016. [25] K. Kanazawa, T. Sueshige, H. Takayasu, and M. Takayasu, “Derivation of the Boltzmann equation for the ﬁnancial Brownian motion,”Physcal Review Letters, vol. 120, p. 138301, 2018. [26] ——, “Kinetic theory for ﬁnance Brownian motion from microscopic dynamics,”Physical Review E, vol. 98, p. 052317, 2018. [27] T. Kaizoji, M. Leiss, A. Saichev, and D. Sornette, “Super-exponential endogenous bubbles in an equilibrium model of fundamentalist and chartist traders,”Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, vol. 112, pp. 289–310, 2015. 24 [28] A. E. Biondo, A. Pluchino, and A. Rapisarda, “A multilayer model of order book dynamics,” Journal Of Network Theory In Finance , vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 37–52, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.siecon.org/online/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/BIONDO.pdf [29] A. E. Biondo, “Learning to forecast, risk aversion, and microstructural aspects of ﬁnancial stability,”Eco- nomics: The Open-Access, Open-Assessment E-Journal, vol. 12, pp. 1–21, 2018. [30] ——, “Order book modeling and ﬁnancial stability,”Journal of Economic Interaction and Coordination, 2018. [31] ——, “Order book microstructure and policies for ﬁnancial stability,”Studies in Economics and Finance, vol. 35, pp. 196–218, 2018. [32] R. M. Navarro and H. Larralde, “A detailed heterogeneous agent model for a single asset ﬁnancial market with trading via an order book,”PLOS ONE, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 1–27, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0170766 [33] L. Cocco, G. Concas, and M. Marchesi, “Using an artiﬁcial ﬁnancial market for studying a cryptocurrency market,”Journal of Economic Interaction and Coordination, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 345–365, 2017. [34] L. Cocco, R. Tonelli, and M. Marchesi, “An agent based model to analyze the Bitcoin mining activity and a comparison with the gold mining industry,”Future Internet, vol. 11, no. 1, p. 8, 2019. [35] B. Llacay and G. Peﬀer, “Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based stock market model,”Com- putational and Mathematical Organization Theory, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 308–350, 2018. [36] S. Alfarano and M. Milakovic, “Network structure and N-dependence in agent-based herding models,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 78–92, 2009. [37] A.FlacheandM.W.Macy, “Localconvergenceandglobaldiversity: Frominterpersonaltosocialinﬂuence,” Journal of Conﬂict Resolution, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 970–995, 2011. [38] A. Kononovicius and J. Ruseckas, “Continuous transition from the extensive to the non-extensive statistics in an agent-based herding model,”European Physics Journal B, vol. 87, no. 8, p. 169, 2014. [39] A. F. Peralta, A. Carro, M. San Miguel, and R. Toral, “Analytical and numerical study of the non-linear noisy voter model on complex networks.” [40] R. Cont, “Empirical properties of asset returns: Stylized facts and statistical issues,”Quantitative Finance, vol. 1, pp. 1–14, 2001. [41] S. Alfarano, T. Lux, and F. Wagner, “Estimation of agent-based models: The case of an asymmetric herding model,”Computational Economics, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 19–49, 2005. [42] ——, “Time variation of higher moments in a ﬁnancial market with heterogeneous agents: An analytical approach,”Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, vol. 32, pp. 101–136, 2008. [43] V. Alﬁ, M. Cristelli, L. Pietronero, and A. Zaccaria, “Minimal agent based model for ﬁnancial markets I: Origin and self-organization of stylized facts,”European Physics Journal B, vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 385–397, 2009. [44] ——, “Minimal agent based model for ﬁnancial markets II: Statistical properties of the linear and multi- plicative dynamics,”European Physics Journal B, vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 399–417, 2009. [45] F. Sano, M. Hisakado, and S. Mori,Mean ﬁeld voter model of election to the house of representatives in Japan. The Physical Society of Japan, 2016, p. 011016. 25 [46] A. Kononovicius, “Empirical analysis and agent-based modeling of Lithuanian parliamentary elections,” Complexity, vol. 2017, p. 7354642, 2017. [47] A. Kononovicius, V. Gontis, and V. Daniunas, “Agent-based versus macroscopic modeling of competition and business processes in economics and ﬁnance,” International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems , vol. 5, no. 1-2, pp. 111–126, 2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=intsys_v5_n12_2012_9 [48] Z. Chen and T. Lux, “Estimation of sentiment eﬀects in ﬁnancial markets: A simulated method of moments approach,”Computational Economics, vol. 2016, pp. 1–34, 2016. [49] T. Lux, “Estimation of agent-based models using sequential Monte Carlo methods,”Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, vol. 91, pp. 391–408, 2018. [50] R. Rak, S. Drozdz, J. Kwapien, and P. Oswiecimka, “Stock returns versus trading volume: is the corre- spondence more general?”Acta Physica Polonica B, vol. 44, pp. 2035–2050, 2013. [51] J. Ruseckas and B. Kaulakys, “1/f noise from nonlinear stochastic diﬀerential equations,”Physical Review E, vol. 81, p. 031105, 2010. [52] V. L. Smith, “An experimental study of competitive market behavior,”Journal of Political Economy, vol. 70, pp. 111–137, 1962. [53] M. Bayati, C. Borgs, J. Chayes, Y. Kanoria, and A. Montanari, “Bargaining dynamics in exchange net- works,”Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 156, pp. 417–454, 2015. [54] H. H. Nax and B. S. R. Pradelski, “Evoliutionary dynamics and equitable core selection in assignment games,”International Journal of Game Theory, vol. 44, pp. 903–932, 2015. [55] J. Leshno and B. Pradelski, “Eﬃcient price discovery and information in the decentralized assignment game,” 2017. [56] E. O. Kimbrough and A. Smyth, “Testing the boundaries of the double auction: The eﬀects of complete information and market power,”Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, vol. 150, pp. 372–396, 2018. [57] H. H. Nax, D. N. Duran, and B. Pradelski, “Price discovery in online markets: Convergence, asymmetries and information,” 2018. [58] D. T. Gillespie, “Exact stochastic simulation of coupled chemical reactions,”Journal of Physical Chemistry, vol. 81, pp. 2340–2361, 1977. [59] ——, Markov processes: An introduction for physical scientists. San Diego CA: Academic Press, 1992. [60] S. Drozdz, R. Gebarowski, L. Minati, P. Oswiecimka, and M. Watorek, “Bitcoin market route to maturity? Evidence from return ﬂuctuations, temporal correlations and multiscaling eﬀects,”Chaos, vol. 28, p. 071101, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://aip.scitation.org/doi/10.1063/1.5036517 [61] S. Begusic, Z. Kostanjcar, H. E. Stanley, and B. Podobnik, “Scaling properties of extreme price ﬂuctuations in Bitcoin markets,” Physica A, vol. 510, pp. 400–406, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378437118308550?via%3Dihub [62] J. Ruseckas, V. Gontis, and B. Kaulakys, “Nonextensive statistical mechanics distributions and dynamics of ﬁnancial observables from the nonlinear stochastic diﬀerential equations,”Advances in Complex Systems, vol. 15, no. supp01, p. 1250073, 2012. 26 [63] J. Ruseckas, R. Kazakevicius, and B. Kaulakys, “Coupled nonlinear stochastic diﬀerential equations gener- ating arbitrary distributed observable with 1/f noise,”Journal of Statistical Mechanics, vol. 2016, no. 4, p. 043209, 2016. [64] Y. Zou, V. A. Fonoberov, M. Fonoberova, I. Mezic, and I. G. Kevrekidis, “Model reduction for agent-based social simulation: Coarse-graining a civil violence model,”Physical Review E, vol. 85, p. 066106, 2012. 27