arXiv:1810.09965v1 [cs.LG] 23 Oct 2018 Using Deep Learning for price prediction by exploiting stat ionary limit order book features Avraam Tsantekidis a, Nikolaos Passalis a, Anastasios Tefas a, Juho Kanniainen b, Moncef Gabboujc, Alexandros Iosiﬁdis d aDepartment of Informatics, Aristotle University of Thessa loniki, Thessaloniki, Greece bLaboratory of Industrial and Information Management, Tamp ere University of Technology, Tampere, Finland cLaboratory of Signal Processing, Tampere University of Tec hnology, Tampere, Finland dDepartment of Engineering, Electrical and Computer Engine ering, Aarhus University, Denmark Abstract The recent surge in Deep Learning (DL) research of the past deca de has successfully provided solutions to many diﬃcult problems. The ﬁeld of quantitative analysis h as been slowly adapting the new methods to its problems, but due to problems such as the no n-stationary nature of ﬁnancial data, signiﬁcant challenges must be overcome before DL is fully utilize d. In this work a new method to construct stationary features, that allows DL models to be app lied eﬀectively, is proposed. These features are thoroughly tested on the task of predicting mid price movements of the Limit Order Book. Several DL models are evaluated, such as recurrent Long S hort Term Memory (LSTM) networks and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). Finally a nove l model that combines the ability of CNNs to extract useful features and the ability of LSTMs’ to analyze time series, is proposed and evaluated. The combined model is able to outperform the individual LSTM and CNN models in the prediction horizons that are tested. Keywords: Limit Order Book, Stationary Features, Price Forecasting, Deep L earning 1. Introduction In the last decade Machine Learning (ML) has been rapidly evolving du e to the profound performance improvements that Deep Learning (DL) has ushered . Deep Learning has outperformed previous state-of-the-art methods in many ﬁelds of Machine Lear ning, such as Natural Language Processing (NLP) [1], image processing [2] and speech generation [3]. As the number of new methods incorporating Deep Learning in many scientiﬁc ﬁelds increase, the pr oposed solutions begin to span across other disciplines where Machine Learning was used in a limited ca pacity. One such example is the quantitative analysis of the stock markets and the usage of M achine Learning to predict price movements or the volatility of the future prices or the detection of anomalous events in the markets. In the ﬁeld of quantitative analysis, the mathematical modelling of th e markets has been the de facto approach to model stock price dynamics for trading, mar ket making, hedging, and risk Email addresses: avraamt@csd.auth.gr (Avraam Tsantekidis), passalis@csd.auth.gr (Nikolaos Passalis), tefas@aiia.csd.auth.gr (Anastasios Tefas), juho.kanniainen@tut.fi (Juho Kanniainen), moncef.gabbouj@tut.fi (Moncef Gabbouj), alexandros.iosifidis@eng.au.dk (Alexandros Iosiﬁdis) management. By utilizing a time series of values, such as the price ﬂuc tuations of ﬁnancial products being traded in the markets, one can construct statistical models which can assist in the extraction of useful information about the current state of the market and a set of probabilities for possible future states, such as price or volatility changes. Many models, su ch as the Black-Scholes-Merton model [4], attempted to mathematically deduce the price of options a nd can be used to provide useful indications of future price movements. However, at some point as more market participants started using the same model the behaviour of the price changed to the point that it could no longer be taken adv antage of. Newer models, such as the stochastic modelling of limit order book dynamics [5], the j ump-diﬀusion processes for stock dynamics [6] and volatility estimation of market microstructur e noise [7] have been attempts predict multiple aspects of the ﬁnancial markets. However such mo dels are designed to be tractable, even at the cost of reliability and accuracy, and thus they do not ne cessarily ﬁt empirical data very well. The aforementioned properties put handcrafted models at a disad vantage, since the ﬁnancial markets very frequently exhibit irrational behaviour, mainly due to the large inﬂuence of human activity, which frequently causes these models to fail. Combining Mac hine Learning models with handcrafted features usually improves the forecasting abilities of such models, by overcoming some of the aforementioned limitations, and improving predictions about v arious aspects of ﬁnancial mar- kets. This led many organizations that participate in the Financial Ma rkets, such as Hedge Funds and investment ﬁrms, to increasingly use ML models, along with the co nventional mathematical models, to make crucial decisions. Furthermore, the introduction of electronic trading, that also led to the automation of trading operations, has magniﬁed the volume of exchanges, producing a we alth of data. Deep Learning models are perfect candidates for analyzing such amounts of data , since they perform signiﬁcantly better than the conventional Machine Learning methodologies whe n a large amount of data is available. This is one of the reasons that Deep Learning is starting to have a role in analyzing the data coming from ﬁnancial exchanges. [8, 9] The most detailed type of data that ﬁnancial exchanges are gathe ring is the comprehensive logs of every submitted order and event that is happening within their int ernal matching engine. This log can be used to reconstruct the Limit Order Book (LOB), which is e xplained further in Section 3. A basic task that can arise from this data is the prediction of future price movements of an asset by examining the current and past supply and demand of Limit Orders. T his type of comprehensive logs kept by the exchanges is excessively large and traditional Mach ine Learning techniques, such as Support Vector Machines (SVMs) [10], usually cannot be applied ou t-of-the-box. Utilizing this kind of data directly with existing Deep Learning methods is also not po ssible due to their non- stationary nature. Prices ﬂuctuate and suﬀer from stochastic d rift, so in order for them to be eﬀectively utilized by DL methods a preprocessing step is required to generate stationary features from them. The main contribution of this work is the proposal of a set of station ary features that can be readily extracted from the Limit Order Book. The proposed featur es are thoroughly evaluated for predicting future mid price movements from large-scale high-fr equency Limit Order data using several diﬀerent Deep Learning models, ranging from simple Multilaye r Perceptrons (MLPs) and CNNs to Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). Also we propose a no vel Deep Learning model that combines the feature extraction ability of Convolutional Neural Ne tworks (CNNs) with the Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) networks’ power to analyze time series . In Section 2 related work which employs ML models on ﬁnancial data is b rieﬂy presented. 2 Then, the dataset used is described in detail in Section 3. In Section 4 the proposed stationary feature extraction methodology is presented in detail, while in Sectio n 5 the proposed Deep Learning methods are described. In Section 6 the experimental evaluation a nd comparisons are provided. Finally, conclusions are drawn and future work is discussed in Section 7. 2. Related Work The task of regressing the future movements of ﬁnancial assets has been the subject of many recent works such as [11, 12, 13]. Proven models such as GARCH are improved and augmented with machine learning component such as Artiﬁcial Neural Networks [14]. New hybrid models are employed along with Neural Networks to improve upon previous perf ormance [15]. One of the most volatile ﬁnancial markets is FOREX, the currency ma rkets. In [16], neural networks are used to predict the future exchange rate of major FOREX pairs such as USD/EUR. The model is tested with diﬀerent prediction steps ranging from daily to yearly which reaches the conclusion that shorter term predictions tend to be more accurat e. Other ﬁnancial metrics, such as cash ﬂow prediction, are very closely correlated to price predict ion. In [17], the authors propose the “Deep Portfolio Theory” which app lies autoencoders in order to produce optimal portfolios. This approach outperforms sever al established benchmarks, such as the Biotechnology IBB Index. Likewise in [18], another type of auto encoders, known as Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM), is applied to encode the end-of-month pr ices of stocks. Then, the model is ﬁne-tuned to predict whether the price will move more than the median change and the direction of such movement. This strategy is able to outperform a b enchmark momentum strategy in terms of annualized returns. Another approach is to include data sources outside the ﬁnancial t ime series, e.g., [19], where phrases related to ﬁnance, such as “mortgage” and “bankruptc y” were monitored on the Google trends platform and included as an input to a recurrent neural net work along with the daily S&P 500 market fund prices. The training target is the prediction of the fut ure volatility of the market fund’s price. This approach can greatly outperform many benchmark met hods, such as the autoregressive GARCH and Lasso techniques. The surge of DL methods has dramatically improved the performanc e over many conventional machine learning methods on tasks, such as speech recognition [20], image captioning[21, 22], and question answering [23]. The most important building blocks of DL are t he Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [24], and the Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) . Also worth mentioning is the improvement of RNNs with the introduction of Long Short-Term Mem ory Units (LSTMs) [25], which has made the analysis of time series using DL easier and more per formant. Unfortunately DL methods are prone to overﬁt especially in tasks s uch as price regression and many works exist trying to prevent such overﬁtting [26, 27]. Some might attribute overﬁtting to the lack of huge amounts of data that other tasks such as image and speech processing have available to them. A very rich data source for ﬁnancial forecasting is the Limit Order Book. One of the few applications of ML in high frequency Limit Order Book da ta is [8], where several handcrafted features are created, including price deltas, bid-as k spreads and price and volume derivatives. An SVM is then trained to predict the direction of futur e mid price movements using all the handcrafted features. In [28] a neural network architec ture incorporating the idea of bilinear projection augmented with a temporal attention mechanism is used to predict LOB mid price. Similarly in [29, 30] utilize the Limit Order Book data along with ML methods such as multilinear methods and smart feature selection to predict the future price m ovements. In our previous work [31, 3 9, 32] we introduced a large-scale high-frequency Limit Order Book dataset, that is also used in this paper, and we employed three simple DL models, the Convolutiona l Neural Networks (CNN), the Long-Short Term Memory Recurrent Neural Networks (LSTM RNNs) and the Neural Bag-of- Features (N-BoF) model, to tackle the problem of forecasting the mid price movements. However, these approaches directly used the non-stationary raw Order Bo ok data, making them vulnerable to distribution shifts and harming their ability to generalize on unseen da ta, as we also experimentally demonstrate in this paper. To the best of our knowledge this is the ﬁrst work that proposes a s tructured approach for extracting stationary price features from the Limit Order Book th at can be eﬀectively combined with Deep Learning models. We also provide an extensive evaluation of the proposed methods on a large-scale dataset with more than 4 million events. Also, a powerfu l model, that combines the CNN feature extraction properties with the LSTM’s time series mode lling capabilities, is proposed in order to improve the accuracy of predicting the price movement o f stocks. The proposed combined model is also compared with the previously introduced methods using the proposed stationary price features. 3. Limit Order Book Data In an order-driven ﬁnancial market, a market participant can plac e two types of buy/sell orders. By posting a limit order, a trader promises to buy (sell) a certain amount of an asset at a sp eciﬁed price or less (more). The limit order book compromises on the valid limit o rder that are not executed or cancelled yet. This Limit Order Book (LOB) contains all existing buy and sell orders t hat have been submitted and are awaiting to be executed. A limit order is placed on the queue at a given price level, where, in the case of standard limit orders, the execution priority at a given price level is dictated by the arrival time (ﬁrst in, ﬁrst out). A market order is is an order to immediately buy/sell a certain quantity of the asset at the best available price in the limit order book . If the requested price of a limit order is far from the best prices, it may take a long time for the ex ecution of the limit order, in which case, the order can ﬁnally be cancelled by the trader. The or ders are split between two sides, the bid (buy) and the ask (sell) side. Each side contains the or ders sorted by their price, in descending order for the bid side and ascending order for the ask s ide. Following the notation used in [5], a price grid is deﬁned as {ρ(1)(t), . . . , ρ(n)(t)}, where ρ(j)(t) > ρ(i)(t) for all j > i . The price grid contains all possible prices and each consecutive pric e level is incremented by a single tick from the previous price level. The state of the order book is a continuous-time process v(t) ≡ ( v(1)(t), v(2)(t), . . . , v(n)(t) ) t≥0, where |v(i)(t)| is the number of outstanding limit orders at price ρ(i)(t), 1 ≤ i ≤ n. If v(i)(t) < 0, then there are − v(i)(t) bid orders at price ρ(i)(t); if v(i)(t) > 0, then there are v(i)(t) ask orders at price ρ(i)(t). That is, v(i)(t) > 0 refers to ask orders and v(i)(t) < 0 bid orders. The location of the best ask price in the price grid is deﬁned by: i(1) a (t) = inf {i = 1, . . . , n ; v(i)(t) > 0}, and, correspondingly, the location of the best bid price is deﬁned by : i(1) b (t) = sup {i = 1, . . . , n ; v(i)(t) < 0}. 4 For simplicity, we denote the best ask and bid prices as p(1) a (t) ≡ ρ(i(1) a (t))(t) and p(1) b (t) ≡ ρ ( i(1) b (t) ) (t), respectively. Notice that if there are no ask (bid) orders in the b ook, the ask (bid) price is not deﬁned. More generally, given that the kth best ask and bid prices exist, their locations are denoted as i(k) a (t) ≡ ia(t) +k − 1 and i(k) b (t) ≡ ib(t) +k − 1. The kth best ask and bid prices are correspondingly denoted by p(k) a (t) ≡ ρ(i(k) a (t))(t) and p(k) b (t) ≡ ρ ( i(k) b (t) ) (t), respectively. Correspondingly, we denote the number of outstanding limit orders at the kth best ask and bid levels by ν(k) a (t) ≡ v(i(k) a (t))(t) and ν(k) b (t) ≡ v ( i(k) b (t) ) (t), respectively. Limit Order Book data can be used for a variety of tasks, such as th e estimation of the future price trend or the regression of useful metrics, like the price volat ility. Other possible tasks may include the early prediction of anomalous events, like extreme chang es in price which may indicate manipulation in the markets. These examples are a few of multiple applic ations which can aid investors to protect their capital when unfavourable conditions e xist in the markets or, in other cases, take advantage of them to proﬁt. Most modern methods that utilize ﬁnancial time series data employ su bsampling techniques, such as the well-known OHLC (Open-High-Low-Close) candles [33], in o rder to reduce the number of features of each time interval. Although the OHLC candles prese rve useful information, such as the market trend and movement ranges within the speciﬁed interva ls, it removes possibly impor- tant microstructure information. Since the LOB is constantly rece iving new orders in inconsistent intervals, it is not possible to subsample time-interval features fro m it in a way that preserves all the information it contains. This problem can be addressed, to some extent, using recurrent neural network architectures, such as LSTMs, that are capable of nativ ely handling inputs of varying size. This allows to directly utilize the data fully without using a time interval-b ased subsampling. The LOB data used in this work is provided by Nasdaq Nordic and consis ts of 10 days worth of LOB events for 5 diﬀerent Finnish company stocks, namely Kesko Oy j, Outokumpu Oyj, Sampo, Rautaruukki and Wartsila Oyj [34, 35]. The exact time period of the g athered data begins from the 1st of June 2010 to the 14th of June 2010. Also, note that trading only happens during business days. The data consists of consecutive snapshots of the LOB state aft er each state altering event takes place. This event might be an order insertion, execution or cancellat ion and after it interacts with the LOB and change its state a snapshot of the new state is taken. The LOB depth of the data that are used is 10 for each side of Order Book, which ends up being 1 0 active orders (consisting of price and volume) for each side adding up to a total of 40 values for e ach LOB snapshot. This ends up summing to a total of 4 .5 million snapshots that can be used to train and evaluate the propos ed models. In this work the task we aim to accomplish is the prediction of price mov ements based on current and past changes occurring in the LOB. This problem is formally deﬁne d as follows: Let x(t) ∈ Rq denote the feature vector that describes the condition of the LO B at time t for a speciﬁc stock, where q is the dimensionality of the corresponding feature vector. The dire ction of the mid-price of that stock is deﬁned as lk(t) = {− 1, 0, 1} depending on whether the mid price decreased (-1), remained stationary (0) or increased (1) after k LOB events occurred. The number of orders k is also called prediction horizon. We aim to learn a model fk(x(t)), where fk : Rn → {− 1, 0, 1}, that predicts the direction lk(t) of the mid-price after k orders. In the following Section the aforementioned features and labels, as well as the procedure to calculate them are explained in depth. 5 4. Stationary F eature and Label Extraction The raw LOB data cannot be directly used for any ML task without so me kind of preprocessing. The order volume values can be gathered for all stocks’ LOBs and n ormalized together, since they are expected to follow the same distribution. However, this is not tr ue for price values, since the value of a stock or asset may ﬂuctuate and increase with time to nev er before seen levels. This means that the statistics of the price values can change signiﬁcant ly with time, rendering the price time series non-stationary. Simply normalizing all the price values will not resolve the non-stationa rity, since there will always be unseen data that may change the distribution of values to ranges that are not present in the current data. We present two solutions for this problem, one used in past work where normalization is applied constantly using past available statistics and a new approach to completely convert the price data to stationary values. 4.1. Input Normalization The most common normalization scheme is standardization (z-score ): xnorm = x − ¯x σ¯x , (1) where x is a feature to be normalized, ¯ x is the mean and σ¯x is the standard deviation across all samples. Such normalization is separately applied to the order size va lues and the price values. Using this kind of “global” normalization allows the preservation of the diﬀerent scales between prices of diﬀerent stocks, which we are trying to avoid. The solution presented in [31, 9] is to use z- score to normalize each stock-day worth of data with the means an d standard deviations calculated using previous day’s data of the same stock. This way a major proble m is avoided which is the distribution shift in stock prices, that can be caused by events suc h as stock splits or the large shifts in price that can happen over longer periods of time. Unfortunately this presents another important issue for learning . The diﬀerence between the price values in diﬀerent LOB levels are almost always minuscule. Since all the price levels are normalized using z-score with the same statistics, extracting feat ures at that scale is hard. In this work we propose a novel approach to remedy this problem. Instea d of normalizing the raw values of the LOB depth, we modify the price values to be their percentage diﬀerence to the current mid price of the Order Book. This removes the non-stationarity fro m the price values, makes the feature extraction process easier and signiﬁcantly improves the p erformance of ML models, as it is also experimentally demonstrated in Section 6. To compensate for t he removal of the price value itself we add an extra value to each LOB depth sample which is the perc entage change of the mid price since the previous event. The mid-price is deﬁned as the mid-point between the best bid and the best ask prices at time t by p(1) m (t) = p(1) a (t) + p(1) b (t) 2 . (2) Let p′(i) a (t) = p(i) a (t) pm(t) − 1, (3) p′(i) b (t) = p(i) b (t) pm(t) − 1, (4) 6 and p′ m(t) = pm(t) pm(t − 1) − 1. (5) Equations (3) and (4) serve as statistic features that represen t the proportional diﬀerence between ith price and the mid-price at time t. Equation (2), on the other hand, serves as a dynamic feature that captures the proportional mid-price movement over the time period (that is, it represents asset’s return in terms of mid-prices). We also use the cumulative sum of the sizes of the price levels as a feat ure, also know as Total Depth: ν′(k) a (t) = k∑ i=1 ν(i) a (t) (6) ν′(k) b (t) = k∑ i=1 ν(i) b (t) (7) where ν(i) a (t) is number of outstanding limit order at the ith best ask price level and ν(i) b (t) is number of outstanding limit order at the bth best ask price level. The proposed stationary features are brieﬂy summarized in Table 1 . After constructing these three types of stationary features, each of them is separately n ormalized using standardization (z- score), as described in (1), and concatenated into a single featur e vector xt, where t denotes the time step. The input used for the time-aware models, such as the CNN, LSTM an d CNN-LSTM, is the sequence of vectors X = {x0, x1, . . . ,xw}, where w is the number of total number of events each one represented by a diﬀerent time step input. For the models that need all the input into a single vector, such as the SVM and MLP models, the matrix X is ﬂatten into a single dimension so it can be used as input for these models. 4.2. Labels The proposed models aim to predict the future movements of the mid price. Therefore, the ground truth labels must be appropriately generated to reﬂect th e future mid price movements. Note that the mid price is a “virtual” value and no order can be guaran teed to immediately executed if placed at that exact price. However being able to predict its upwar ds or downwards movement provides a good estimate of the price of the future orders. A set o f discrete choices must be constructed from our data to use as target for our classiﬁcation models. The labels for describing the movement denoted by yt ∈ {− 1, 0, 1}, where t denotes the timestep. Simply using pm(t + k) > p m(t) to determine the upward direction of the mid price would introduce unmanageable amount of noise, since the smallest change would be registered as an upward or downward movement. To remedy this, in our previous wor k [31, 9] the noisy changes of the mid price were ﬁltered by employing two averaging ﬁlters. One ave raging ﬁlter was used on a window of size k of the past values of the mid price and another averaging was applied on a future 7 Table 1: Brief description of each proposed stationary feat ure F eature Description Price level diﬀerence The diﬀerence of each price level to the current mid price, see Eq. (3),(4) p′(i)(t) = p(i)(t) pm(t) − 1 Mid price change The change of the current mid price to the mid price of the previous time step, see Eq. (5) p′ m(t) = pm(t) pm(t − 1) − 1 Depth size cumsum Total depth at each price level, see Eq. (6), (7) ν′(k)(t) = k∑ i=1 ν(i)(t) window k: mb(t) = 1 k + 1 k∑ i=0 pm(t − i) (8) ma(t) = 1 k k∑ i=1 pm(t + i) (9) where pt is the mid price as described in Equation (2). The label lt, that expresses the direction of price movement at time t, is extracted by comparing the previously deﬁned quantities ( mb and ma). However, using the mb values to create labels for the samples, as in [31, 9], is making the problem signiﬁcantly easier and predictable due to the slower adapta tion of the mean ﬁlter values to sudden changes in price. Therefore, in this work we remedy this is sue by replacing mb with the mid price. Therefore, the labels are redeﬁned as: lt =    1, if ma(t) pm(t) > 1 + α − 1, if ma(t) pm(t) < 1 − α 0, otherwise (10) where α is the threshold that determines how signiﬁcant a mid price change ma(t) must be in order to label the movement as upward or downward. Values that d o not satisfy this inequality are considered as insigniﬁcant and are labeled as having no price movemen t, or in other words being “stationary”. The resulting labels present the trend to be predict ed. This process is applied across all time steps of the dataset to produce labels for all the depth sam ples. 8 Input (300 time steps x 42 features) 1D Convolution (10,40) 16 ﬁlters 1D Convolution (10,) 16 ﬁlters 1D Convolution (8,) 32 ﬁlters 1D Convolution (6,) 32 ﬁlters MLP MLP MLP T emporal order of CNN extracted features 1D Convolution (8,) 32 ﬁlters Figure 1: A visual representation of the evaluated CNN model . Each layer includes the ﬁlter input size and the number of ﬁlters used. 5. Machine Learning Models In this section we explain the particular inner workings of the CNN and LSTM models that are used and present how they are combined to form the proposed CNN -LSTM model. The technical details of each model are explained along with the employed optimizatio n procedure. 5.1. Convolutional Neural Networks Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) consist of the sequential application of convolutional and pooling layers usually followed by some fully connected layers, as s hown in Figure 1. Each convolutional layer i is equipped with a set of ﬁlters Wi ∈ RS×D×N that is convolved with an input tensor, where S is the number of used ﬁlters, D is the ﬁlter size, and N is the number of the input channels. The input tensor X ∈ R(B×T ×F ) is consisted by the temporally ordered features described in Section 4.1, where B is the batch size, T is the number of time steps and F is the number of features per time step. In this work we leverage the causal padding introduced in [3] to avoid using future information to produce features for the current time step. Using a series of c onvolutional layers allows for capturing the ﬁne temporal dynamics of the time series as well as co rrelating temporally distant features. After the last convolutional/pooling layer a set of fully co nnected layers are used to classify the input time series. The network’s output expresses the categorical distribution for the three direction labels (upward, downward and stationary), as des cribed in (10), for each time-step. 9 We also employ a temporal batching technique, similar to the one used in LSTMs, to increase the computational eﬃciency and reduce memory requirements of our e xperiments when training with CNNs. Given the above described input tensor X and convolution ﬁlters Wi the last convolution produces a tensor with dimensions ( B, T, S, N ), which in most uses cases is ﬂattened to a tensor of size ( B, T × S × N ) before being fed to a fully connected layer. Instead we retain the temporal ordering by only reducing the tensor to dimension ( B, T, S × N ). An identical fully connected network with a softmax output is applied for each S × N vectors leading to T diﬀerent predictions. Since we are using causal convolutions with ”full” padding, all the con volutional layers produce the same time steps T , hence we do not need to worry about label alignment to the correc t time step. Also the causal convolutions ensure that no information fro m the future leaks to past time step ﬁlters. This technique reduces the receptive ﬁeld of the emplo yed CNN, but this can be easily remedied by using a greater number of convolutional layers and/or a larger ﬁlter size D. 5.2. Long Short Term Memory Recurrent Neural Networks One of the most appropriate Neural Network architectures to ap ply on time series is the Re- current Neural Network (RNN) architecture. Although powerfu l in theory, this type of network suﬀers from the vanishing gradient problem, which makes the gradie nt propagation through a large number of steps impossible. An architecture that was introduced t o solve this problem is the Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) networks [25]. This architecture prot ects its hidden activation from the decay of unrelated inputs and gradients by using gated functio ns between its “transaction” points. The protected hidden activation is the “cell state” which is r egulated by said gates in the following manner: ft = σ(Wxf · x + Whf · ht−1 + bf ) (11) it = σ(Wxi · x + Whi · ht−1 + bi) (12) c′ t = tanh(Whc · ht−1 + Wxc · xt + bc) (13) ct = ft · ct−1 + it · c′ t (14) ot = σ(Woc · ct + Woh · ht−1 + bo) (15) ht = ot · σ(ct) (16) where ft, it and ot are the activations of the input, forget and output gates at time- step t, which control how much of the input and the previous state will be conside red and how much of the cell state will be included in the hidden activation of the network. The pro tected cell activation at time-step t is denoted by ct, whereas ht is the activation that will be given to other components of the model. The matrices Wxf , Whf , Wxi, Whi, Whc, Wxc, Woc, Woh are used to denote the weights connecting each of the activations with the current time st ep inputs and the previous time step activations. 5.3. Combination of models (CNN-LSTM) We also introduce a powerful combination of the two previously desc ribed models. The CNN model is identically applied as described in Section 5.1, using causal con volutions and temporal batching to produce a set of features for each time step. In esse nce the CNN acts as the feature extractor of the LOB depth time series, which produces a new time s eries of features with the same length as the original one, with each of them having time steps corre sponding to one another. 10 An LSTM layer is then applied on the time series produced by the CNN, a nd in turn produces a label for each time step. This works in a very similar way to the fully co nnected layer described in 5.1 for temporal batching, but instead of the Fully Connected laye r the LSTM allows the model to incorporate the features from past steps. The model archite cture is visualized in Figure 2. 5.4. Optimization The parameters of the models are learned by minimizing the categoric al cross entropy loss deﬁned as: L(W) = − L∑ i=1 yi · log ˆyi, (17) where L is the number of diﬀerent labels and the notation W is used to refer to the parameters of the models. The ground truth vector is denoted by y, while ˆy is the predicted label distribution. The loss is summed over all samples in each batch. Due to the unavoida ble class imbalance of this type of dataset, a weighted loss is employed to improve the mean rec all and precision across all classes: L(W) = − L∑ i=1 cyi · yi · log ˆyi, (18) where cyi is the assigned weight for the class of yi. The individual weight ci assigned to each class i is calculated as: ci = |D| n · |Di| , (19) where |D| is the total number of samples in our dataset D, n is the total number of classes (which in our case is 3) and Di is set of samples from our dataset that have been labeled to belong in class i. The most commonly used method to minimize the loss function deﬁned in (18) and learn the parameters W of the model is gradient descent [36]: W′ = W − η · ∂L ∂W (20) where W′ are the parameters of the model after each gradient descent st ep and η is the learning rate. In this work we utilize the RMSProp optimizer [37], which is an ada ptive learning rate method and has been shown to improve the training time and performance of DL models. The LSTM, CNN and CNN-LSTM models along with all the training algorith ms were developed using Keras [38], which is a framework built on top of the Tensorﬂow libr ary [39]. 6. Experimental Evaluation All the models were tested for step sizes k = 10 , 50, 100, and 200 in (9), where the α value for each was set at 2 × 10−5, 9 × 10−5, 3 × 10−4 and 3 .5 × 10−4 respectively. The parameter α was chosen in conjunction with the future horizon with the aim to have re latively balanced distribution of labels across classes. In a real trading scenario it is not possible t o have a proﬁtable strategy that creates as many trade signals as “no-trade” signals, becaus e it would accumulate enormous commission costs. For that reason α is selected with the aim to get a logical ratio of about 20% long, 20% short and 60% stationary labels. The eﬀect of varying the para meter α on the class distribution 11 Convolution Convolution Predictions Feature Time Series Convolution LSTM Figure 2: CNN-LSTM model Table 2: Example of sample distribution across classes depe nding on α for prediction horizon k = 100 α Down Stationary Up 1.0 × 10−5 0.39 0.17 0.45 2.0 × 10−5 0.38 0.19 0.43 5.0 × 10−5 0.35 0.25 0.41 1.0 × 10−4 0.30 0.33 0.36 2.0 × 10−4 0.23 0.49 0.28 3.0 × 10−4 0.18 0.60 0.22 3.5 × 10−4 0.15 0.66 0.19 of labels is shown in Table 2. Note that increasing the α allows for reducing the number of trade signals which should be changed depending on the actual commission a nd slippage costs that are expected to occur. We tested the CNN and LSTM models using the raw features and the p roposed stationary features separately and compared the results. The architectur e of the three models that were tested is described bellow. The proposed CNN model consists of the following sequential layers : 1. 1D Convolution with 16 ﬁlters of size (10 , 42) 2. 1D Convolution with 16 ﬁlters of size (10 , ) 3. 1D Convolution with 32 ﬁlters of size (8 , ) 4. 1D Convolution with 32 ﬁlters of size (6 , ) 5. 1D Convolution with 32 ﬁlters of size (4 , ) 6. Fully connected layer with 32 neurons 7. Fully connected layer with 3 neurons The activation function used for all the convolutional and fully conn ected layer of the CNN is the Parametric Rectifying Linear Unit (PRELU) [40]. The last layer uses th e softmax function for the 12 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 LSTM step 0.30 0.32 0.34Cost Train Test Figure 3: Mean cost per recurrent step of the LSTM network prediction of the probability distribution between the diﬀerent class es. All the convolutional layers are followed by a Batch Normalization (BN) layer after them. The LSTM network uses 32 hidden neurons followed by a feed-forwa rd layer with 64 neurons using Dropout and PRELU as activation function. Experimentally we f ound out that the hid- den layer of the LSTM should contain 64 or less hidden neurons to avo id over-ﬁtting the model. Experimenting with higher number of hidden neurons would be feasible if the dataset was even larger. Finally the CNN-LSTM model applies the convolutional feature extra ction layers on the input and then feeds them in the correct temporal order to an LSTM mod el. The CNN component is comprised of the following layers: 1. 1D Convolution with 16 ﬁlters of size (5 , 42) 2. 1D Convolution with 16 ﬁlters of size (5 , ) 3. 1D Convolution with 32 ﬁlters of size (5 , ) 4. 1D Convolution with 32 ﬁlters of size (5 , ) Note that the receptive ﬁeld of each convolutional ﬁlter in the CNN m odule is smaller that the standalone CNN, since the LSTM can capture most of the informatio n from past time steps. The LSTM module has the same exact architecture as the standalone LS TM. A visual representation of this CNN-LSTM model is shown in Figure 2. Likewise, PRELU is the act ivation function used for the CNN and the fully connected layers, while the softmax funct ion is used for the output layer of the network to predict the probability distribution of the classes . One recurring eﬀect we observe when training LSTM networks on LO B data is that for the ﬁrst steps of observation the predictions yi yield a bigger cross entropy cost, meaning worse performance in our metrics. We run a set of experiments where the LSTM was train ed for all the steps of the input windows T . The resulting mean cost per time step can be observed in Figure 3. A s a result, trying to predict the price movement using insuﬃcient past informat ion is not possible and should be avoided since it leads to noisy gradients. To avoid this, a “burn-in” input is initially used to build its initial perception of the market before actually making corre ct decisions. In essence the ﬁrst “burn-in” steps of the input are skipped, by not allowing any gr adient to alter our model until after the 100th time step. We also apply the same method to the CNN -LSTM model. 13 Table 3: Experimental results for diﬀerent prediction hori zons k. The values that are reported are the mean of each metric for the last 20 training epochs. F eature Type Model Mean Recall Mean Precision Mean F1 Cohen’s κ Prediction Horizon k = 10 Raw V alues SVM 0.35 0.43 0.33 0.04 MLP 0.34 0.34 0.09 0.00 CNN 0.51 0.42 0.38 0.14 LSTM 0.49 0.41 0.35 0.12 Stationary F eatures SVM 0.33 0.46 0.30 0.011 MLP 0.34 0.35 0.09 0.00 CNN 0.54 0.44 0.43 0.19 LSTM 0.55 0.45 0.42 0.18 CNNLSTM 0.56 0.45 0.44 0.21 Prediction Horizon k = 50 Raw V alues SVM 0.35 0.41 0.32 0.03 MLP 0.41 0.38 0.21 0.04 CNN 0.50 0.42 0.37 0.13 LSTM 0.46 0.40 0.34 0.10 Stationary F eatures SVM 0.39 0.41 0.38 0.09 MLP 0.49 0.43 0.38 0.14 CNN 0.55 0.45 0.43 0.20 LSTM 0.56 0.46 0.44 0.21 CNNLSTM 0.56 0.47 0.47 0.24 Prediction Horizon k = 100 Raw V alues SVM 0.35 0.46 0.33 0.05 MLP 0.45 0.39 0.26 0.06 CNN 0.49 0.42 0.37 0.12 LSTM 0.45 0.39 0.34 0.09 Stationary F eatures SVM 0.36 0.46 0.35 0.07 MLP 0.50 0.43 0.39 0.14 CNN 0.54 0.46 0.44 0.21 LSTM 0.56 0.46 0.44 0.20 CNNLSTM 0.55 0.47 0.48 0.24 Prediction Horizon k = 200 Raw V alues SVM 0.35 0.44 0.31 0.04 MLP 0.44 0.40 0.32 0.08 CNN 0.47 0.43 0.39 0.14 LSTM 0.42 0.39 0.36 0.08 Stationary F eatures SVM 0.38 0.46 0.36 0.10 MLP 0.49 0.45 0.42 0.17 CNN 0.51 0.47 0.45 0.20 LSTM 0.52 0.47 0.46 0.22 CNNLSTM 0.53 0.48 0.49 0.25 14 0 20 40 60 80 100 Training Epoch 0.325 0.350 0.375 0.400 0.425 0.450 0.475 0.500F1 0 20 40 60 80 100 Training Epoch 0.10 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.20 0.22 0.24 0.26Cohen's κ LSTM Train LSTM Test MLP Train MLP Test CNN Train CNN Test CNNLSTM Train CNNLSTM Test Figure 4: F1 and Cohen’s κ metrics during training for prediction horizon k = 100. Plots are smoothed with a mean ﬁlter with window=3 to reduce ﬂuctuations. For training the models, the dataset is split as follows. The ﬁrst 7 day s of each stock are used to train the models, while the ﬁnal 3 days are used as test data. The experiments were conducted for 4 diﬀerent prediction horizons k, as deﬁned in (9) and (10). Performance is measured using Cohen’s kappa [41], which is used to ev aluate the concordance between sets of given answers, taking into consideration the poss ibility of random agreements hap- pening. The mean recall, mean precision and mean F1 score between a ll 3 classes is also reported. Recall is the number of true positives samples divided by the sum of tr ue positives and false nega- tives, while precision is the number of true positive divided by the sum o f true positives and false positives. F1 score is the harmonic mean of the precision and recall m etrics. The results of the experiments are shown in Table 3. The results are compared for the models trained on the raw price features with the ones trained using the ex tracted stationary features. The results conﬁrm that extracting stationary features from the da ta signiﬁcantly improve performance of Deep Learning models such as CNNs and LSTMs. We also trained a Linear SVM model and a simple MLP model and compare d them to the DL models. The SVM model was trained using Stochastic Gradient Desce nt since the size of the dataset is too large to use a regular Quadratic Programming solver. The SVM m odel implementation is provided by the sklearn library [42]. The MLP model consists of three fully connected layers with sizes 128, 64, 32, and PRELU as activations for each layers. Dropo ut is also used to avoid overﬁtting and the softmax activation function was used in the last layer. Since both the SVM and the MLP models cannot iterate over timestep s to gain the same amount of information as the CNN and LSTM-based models, a window of 50 dep th events is used and is ﬂattened into a single sample. This process is applied in a rolling fashion f or all the dataset to generate a dataset upon which the two models can be trained. One im portant note is the training ﬂuctuations that are observed in Figure 4, which are caused by the great class imbalance. Similar issues where observed in initial experiments with CNN and LSTM models but using the weighted loss described in 5.4 the ﬂuctuations subsided. The proposed stationary price features signiﬁcantly outperform the raw price features for all the tested models. This can be attributed to a great extent to the sta tionary nature of the proposed features. The employed price diﬀerences provide an intrinsically sta tionary and normalized price measure that can be directly used. This is in contrast with the raw pr ice values that requires careful normalization to ensure that their values remain into a reas onable range and suﬀer for signiﬁcantly non-stationarity issues when the price increases to lev els not seen before. By converting 15 the actual prices to the their diﬀerence to the mid price and normaliz e that, this important feature is exaggerated to avoid being suppressed by the much larger price m ovements through time. The proposed combination model CNN-LSTM also outperforms its separ ated individual component models as shown in Figure 4 and Table 3 showing that it can better hand le the LOB data and use them to take advantage of the microstructure existing within the d ata to produce more accurate predictions. 7. Conclusion In this paper we proposed a novel method for extracting stationa ry features from raw LOB data, suitable for use with diﬀerent DL models. Using diﬀerent ML mod els, i.e., SVMs, MLPs, CNNs and LSTMs, it was experimentally demonstrated that the prop osed features signiﬁcantly outperform the raw price features. The proposed stationary fe atures achieve this by making the diﬀerence between the prices in the LOB depth the main metric instea d of the price itself, which usually ﬂuctuates much more through time than the price level within the LOB. A novel combined CNN-LSTM model was also proposed for time series predictions and it was demonstrated that exhibits more stable behaviour and leads to better results that the CNN and LSTM models. There are several interesting future research directions. As wit h all the DL application, more data would enable the use of bigger models that would not be at risk of being overtrained as it was observed in this work. An RNN-type of network could be also use d to perform a form of “intelligent” r-sampling extracting useful features from a speciﬁc and limited time-interval of depth events, which would avoid losing information and allow for the later mod els produce prediction for a certain time period and not for a number of following events. Anoth er important addition would be an attention mechanism [21], [43], which would allow for the better ob servation of the features by the network allowing it to ignore noisy parts of the data and use on ly the relevant information. Acknowledgment The research leading to these results has received funding from th e H2020 Project BigData- Finance MSCA-ITN-ETN 675044 (http://bigdataﬁnance.eu), Train ing for Big Data in Financial Research and Risk Management. References [1] H. Deng, L. Zhang, X. Shu, Feature memory-based deep recur rent neural network for language modeling, Applied Soft Computing 68 (2018) 432–446. [2] M. Larsson, Y. Zhang, F. Kahl, Robust abdominal organ segmen tation using regional convo- lutional neural networks, Applied Soft Computing. [3] A. Van Den Oord, S. Dieleman, H. Zen, K. Simonyan, O. Vinyals, A. G raves, N. Kalchbren- ner, A. Senior, K. Kavukcuoglu, Wavenet: A generative model for raw audio, arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03499. [4] F. Black, M. Scholes, The pricing of options and corporate liabilities , Journal of Political Economy 81 (3) (1973) 637–654. 16 [5] R. Cont, S. Stoikov, R. Talreja, A stochastic model for order b ook dynamics, Operations research 58 (3) (2010) 549–563. [6] F. M. Bandi, R. Ren` o, Price and volatility co-jumps, Journal of F inancial Economics 119 (1) (2016) 107–146. [7] Y. A ¨ ıt-Sahalia, P. A. Mykland, Estimating volatility in the presence of market microstructure noise: A review of the theory and practical considerations, in: Han dbook of ﬁnancial time series, Springer, 2009, pp. 577–598. [8] A. N. Kercheval, Y. Zhang, Modelling high-frequency limit order bo ok dynamics with support vector machines, Quantitative Finance 15 (8) (2015) 1315–1329. [9] A. Tsantekidis, N. Passalis, A. Tefas, J. Kanniainen, M. Gabbouj , A. Iosiﬁdis, Using deep learning to detect price change indications in ﬁnancial markets, in: P roceedings of the European Signal Processing Conference, 2017, pp. 2511–2515. [10] V. Vapnik, I. Guyon, T. Hastie, Support vector machines, Mac h. Learn 20 (3) (1995) 273–297. [11] A. Kazem, E. Shariﬁ, F. K. Hussain, M. Saberi, O. K. Hussain, Su pport vector regression with chaos-based ﬁreﬂy algorithm for stock market price forecasting , Applied soft computing 13 (2) (2013) 947–958. [12] T.-J. Hsieh, H.-F. Hsiao, W.-C. Yeh, Forecasting stock markets using wavelet transforms and recurrent neural networks: An integrated system based on art iﬁcial bee colony algorithm, Applied soft computing 11 (2) (2011) 2510–2525. [13] L. Lei, Wavelet neural network prediction method of stock pric e trend based on rough set attribute reduction, Applied Soft Computing 62 (2018) 923–932. [14] K. Michell, et al., A stock market risk forecasting model through integration of switching regime, anﬁs and garch techniques, Applied Soft Computing 67 (201 8) 106–116. [15] C.-F. Huang, A hybrid stock selection model using genetic algorit hms and support vector regression, Applied Soft Computing 12 (2) (2012) 807–818. [16] S. Galeshchuk, Neural networks performance in exchange ra te prediction, Neurocomputing 172 (2016) 446–452. [17] J. Heaton, N. Polson, J. Witte, Deep portfolio theory, arXiv pr eprint arXiv:1605.07230. [18] L. Takeuchi, Y.-Y. A. Lee, Applying deep learning to enhance mom entum trading strategies in stocks. [19] R. Xiong, E. P. Nichols, Y. Shen, Deep learning stock volatility with google domestic trends, arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.04916. [20] A. Graves, A.-r. Mohamed, G. Hinton, Speech recognition with d eep recurrent neural net- works, in: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, 2013, pp. 6645–6649. 17 [21] K. Xu, J. Ba, R. Kiros, K. Cho, A. C. Courville, R. Salakhutdinov, R. S. Zemel, Y. Bengio, Show, attend and tell: Neural image caption generation with visual a ttention., in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, Vol. 14, 20 15, pp. 77–81. [22] J. Mao, W. Xu, Y. Yang, J. Wang, Z. Huang, A. Yuille, Deep captio ning with multimodal recurrent neural networks (m-rnn), arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6 632. [23] Y. Zhu, O. Groth, M. Bernstein, L. Fei-Fei, Visual7w: Grounded question answering in images, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pat tern Recognition, 2016, pp. 4995–5004. [24] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, et al., Convolutional networks for images, speech, and time series, The handbook of brain theory and neural networks 3361 (10) (1995) 1995. [25] S. Hochreiter, J. Schmidhuber, Long short-term memory, Ne ural Computation 9 (8) (1997) 1735–1780. [26] D.-x. Niu, H.-f. Shi, D. D. Wu, Short-term load forecasting using bayesian neural networks learned by hybrid monte carlo algorithm, Applied Soft Computing 12 (6 ) (2012) 1822–1827. [27] L. Xi, H. Muzhou, M. H. Lee, J. Li, D. Wei, H. Hai, Y. Wu, A new cons tructive neural network method for noise processing and its application on stock ma rket prediction, Applied Soft Computing 15 (2014) 57–66. [28] D. T. Tran, A. Iosiﬁdis, J. Kanniainen, M. Gabbouj, Temporal a ttention augmented bilinear network for ﬁnancial time-series data analysis, arXiv preprint arX iv:1712.00975. [29] A. Ntakaris, J. Kanniainen, M. Gabbouj, A. Iosiﬁdis, Mid-price p rediction based on machine learning methods with technical and quantitative indicators. [30] D. T. Tran, M. Magris, J. Kanniainen, M. Gabbouj, A. Iosiﬁdis, T ensor representation in high- frequency ﬁnancial data for price change prediction, in: Computa tional Intelligence (SSCI), 2017 IEEE Symposium Series on, IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–7. [31] A. Tsantekidis, N. Passalis, A. Tefas, J. Kanniainen, M. Gabbou j, A. Iosiﬁdis, Forecasting stock prices from the limit order book using convolutional neural ne tworks, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Business Informatics, Vol. 1, 2017, pp. 7 –12. [32] N. Passalis, A. Tsantekidis, A. Tefas, J. Kanniainen, M. Gabbou j, A. Iosiﬁdis, Time-series classiﬁcation using neural bag-of-features, in: Proceedings of t he European Signal Processing Conference, 2017, pp. 301–305. [33] D. Yang, Q. Zhang, Drift-independent volatility estimation base d on high, low, open, and close prices, The Journal of Business 73 (3) (2000) 477–492. [34] A. Ntakaris, M. Magris, J. Kanniainen, M. Gabbouj, A. Iosiﬁdis, Benchmark dataset for mid- price prediction of limit order book data, arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03 233. [35] M. Siikanen, J. Kanniainen, A. Luoma, What drives the sensitivity of limit order books to company announcement arrivals?, Economics Letters 159 (2017) 65–68. 18 [36] P. J. Werbos, Backpropagation through time: what it does and how to do it, Proceedings of the IEEE 78 (10) (1990) 1550–1560. [37] T. Tieleman, G. Hinton, Lecture 6.5-rmsprop: Divide the gradien t by a running average of its recent magnitude, COURSERA: Neural networks for machine learn ing 4 (2) (2012) 26–31. [38] F. Chollet, et al., Keras, https://github.com/keras-team/keras (2015). [39] M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. B. et at., TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous syst ems, software available from tensorﬂow.org (2015). URL https://www.tensorflow.org/ [40] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Delving deep into rectiﬁers: Su rpassing human-level per- formance on imagenet classiﬁcation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE In ternational Conference on Computer Vision, 2015, pp. 1026–1034. [41] J. Cohen, A coeﬃcient of agreement for nominal scales, Educa tional and Psychological Mea- surement 20 (1) (1960) 37–46. [42] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirio n, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, et al., Scikit-learn: Machin e learning in python, Journal of Machine Learning Research 12 (Oct) (2011) 2825–2830. [43] K. Cho, A. Courville, Y. Bengio, Describing multimedia content usin g attention-based encoder- decoder networks, IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 17 (11) (2015 ) 1875–1886. 19