Optimal trading using signals Hadrien De March∗ Charles-Albert Lehalle† November 12, 2018 Abstract In this paper we propose a mathematical framework to address the uncertainty emerging when the designer of a trading algorithm uses a threshold on a signal as a control. We rely on a theorem by Benveniste and Priouret to deduce our Inventory Asymptotic Behaviour (IAB) Theorem giving the full distribution of the inventory at any point in time for a well formulated time continuous version of the trading algorithm. Since this is the ﬁrst time a paper proposes to address the uncertainty linked to the use of a threshold on a signal for trading, we give some structural elements about the kind of signals that are using in execution. Then we show how to control this uncertainty for a given cost function. There is no closed form solution to this control, hence we propose several approximation schemes and compare their performances. Moreover, we explain how to apply the IAB Theorem to any trading algorithm driven by a trading speed. It is not needed to control the uncertainty due to the thresholding of a signal to exploit the IAB Theorem; it can be applied ex-post to any traditional trading algorithm. Key words. Optimal trading, short term signal, stochastic control. Acknowledgements. Authors thank Mihail Vladkov, Robert Almgren, Reza Gholizadeh, Isaac Carruthers, and Shankar Narayanan for very fruitful discussions about the modelling of a trading algorithm using a threshold on a signal. 1 Introduction With fragmentation and electroniﬁcation of markets, the trading process needs to be automated. Trading algorithms can be used to buy or sell a large amount of shares, to route across diﬀerent trading venue taking proﬁt of the most liquid ones, or to make the markets (see [19] for more ∗CMAP, École Polytechnique, hadrien.de-march@polytechnique.org. †Capital Fund Management (Paris) and Imperial College (London). 1 arXiv:1811.03718v1 [q-fin.TR] 8 Nov 2018 details). Academic literature addressed optimal trading from diﬀerent angles the last twenty years, but few attention has been paid to the use of “signals” during the trading process. Focus has been made on risk management, since it is one of the usual stakes of mathematical ﬁnance. The optimal trading (or optimal liquidation) literature structured itself in the late nineties around two seminal papers:Optimal control of execution costs[7], focussed on how to minimize the market impact potentially at the portfolio level, taking proﬁt of the correlations between its components; andOptimal execution of portfolio transactions[2], focussed on the balance between trading slow (to minimize the market impact) and trading fast (to obtain a price close to the one initiated the decision), in a mean-variance framework close to Markowitz’ one [22]. Both established that as far as you are not concerned by high frequency trading, thetrading speed is an adequate control. The literature then evolved towards more sophisticated control of the same components mixed more complex ways. The market impact [4] and the price variations during the liquidation [1] kept the ﬁrst roles. A notable exception is the extension of optimal trading to market making. Following an adaptation of [15] to modern stochastic control by [3], [14] and [5] simultaneously proposed solutions for diﬀerent criteria, i.e. adding the intensity of market orders consuming liquidity as a state variable, and using a “posting price” and not thetrading speedas control. In the optimal market making literature, the goal is not to liquidate a position (i.e. a “metaorder”), but to provide liquidity on both sides of the market (the bid and ask sides), in the hope to earn the bid-ask spread and to not suﬀer losses because of adverse selection (usually modeled by a price trend) or too large unexpected variations of the midprice. Coming back to optimal trading: statistical learning methods with diﬀerent controls like the fragmentation of the metaorder have been proposed to address faster time scale, like in [23] or [17]. The common point between existing papers in optimal trading before 2015 is they do not make assumptions on the knowledge the optimal trader can have on the future price moves. In practice, it is known short term traders usesignals to anticipate the value of the price in few minutes or seconds, using them to make the decision to trade now or to wait few seconds or minutes more. Recent academic papers started to introduce such signals, like [21] and [10]. In the ﬁrst paper authors proposed a predictive signal of future midprice and provide a detailed analysis and modeling of this signal. In the second paper, authors put forward a very natural and elegant way to link their signal to permanent market impact. Thanks to this slight modiﬁcation of the original Almgren and Chriss framework, they can use orderﬂow as a signal. Nevertheless the orderﬂow is a very speciﬁc signal. They do not provide a generic way to use any predictor to adjust the trading speed. It may be worthwhile to underline the initial paper of Bertimas and Lo [7] included an AR(1) signal, generating a linear market impact. In the case of a very simple utility function and speciﬁc forms of market impact and signal dynamics, this seminal paper can be seen as a special case of the Cartea and Jaimungal framework. 2 The goal of our paper is to provide a way to include signals in optimal trading strategies at a high frequency, using a threshold on this signal as a control: the trader sends an order if and only if the signal is above this chosen threshold. This is very close to some industrial practices. Moreover, a new type of uncertainty appears when you use such a threshold because it does not guarantee to trade. Setting a threshold at a levelϑppq corresponding to the quantile of levelp of the signal does only guarantee that the probability to obtain a transaction is1´p. We believe it is crucial since it is the most natural way to render the idea of thesaturation of a signal, used in practice by all traders: it is not possible to exploit any signal as strongly as one wants. If the trader targets only the highest quantile of the signal (i.e. the best opportunities), he will have only few occasions to trade, and hence he will probably not ﬁnish his order on time. As a consequence, traders having largest quantities to trade, naturally take less proﬁt of their signal per trade. In short: the more a trader can aﬀord to be opportunistic, the more free he is to choose high quantile, and hence the best price he will obtain at the end. Another speciﬁcity of this paper is we model the price dynamics in a discrete time framework (the time can be seen as event time or physical time without great change) to be as realistic as possible. One of the key points of our work is to provide a natural approximation of the dynamics in continuous time, allowing to solve it an elegant way while controlling the associated approximation error. Beside, going back to risk control, we show how our approach can provide to any existing trading strategy using thresholds on a signal a way to approximate the uncertainty due to he randomness of the realized trading speed. Even once a strategy is ﬁxed using any arbitrary criterion, our approximation can provide uncertainty bounds on the traded quantities at any point in time. Our work largely relies on stochastic approximation results of [6]. The ﬁrst section of this paper describe the kind of trading signal we have in mind, providing numerical examples. Section two starts with the discrete formulation of a trading algorithm using a signal, expresses our Inventory Asymptotic Behaviour Theorem, and shows its implication on the asymptotic dynamics of a trading algorithm. Section three is dedicated to solving these asymptotic problem for a speciﬁc utility function and Section four applies the IAB Theorem to the soltion of the well-know Almgren-Chriss optimal trading problem. 1.1 Modeling optimal trading in automated markets In this paper we propose a model at a small time scale (i.e. the one of orderbook dynamics), allowing to design optimal trading strategies using signals. First of all, one has to note that, at the scale of orderbook dynamics, the time is discrete and event-driven. Following the literature (like [11] or [13]), we will adopt an event driven model, were an “event” can be a trade, or the insertion, the modiﬁcation or the cancellation of an order at a “meaningful distance” of the mid-price (being deﬁned as the middle between the best ask and the best bid price). The exposed framework will not address a collection 3 of electronic orderbooks independently (as in [18]), but will trade in front of one aggregated liquidity pool. This paper focuses on the optimal behaviour of one large trader. Our methodology can address the cases of a market maker, a proprietary trader or a broker executing the large order of an institutional investor. To keep the notations and the explanations simple, we will treat the case of a broker trading algorithm. In such a case the contract is straightforward: buy (or sell) Q˚ shares fromt“ 0 to t“T at the best possible price. If it is a buy order, the trader is not allowed to sell, and if it is a sell order, he is not allowed to buy. The simplest way to express optimal trading in our framework is as follow: •The trading takes place between time 0 and timeT; •During this time interval, the trader will "wake-up"N times (the last one being atT); •Time steps (i.e. wake-ups) are indexed byn, it can be any unit of time (physical time or event time); •At each stepnPr| 0,N|s, the price of the stock isPn, the inventory of the trader has a size Qn, and the money accumulated by the trader isMn; •Each time the trader wakes up, he can read a signalSn and use it to decide to trade or not immediately at pricePn, the “expected future price change” is monotonous inS. It means the largestS, the more chance to see a price increase in a short future (i.e. before the next weak up); A natural way for the trader to take a decision at stepn is to buy only if the signal is larger than a threshold, and to sell when it is lower than another threshold. The dynamics of the system hence is given by $ ’& ’% Pn`1 “ Pn` ∆Pn`1 Qn`1 “ Qn` 1Snąθn Mn`1 “ Mn´ 1Snąθn¨Pn. (1.1) WhereXn“pPn,Qn,Mnq is the state,θn is athreshold, chosen just beforet“n, to be applied to a signalS. We simplify the notation here. We useSnąθn to express that the threshold θn chosen attn is crossed aftertn and beforetn`1. Remember thattn are wake-up times of around few seconds to few minutes; as a consequence multiple orderbook events occur between two wake-ups. The trader targets to ﬁnd aθn that optimizes a utility function of the ﬁnal money and remaining quantity :upMN,QNq. He basically wants to maximize the money while having QN as close as possible to a terminal targetQ˚. The control used by the trader to reach this optimum is the sequence of thresholdsθn. 1.2 The signal Here we will consider a short term predictive signal. As an example we will use the signal studied in [21], i.e. the quantity at the best bid divided by the sum of the quantities at the 4 best bid and asks. As underlined in the paper, this signal has more predictive power when the tick islarge, in the sense the quantities at the best bid and ask describe better the short term liquidity in the orderbook on large ticks1. For small tick instrument, it is probably needed to aggregate smartly several limits to obtain the same predictive power. Figure 1: The "imbalance signal" for General Electric (left, using 100 million of observations) and HSBC (right, using 590 million of observations). Top: the expected price change after 20 seconds; Bottom: the densityf of the imbalances values (sampled every update of ﬁrst bid and ask price or quantity). We computed the signal of this paper using Capital Fund Management tick-by-tick datasets. Figure 1 shows the relation between the expected price move in the future 20 seconds and the imbalance is increasing. Sampled every update of the ﬁrst bid and ask (quantity or price), the density is rather U-shaped. Major trading venues available are used and aggregated2. To make it simple we will consider that this signalSn is i.i.d. and that its interaction with the price has a correlation with the future price change∆Pn`1. As we will see later, an essential notion for solving this optimal trading problem is the gain associated to a quantile of levelp: gppq“ Ep∆Pn`1¨ 1Sněϑppqq Note that the quantilep is the probability to obtain a trade when setting the threshold to ϑppq. By deﬁnition ofp and ϑp¨q, we havep“ PpSněϑppqq. Finally, we will assume that the signal Sn is a well designed signal, which means that the absolute gainGppq“ E ` ∆Pn`1|Sně ϑppq ˘ “gppq{p is an increasing function. Figure 2 shows the shape of the diﬀerent functions linked to the imbalance on real data. One can read on the bottom charts: the largest thresholdϑppq, the better expected price move, 1An instrument is usually considered aslarge tickwhen its average bid-ask spread is lower than 1.2 ticks [16]. 2We refer to ﬁdessa’sfragulator to select the venues: Nyse, BATS, NASDAQ and Nyse Arca for these two stocks. 5 Figure 2: The functiongppq and Θppq for the "imbalance signal" on General Electric (left) and HSBC (right). but the lowerp. This is asaturation mechanism: the more the trader wants to exploit the signal, the less attractive opportunities he has to catch, progressively killing the eﬃciency of his strategy. 2 Trading with a threshold on a signal 2.1 Discrete formulation of the problem and the associated un- certainty We study the following problem: a broker wants to buy a given quantityQ˚ of shares (or contracts). To do that, he will haveN opportunities to buy shares during the day (or a given period of time). For each opportunityn from 0 to N, we introduce the following quantities: Qn is the number of shares already bought,Pn is the stock price, andMn is the bank account (i.e. the money left). At each time we also observe a short term signalSn that has a predictive power on the evolution of the price betweenn and n` 1. Our control strategy will be to buy 6 one share3 each timeSn is higher than a thresholdθn that we will determine4. We recall (1.1): Pn`1´Pn “ ∆Pn`1 Qn`1´Qn “ 1Sněθn Mn`1´Mn “ ´ 1SněθnPn. We add some assumptions. Assumption 2.1. (i) The signals and price moves vectorpSn, ∆Pn`1q is i.i.d. (ii) The mapθÞÝÑ Er∆Pn`1|Sněθs is increasing, andpPtqt is martingale. (iii) The mapθÞÝÑ PrSněθs is a continuous bijectionIÝÑr0, 1s for IĂ R. We denoteϑits reciprocal map. Thankstothisassumption, wemaydeﬁnefor pPr 0, 1sthegainmap gppq :“ Er1Sněϑppq∆Pn`1s. Indeed, this map is independent ofn thanks to Assumption 2.1 (i). Furthermore,g is concave by (iii) andgp0q“ gp1q“ 0 by (ii). Indeed,gp0q :“ Er1H∆Pn`1s“ 0, gp1q :“ Er∆Pn`1s“ 0, and gppq´gpp0q p´p0 “ E ” 1∆Pn`1Prϑpp0q,ϑppqs∆Pn`1 ı p´p0 . Then gppq´gpp0q p´p0 Prϑpp0q,ϑppqs, and therefore by (iii) g is diﬀerentiable atp and g1ppq“ ϑppq. The concavity ofg is a consequence of the fact thatϑ is decreasing. The problem we study in this paper is the optimal policyθn to apply in order to maximize the expectation ofMN while executing theQ˚ orders: max pθnq0ďnďN´1,QN“Q˚ ErMNs. (2.2) We may reformulate this problem to show thatQn andn are the only important state variables. Let introduce for alln, Xn :“ Mn`pQ˚´QnqPn, and deﬁne the probabilities of buying pn :“θ´1pθnq. We have the fundamental evolution equation Xn`1´Xn“ 1Sněθn∆Pn`1`pQ˚´Qnq∆Pn`1. (2.3) The expectation of (2.3) gives that ErXn`1´Xn|Fns “gppnq. Then we have ErXNs “ X0` E ”řN´1 n“0 gppnq ı , and therefore the problem (2.2) may be rewritten max pθnq0ďnďN´1,QN“Q˚ ErMNs “ max ppnq0ďnďN´1,QN“Q˚ ErXNs “ X0` max ppnq0ďnďN´1,QN“Q˚ E «N´1ÿ n“0 gppnq ﬀ . (2.4) We observe in particular that for this optimization problem, the quantityQn and the time are the only important state variables. 3We take a unit of one share for each opportunity, but it can be any number of shares, even random, as far as it is not correlated with the signal nor the price, without changing the result. If the number of shares is correlated with the signal or the price (it can be the case), then other terms will appear in the equations. 4The reader can consider another way to use a signal: maintain one limit order in the book except if the signal is lower than a threshold. The formula will look the same once an adequate change of variable will have been done. 7 2.2 The continuous limit In order to get an HJB control equation, it is natural to pass to the continuous time limit. Notice that ErQn`1´Qns“ pn. By adaptativeness of the optimal control and by linearity, we may look for optimal controls under the shapepn“FNpn,Qnqfor someFN :t0,...,N´1uˆt0,...,Q˚uÝÑ r0, 1s. In order to pass to the limit, we need another assumption. Assumption 2.2 (A priori shape of the execution probability). We assume thatFN stems from a macroscopic smooth map¯F P C0,1` r0,Tsˆr 0, ¯Q˚s,r0, 1s ˘ : FNpn,Qq“ ¯F ˆnT N , Q N ˙ `op1{ ? Nq, (2.5) when N goes to inﬁnity, where theo is in probability, uniformly on all 0 ď n ď N, and ¯Q˚ :“ Q˚ N . A "noise" term on the quantity will appear in the following results, it will be noted with a bar, see equality (2.6). Note that after these deﬁnitions: •we have a way to model an imperfect knowledge on the signal realizations, •we have a way to express the model whenN is large. We can now provide the asymptotpic dynamics of the inventory. Theorem 2.3 (Inventory Asymptotic Behaviour (IAB)). Under Assumption 2.2, the size of the inventoryQn at any stepn given by Qn“N ¯QnT N `op ? Nq (2.6) Wherep ¯Qtq0ďtďT is solution of the stochastic diﬀerential equation $ & % d ¯Qt “ ¯Fpt, ¯Qtqdt T ` b ¯Fp1´ ¯Fq N pt, ¯QtqdWt? T ¯Q0 “ 0. (2.7) Proof. This is a straightforward application of the diﬀerential equation theorem (Theorem 1 of Chapter 3 in [6], see Appendix A). We just need to note∆Qn`1 is bounded, that its expectation is Er∆Qn`1|Fns “ ¯F ´ nT N , QT N ¯ `op1{ ? Nq, and that its variance is given by Vp∆Qn`1|Fnq“ ¯Fp1´ ¯Fq ´ nT N , Q N ¯ `op1q. l 2.3 The associated Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation For the sake of simplicity for the notation, we assume now thatT “ 1, up to scaling the time. Then the caseT ‰ 1 is obtained by replacingt byt{T in the equations. Up to relaxing the regularity constraint onpptq, we may rewrite the optimal trading problem(2.4) when N" 1 as follows: max pptq0ďtď1Ăr0,1s, ¯Q1“ ¯Q˚ E „ż 1 0 gppsqds  , with ¯Qt :“ şt 0psds` 1? N şt 0 a psp1´psqdWs. (2.8) 8 Let VNpt,Qq :“ maxppsqtďsď1Ăr0,1s, ¯Qt“Q, ¯Q1“ ¯Q˚ E ”şT t gppsqds ı . We are looking for the value seen from zero:VNp0, 0q. The bounds onpt give the limit conditions:VNpt, ¯Q˚q“ VNp1´ t, ¯Q˚´tq“ 0, by the fact thatgp0q“ gp1q“ 0. Forpt,Qq such that ¯Q˚´p 1´tqď Qď ¯Q˚, the dynamic programming principle provides the HJB partial diﬀerential equation satisﬁed by VN: ´BtVN “ max pPr0,1s ˆ gppq` pBQVN` 1 2Npp1´pqB2 QVN ˙ . (2.9) We use the fact thatN" 1 to solve the HJB equation. Proposition 2.4. In the deterministic limitN“8 , the functionV8pt,Qq :“p 1´tqg ´ ¯Q˚´Q 1´t ¯ is the solution of(2.9) for ¯Q˚´p 1´tqď Qď ¯Q˚, and the associated optimal control is given by pdetpt,Qq :“ ¯Q˚´Q 1´t . Proof. The constraint may be included in a Lagrangian. The resolution becomes min λ max ppsqtďsď1Ăr0,1s ż 1 t gppsqds´λ ˆż 1 t psds´ ¯Q˚ ˙ . by deriving formally with respect tops, we get thatg1ppsq“ λ, which means by strict concavity of g that ps is constant. Therefore the only value that guarantees¯Q1 “ ¯Q˚ is ps “ ¯Q˚´Q 1´t , whence the result. l 3 Approximate solutions 3.1 Performance ratio Our goal in this section is to ﬁnd closed approximate formulas for the optimal threshold policy. In order to determine if the approximation is satisfying, we shall introduce a performance criterion. Thanks to discrete dynamic programming5, we may compute the optimal strategy and its expected returnperfoptimal. Similar, we may compute the expected returnperfdeterministic of the deterministic strategy from Proposition 2.4:pt“pdet. Then the performance criterion of a thresholding policypt will be the ratio of expected return gained from the deterministic strategy to the optimal strategy: performance ratio“ perf´ perfdeterministic perfoptimal´ perfdeterministic , where we denote byperf the expected return underpt. 5We implement a numerical scheme to obtain the optimal solution and we use it as a benchmark, see Appendix B. 9 3.2 approximate problem We may exploit the fact that 1 2N ! 1 to get an approximate resolution for(2.9). We use the approximationB2 QVN «B 2 QV8 in the equation whenN ÝÑ8. Notice thatB2 QV8pt,Qq“ p1´tq´1g2 ´ ¯Q˚´Q 1´t ¯ “p 1´tq´1g2pptq. Then the problem to solve becomes rVpt,Qq :“ max ppsqtďsď1Ăr0,1s, ş1 t ps ds 1“ ¯Q˚´Q E «ż 1´ 1 N t gppsq` g2ppsq 2 1 Np1´tqpsp1´psqds ﬀ .(3.10) Notice that Problem(3.10) would have been ill-posed if the ﬁnal bound of the integral had been 1, indeed the factor 1 Np1´tq is not integrable whentÝÑ1. However, we know that structurally the value of the problem is zero at time1´ 1 N. Then the integral may be stopped at that time, solving the ill-posedness problem. Proposition 3.1. In the particular case whereEr∆Pn`1|Sns“ aSn for someaą 0, andSn follows a uniform law, we havegppq“ Gpp1´pq for someGą 0. Proof. This follows from elementary calculations left as an exercise for the reader. l We solve Problem(3.10) in the case ofgppq :“Gpp1´pq for someGą 0. The problem becomes rVpt,Qq :“ max ppsqtďsď1Ăr0,1s, ş1 t psds“ ¯Q˚´Q G ż 1´ 1 N t psp1´psq ` 1´γpsq ˘ ds, (3.11) with γpsq :“ 1 Np1´tq. 3.3 Unconstrained approximate solution We may solve the problem under the assumption that the solution is the same without the constraintppsqtďsď1 Ă r0, 1s. Then as we assumed that the problem was deterministic, we may solve it like a Lagrangian problem. We are looking forminλmaxppsqĂR` ş1 t psp1´psq ` 1´ γpsq ˘ ds´λ ´ş1 t psds´p ¯Q˚´Qq ¯ . By formally deriving with respect tops, we get thatpt“ 1 2´ λ 2 ` 1´γptq ˘. We obtainλby “injecting it into the constraint”, i.e. integrating on the quantity: ¯Q˚´Q“ 1 2p1´tq´ λ 2 ş1´ 1 N t ds 1´γpsq. It gives pt :“ 1 2` ˆ 1 1´t ş1´ 1 N t 1´γptq 1´γpsqds ˙´1´ ¯Q˚´Q 1´t ´ 1 2 ¯ . Computing the integral, we ﬁnally get: pt “ 1 2` pdetpt,Qq´ 1 2ˆ 1` ln “ Np1´tq´1 ‰ Np1´tq ˙´ 1´ 1 Np1´tq ¯. where recall thatpdetpt,Qq :“ rQ˚´Q 1´t . 3.4 Approximate solution under constraint The previous control choice has a limitation as the Lagrangian resolution does not take into account the constraint0ď pt ď 1. In order to take this feature into account, we solve the 10 following Lagrangian system: min µ0 t,µ1 tě0,λ max ppsqĂR` ż 1 t psp1´psq ` 1´γpsq ˘ ds´λ ˆż 1 t psds´p ¯Q˚´Qq ˙ ´ ż 1 t ` µ0 spt`µ1 sp1´ptq ˘ ds. Deriving this Lagrangian with respect topt gives the equationp1´ 2ptq ` 1´γptq ˘ `λ“µ0 t´µ1 t. Recall that in Lagrangian analysis, the constraint is not active only if the associated coeﬃcient is zero. Thereforeµ0 t and µ1 t cannot be non-zero at the same time and we may study three cases: Case 1: µ0 t ą 0, thenpt“ 0, andµ0 t “ ` 1´γptq ˘ ´λą 0. Case 2: µ1 t ą 0, thenpt“ 1, andµ1 t “´ ` 1´γptq ˘ ´λą 0. Case 3: µ0 t “µ1 t “ 0, then 0“p 1´ 2ptq ` 1´γptq ˘ ´λ, and´ ` 1´γptq ˘ ďλď ` 1´γptq ˘ . Therefore we see that the eﬀect of this constraint depends only on the comparison between λand ` 1´γptq ˘ . There are then still three cases depending on the sign ofλ. The caseλ“ 0 immediately gives the constant solutionpt“ 1{2. Now we treat the caseλą 0. In such a case there is a limit timet0 :“ 1´ 1 Np1´λq such thatpt“ 0 if tět0, andµ0 t “µ1 t “ 0 if tďt0. It allows to obtain the following equation onλby using the fact that¯Q˚´Q“ şt0 t psds: 1´ 2pdet´ 1 Np1´tq“λ ˆ 1` 1 Np1´tq ln „ Np1´tq1´λ λ ˙ , where we denotepdet :“pdetpt,Qq“ ¯Q˚´Q 1´t . Therefore we get pt“ 1{2´ λ{2 1´ 1 Np1´tq . The caseλă 0 stems from the symmetrypdetÝÑ1´pdet, andptÝÑ1´pt, see Proposition B.1. Then for allλP R we have pt“ 1{2´ λ{2 1´ 1 Np1´tq , with 1´ 2pdet´ signp1´ 2pdetq 1 Np1´tq“λ ˆ 1` 1 Np1´tq ln „ Np1´tq1´|λ| |λ| ˙ . This value may be found quickly thanks to a solver, with the initial guessλ0 :“ 1´ 2pdetpt,Qq. We may also iterate the mapf : xÞÝÑ 1´2pdet´signp1´2pdetq 1 Np1´tq 1` 1 Np1´tq ln ” Np1´tq 1´|x| |x| ı on λ0. Iterating 4 times is enough in practice. 3.5 A systematic method to dramatically improve the perfor- mance of the approximation for symmetric gain functions The performance of the previous strategies is not really satisfactory, see Figure 3 (we explain in Section 3.6 how the performance is computed). Indeed the strategy not taking the border into 11 account has an average60% performance, and the strategy taking the constraint of Section 3.4 into account has a better performance close to the borders, but gets a very negative performance far from the borders. We observe by looking at the numbers that the mismatch in terms of optimal p are strong for small remaining steps and tends to vanish whenN´n goes to inﬁnity. There may be several interpretations for this mismatch. The change of performance is very small and then it is very sensitive to the change ofB2 QVN which is due to the loss of gain, itself due to the termB2 QVN. The problem is that the formulas that we get involve ﬁnding primitives to functions of the shape1{plnpxq` x` 1q, which will not generate closed formula. Furthermore, notice that in all those cases, the optimalp does not satisfy Assumption 2.2, as the underlying functionF does not have a continuousQ´derivative att“ 1. This explains why most mismatch is located aroundt“ 1, therefore we provide a technique that repairs the matching at the ﬁnal times. Figure 3: ForN “ 100; on thex-axis: the number of shares (or contracts) to buy (or sell)Q˚, and on they-axis: the performance ratios of the approximations of the optimal threshold policy obtained by approximation of Section 3.4 (constrained) and Section 3.5 (unconstrained). 12 A way to deal with this problem simply consists in shifting the loss functionγ. We replace it by a weakened functionγτptq :“γpt`τq. The interest of simply shifting is that the optimization equations from Section 3.3 and Section 3.4 bring to the same solution up to a shifting, and therefore generates closed formulas. Now we determineτby calibration. We selectτso that we get the right value forN´n“ 3. We can get this value from the discrete dynamic programming principle: p˚ 1p1´3{Nq ` ¯Q˚´ 1{N ˘ “ 3 8, see Appendix B. It is enough to do it forpdet “ 1 3 by symmetry with respect to the lineppdet“ 1 2q. For the unconstrained problem we get the equation3 8“ 1 2´ 1 3´ 1 2 p1` 2`Nτ 3 qp1´ 1 3`Nτq, that leads to the equation ` 1` 2`Nτ 3 ˘´ 1´ 1 3`Nτ ¯ “ 4. A python solver gives the approximate solution τunco« 3.5723{N. We get the solution: pt“ 1{2` pdetpt,Qq´ 1{2´ 1` lnrNp1´tq`2.5723s Np1´tq ¯´ 1´ 1 Np1´tq`3.5723 ¯. (3.12) For the constrained problem we get the equation3 8 “ 1 2` λ 2p1´ 1 3`Nτq, that leads toλ“ p 1 3`Nτ´1q 4 injecting in the equation λ ˆ 1` lnpp2`Nτq 1´λ λq 3 ˙ “ 1´ 2 3 ´ 1`τp1´λq 3 , we ﬁnally getp2`Nτq ´ 1` lnp10`3Nτq 3 ¯ ´Nτ10`3Nτ 3 . A python solver gives the approximate solution τconst« 1.3445{N. We get the solution: pt“ 1{2´ λ{2 1´ 1 Np1´tq`1.3445 , (3.13) with 1´ 2pdet´ signp1´ 2pdetq 1 Np1´tq ` 1` 1.3445¨p 1´|λ|q ˘ “λ ˆ 1` 1 Np1´tq ln „` Np1´tq` 1.3445 ˘1´|λ| |λ| ˙ . This value may be computed quickly thanks to a solver, with the initial guessλ0 :“ 1´2pdetpt,Qq. We may also iterate the mapf :xÞÝÑ 1´2pdet´signp1´2pdetq 1 Np1´tq ` 1`1.34451p1´|x|q ˘ 1` 1 Np1´tq ln ” Np1´tq 1´|x| |x| ı onλ0. Iterating 4 times is enough in practice. 3.6 Comparing performances If we compare forN“ 100 the performance ratios of these two strategies. Figure 4 gives this ratio as a function ofQ˚. 13 Figure 4: ForN “ 100; on thex-axis: the number of shares (or contracts) to buy (or sell)Q˚, and on they-axis: the performance ratios of the approximations of the optimal threshold policy with diﬀerent approximation schemes: “constrained calibrated” corresponds to the equation (3.12); “constrained calibrated” corresponds to the equation (3.13); and “con/uncon calibrated mixed eﬀect” corresponds to the heuristic exposed in Section 3.6 mixing the two previous solutions. We observe on Figure 4 that the performance of the shifted strategy taking into account the border eﬀect (“constrained calibrated”) is quite good close to the borders. Furthermore, the performance of the shifted strategy not taking the border eﬀect into account (“unconstrained calibrated”) is bad close to the borders, but good close to the center. A heuristic strategy consists in taking the border eﬀects into account close to the borders (1{2´|pdet´ 1{2|ă 0.15), and stop taking them into account close to the center (1{2´|pdet´ 1{2|ě 0.15) this gives the “con/uncon calibrated mixed eﬀect” curve. The choice of0.15 is arbitrary. This mixed-eﬀect strategy gets back at least98% of the performance available, even99% out of the extreme10%. 14 4 Application of the Asymptotic Behaviour of the Inventory on other trading strategies In this section we show how to use our framework to understand, measure and anticipate the uncertainty due to the use of threshold-driven policies in a well-known optimal liquidation framework. Designers of trading algorithms are confronted to the following dilemma: on the one hand there is now a plethoric literature explaining how to design an algorithm minimizing risk-driven cost functions (see for instance [2], [8] or [12]); on the other hand they would like to use ﬁne tuned signals to drive their trading decisions. To the knowledge of authors, only two papers ([20] and [9]) propose frameworks to inject a signal in the now "standard" risk-driven frameworks. But their control is the trading speed, and not a threshold to be applied to the signal. The most natural way to use a signal once a desired trading speed is computed is to choose a threshold that is crossed by the signal on average a number of times per unit of time equals to the “optimal trading speed”. Typically the repartition function of the signal can be inverted and this inverse gives a natural relationship between a desired trading speed and a threshold to apply on the signal. This is a practice commonly used by designers of trading algorithms. This paper provides a way to address the uncertainty arising from the fact that, if the signal is meant to cross the threshold “on average” the desired number of times, the realizations of the signal not really cross the threshold this number of times. To really control this uncertainty, the reader has to refer to the previous sections. Besides, the framework of this paper allows to anticipate the level of this uncertainty not only for trading algorithms designed with our framework, but also for any trading algorithm. In this section, it is hence no more about being "optimal" with respect to this uncertainty, but simply to quantify this uncertainty when it has not been taken into account. To illustrate how to do it, this section apply our results, and especially our Inventory Asymptotic Behaviour (IAB) Theorem, to the celebrated Almgren-Chriss framework. 4.1 Notations for the Almgren-Chriss framework We simply rely on [2] to formulate the optimal liquidation of a stock within a mean-variance framework. We mix the notations of the original paper with ours to help the reader to make the connection between the two frameworks:T is the time to liquidate a position of sizeQ˚, in an arithmetic Brownian market with a volatilityσand market impact parameters ofηfor the temporary part andγfor the permanent part. The risk aversion of the minimization program is λ. There is no signal in this framework; the result of a mean-variance optimization overN time steps6 is a deterministic optimal trading speedντk, constant on thekth time steprkτ,pk` 1qτs, 6Notice that this constantN from [2] is diﬀerent than the one introduced in Subsection 1.1. 15 where τ“T{N is the discretization step: ντk“ 2sinhpκτ{2q sinhpκτq ¨ Q˚ τ¨ coshtκ¨pT´τkqu, whereκstands forτ´1 cosh´1t1`prκτq2{2u and tilde variables are renormalization of the original ones: rκ“ λσ2 rη, rη“η ˆ 1´ γτ 2η ˙ . 4.2 Deducing a threshold policy from a trading speed The optimal speed resulting from an optimization (here we develop the example ofντk, but this approach can be used for any other trading speed, obtained for instance in [8] or [12]) is only one component of a trading algorithm. The next step is to interact with liquidity at the time scale of events in an orderbook. Typically the goal of these interactions is to buyντk¨τ shares between timeτkand timeτpk` 1q at the best price. In practice, designers of trading algorithms use diﬀerent means to obtain theseντk¨τshares. They can use a stochastic algorithm, like in [23], to learn online the optimal distance to the mid-point for limit orders, or they can control directly the distance to the mid-point under liquidity consumption models, like in [14]. We explain here how to use a signal to obtain the desired number of shares. Here a signal is a custom indicator such that it is on average better to buy (respectively to sell) when the signal is high (resp. low). The common practice is to set a thresholdθτkwhen t“τkand to keep it during a timeτ, waiting for the signal to cross it. This threshold can also be updated in real time, or according to a stopping time that isτ or the time at which the signal is crossed if any. Another common practice is that as soon as the signal crossesθτk, the algorithm sends a market order or a limit order, or a cancellation instruction7. For simplicity we will deal with market orders only in our example. There is a very simple way to deduce the threshold to apply to a signal once the desired trading speed is computed: 1. denote u the average number of observations of the signal during a unit if time8, meaning that the algorithm looks at the signaluτtimes during a typical time intervalτ. 2. Set the thresholdθτksuch that it is the value of the quantile with a probabilitypτk“ ντk¨τ uτ. 3. Apply the IAB theorem withFpt,Qq“ pτtt τu. That for it is enough that the probabilitypτkis a function of the (remaining) time and the (remaining) quantity to trade. 7A very simple strategy would be, for a buy metaorder (assuming that the higher the signal, the higher the expectation of short term price returns), to send a market order if the signal is very high, to maintain a limit order in the book if the signal is not too negative, and to cancel all orders and wait if the signal is too negative. 8The total number of observationsN of the signal, introduced in Subsection 1.1, is given byuT. 16 For our Almgren-Chriss example, it implies: Fptq“ 2sinhpκτ{2q sinhpκτqloooooomoooooon apκ,τq ¨Q˚ uτ¨ cosh " κ¨ ˆ T´τ Zt τ ^˙* . Since our optimal trading speed is deterministic,F is a function of the remaining time only,9 and not ofQ, the remaining quantity to trade. Figure 5: The Discrete Almgren-Chriss result (dots), the continuous version (blue line) and slices of the IAB derived asymptotic distribution for an example (T “ 1, Q˚“ 100, η“ 1, γ“ 1, σ“ 1, λ“ 3). Top panel: Remaining quantity; Bottom Panel: Trading speed. 4.3 A straightforward application of the IAB Theorem By the facts thatF is continuous and independent ofQ, Assumption 2.2 is satisﬁed on each intervalrkτ,pk` 1qτs. InjectingFptq in the IAB Theorem gives immediately the asymptotic 9For other frameworks like the Cartea-Jaimungal or the Dang-Bouchard-Lehalle ones,F will be a function of time and of the remaining quantity to trade. 17 distributions whenuτ" 1 of the realized trading speedrντk:“ rQτpk`1q´rQτk τ and of the number of shares rQτkthat will have been really bought at timeτk: rντk„ N ´ ντk,vpτkq¨ u τ ¯ , rQτk„ N ´ rQdet τk,V pτkq¨ uT ¯ , (4.14) with rQdet t :“Q˚¨ sinhtκpT´tqu sinhpκTq , vptq :“apκ,τqQ˚ uτcosh " κ¨ ˆ T´τ Zt τ ^˙*ˆ 1´apκ,τqQ˚ uτcosh " κ¨ ˆ T´τ Zt τ ^˙*˙ , and Vptq“ 1 T şt s“0vpsqds. Figure 5 shows these distributions for few values ofk and their expected values as lines. Their expectations are, by design, the targeted ones, i.e. the continuous version of the Almgren-Chriss framework. Thanks to the IAB Theorem, it is now possible to know an asymptotic of the distribution of these quantities at any point in time, as disclosed by formula (4.14). Appendix A Limit theorem We state the theorem from [6] that we use for the continuous limit. Letpθnqně0 satisfying forně 1: θn“θn´1`γHpθn´1,Xnq` γ2εnpθn´1,Xnq, Where the state has a dynamic Markov representation controlled byθ, hence PrξnPG|ξn´1,ξn´2,...;θn´1,θn´2,...s“ ż G πθn´1pξn´1,dxq Xn“fpξnq, where πθis the transition probability of theθ´dependent Markov chainξn, andf is a function. We assume the existence of a locally Lipschitzhpθq :“ Eθ “ Hpθ,Xnq ‰ , so the ODE θ1“hpθq, θp0q“ θ0, (A.15) has a unique maximal solution. Assumption A.1 ([6], Chapter 2, Assumption A.1). There exists a ﬁxed cylinder of diameter ηą 0 containing the trajectory ` θptq ˘ 0ďtďT of ODE (A.15) in whichh is locally Lipschitz, and for all compact setK, the functionεnpθ,Xq is uniformly bounded forpθ,Xq in K. Then the diﬀerential equation theorem holds: 18 Theorem A.2 ([6], Chapter 2, Theorem 1). Letεą 0, andγą 0 small enough, then under Assumption A.1 we have P „ max n:tnďT }θn´θptnq}ą ε  ďCpγ,Tq, where, for ﬁxedT ă8 , Cpγ,Tq tends to zero asγtends to 0. Let ˜θγ tn :“γ´ 1 2 ` θn´θptnq ˘ , and let˜θγ t denote the trajectory obtained by linear interpolation between the timestn. Then we have the following theorem: Theorem A.3 ([6], Chapter 3, Theorem 1). When γÝÑ0, the diﬀerencep˜θγ tq0ďtďT converges weakly towards the solutionp˜θγ tq0ďtďT of the stochastic diﬀerential equation d˜θt“ dh dθrθptqs¨ ˜θtdt`R 1 2rθptqs¨ Wt, wherepWtq is a standard vector Wiener process, andRpθq :“ ř8 n“´8 covθrHpθ,XnqHpθ,X0qs. B Discrete resolution We provide the discrete Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation that solves (2.4). Let Vpn,Qq :“ max ppkqnďkďN´1,QN“Q˚ E «N´1ÿ k“n gppkq ﬀ The result we are looking for isVp0, 0q. We ﬁnd it by a backwards resolution. For all 0ďnďN, we haveVpn,Q˚q“ VpN´n,Q˚´nq“ 0, and the discrete dynamic programming principle gives: Vpn,Qq “ sup pPr0,1s gppq` pVpn` 1,Q ` 1q`p 1´pqVpn` 1,Qq. (B.16) Ifweassumethat gppq“ Gpp1´pq, wegetthat p“ max ˆ 0, min ˆ 1, Vpn`1,Q`1q´Vpn`1,Qq G `1 2 ˙˙ . If we have that|Vpn` 1,Q ` 1q´ Vpn` 1,Qq|ď G, then we have the equation Vpn,Qq “ Vpn` 1,Qq` 1 4 ˆ? G` Vpn` 1,Q ` 1q´ Vpn` 1,Qq? G ˙2 . We may use these formulas to computeVpN´ 3,¨q. We haveVpN,Q˚q“ VpN´ 1,Q˚q“ VpN´ 1,Q˚´ 1q“ 0. SimilarVpN´ 2,Q˚q“ VpN´ 2,Q˚´ 2q“ 0, andVpN´ 2,Q˚´ 1q“ supgppq“ 1 4G, withpN´2pQ˚´ 1q“ 1 2. FinallyVpN´ 3,Q˚´ 1q“ VpN´ 3,Q˚´ 2q“ 25 64G, with pN´3pQ˚´ 1q“ 3 8 and pN´3pQ˚´ 2q“ 5 8. Finally, we explicit the symmetry relationship veriﬁed byV. Proposition B.1. We assume that for allpPr 0, 1s, we havegp1´pq“ gppq, then for alln,Q, we haveVpn,Qq“ V ´ n,Q˚´ ` N´n´pQ˚´Qq ˘¯ , andpnpQq“ 1´pn ´ Q˚´ ` N´n´pQ˚´Qq ˘¯ . Proposition B.1 may be proved by backwards induction using (B.16). 19 References [1] Aurélien Alfonsi and Pierre Blanc. Dynamic optimal execution in a mixed-market-impact hawkes price model.Finance and Stochastics, 20(1):183–218, 2016. [2] R. F. Almgren and N. Chriss. Optimal execution of portfolio transactions.Journal of Risk, 3(2):5–39, 2000. [3] Marco Avellaneda and Sasha Stoikov. High-frequency trading in a limit order book. Quantitative Finance, 8(3):217–224, March 2008. [4] Emmanuel Bacry, Adrian Iuga, Matthieu Lasnier, and Charles-Albert Lehalle. Market Impacts and the Life Cycle of Investors Orders.Market Microstructure and Liquidity, 1(2), December 2015. [5] Erhan Bayraktar and Michael Ludkovski. Liquidation in limit order books with controlled intensity. Mathematical Finance, June 2012. [6] Albert Benveniste, Michel Métivier, and Pierre Priouret.Adaptive algorithms and stochastic approximations, volume 22. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012. [7] Dimitris Bertsimas and Andrew W. Lo. Optimal control of execution costs.Journal of Financial Markets, 1(1):1–50, 1998. [8] Álvaro Cartea and Sebastian Jaimungal. Incorporating Order-Flow into Optimal Execution. Social Science Research Network Working Paper Series, January 2015. [9] Álvaro Cartea, Sebastian Jaimungal, and Jason Ricci. Buy Low Sell High: A High Frequency Trading Perspective.Social Science Research Network Working Paper Series, November 2011. [10] Alvaro Cartea, Sebastian Jaimungal, and Jason Ricci. Buy low, sell high: A high frequency trading perspective. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics, 5(1):415–444, 2014. [11] Rama Cont and Adrien De Larrard. Price Dynamics in a Markovian Limit Order Book Market. SIAM Journal for Financial Mathematics, 4(1):1–25, January 2013. [12] Ngoc-Minh Dang and Charles-Albert Lehalle. Using Short-Term Predictions for Participation-Rate Driven Trading Algorithms.Social Science Research Network Working Paper Series, December 2012. [13] Zoltan Eisler, Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, and Julien Kockelkoren. The price impact of order book events: market orders, limit orders and cancellations.Quantitative Finance, 12(9):1395–1419, 2012. [14] Olivier Guéant, Charles-Albert Lehalle, and Joaquin Fernandez-Tapia. Dealing with the inventory risk: a solution to the market making problem.Mathematics and Financial Economics, 4(7):477–507, September 2013. [15] Tsy Ho and H. R. Stoll. The dynamics of dealer markets under competition.Journal of Finance, 38(4):1053–1074, 1983. 20 [16] Weibing Huang, Charles-Albert Lehalle, and Mathieu Rosenbaum. How to predict the consequences of a tick value change? evidence from the tokyo stock exchange pilot program. Market Microstructure and Liquidity, 2(03n04):1750001, 2016. [17] Sophie Laruelle, Charles-Albert Lehalle, and Gilles Pagès. Optimal posting price of limit orders: learning by trading.Mathematics and Financial Economics, 7(3):359–403, June 2013. [18] Sophie Laruelle, Charles-Albert Lehalle, and Gilles Pagès. Optimal posting price of limit orders: learning by trading.Mathematics and Financial Economics, 7(3):359–403, June 2013. [19] Charles-albert Lehalle and Sophie Laruelle.Market Microstructure In Practice. World Scientiﬁc, 2018. [20] Charles-Albert Lehalle and Eyal Neuman. Incorporating Signals into Optimal Trading, April 2017. [21] Alexander Lipton, Umberto Pesavento, and Michael G. Sotiropoulos. Trade arrival dynamics and quote imbalance in a limit order book, December 2013. [22] Harry Markowitz. Portfolio Selection.The Journal of Finance, 7(1):77–91, March 1952. [23] Gilles Pagès, Sophie Laruelle, and Charles-Albert Lehalle. Optimal split of orders across liquidity pools: a stochastic algorithm approach.SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics, 2:1042–1076, 2011. 21