The value of forecasts: Quantifying the economic gains of accurate quarter-hourly electricity price forecasts Christopher Katha,*,1, Florian Zielb aRWE Supply & Trading GmbH, Altenessenerstr.27, 45141 Essen bUniversity of Duisburg-Essen, House of Energy Markets and Finance Abstract We propose a multivariate elastic net regression forecast model for German quarter-hourly electricity spot markets. While the literature is diverse on day-ahead prediction approaches, both the intraday continuous and intraday call-auction prices have not been studied intensively with a clear focus on predictive power. Besides electricity price forecasting, we check for the impact of early day-ahead (DA) EXAA prices on intraday forecasts. Another novelty of this paper is the complementary discussion of economic beneﬁts. A precise estimation is worthless if it cannot be utilized. We elaborate possible trading decisions based upon our forecasting scheme and analyze their monetary e ﬀects. We ﬁnd that even simple electricity trading strategies can lead to substantial economic impact if combined with a decent forecasting technique. Keywords: forecasting, portfolio analysis, elastic net regression, Markowitz portfolio, quarter-hourly spot prices, electricity price forecast 1. Introduction Germany is an outstanding example of massive renewable inte- gration within the European energy market. Politically induced, renewable generation capacities were expanded and their mar- keting subsidized. This not only aﬀected the German day-ahead bid-stack but also caused exchanges and market participants likewise to set the focus on quarter-hourly (QH) considerations for their optimization procedures due to the increasing residual volumes after hourly day-ahead bidding. For more informa- tion on the described renewables impact, the interested reader might refer to Hirth (2013); Paraschiv et al. (2014); Ketterer (2014); Würzburg et al. (2013). As a result of this ongoing trend, marketplaces have adapted their products so that the Ger- man market features another unique characteristic. While other countries such as the Netherlands or Belgium do not o ﬀer any possibility to trade QH products at the time of the writing of ∗Corresponding author Email addresses: christopher.kath@rwe.com (Christopher Katha,*,), florian.ziel@uni-due.de (Florian Zielb) 1The ﬁndings, interpretations and conclusions expressed hereinafter are those of the author and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of RWE Supply & Trading GmbH. this paper, Germany has three independent exchanges that al- low trading on an early day-ahead basis up to half an hour before physical delivery. The opportunity to enter QH trades started in December 2011 with the ﬁrst 15-minute contracts in continuous intraday markets and was consequently expanded in September and December 2014 by EXAA quarter-hourly day- ahead products and the EPEX intraday call auction. A more thorough discussion of the German spot market is provided by Viehmann (2017). Unfortunately, academic attention is only recently focused on lower time intervals. Discussions of quarter-hourly German spot markets are rare. A good starting point is provided by Kiesel & Paraschiv (2017) who discuss the econometric char- acteristics of quarter-hourly EPEX intraday (ID) time series and provide an analytical model approach. Märkle-Huß et al. (2018) evaluate market impacts of the introduction of 15-minute contracts and report price reductions in correlated hourly spot markets. However, the current literature lacks a decent discus- sion of forecasting QH prices. Quarter-hourly trading appears to be crucial, but there is no particular forecasting model avail- able. This statement equally counts for QH auctions as well Preprint submitted to Energy Economics (accepted for publication in Energy Economics: 06 Oct 2018) November 22, 2018arXiv:1811.08604v1 [q-fin.ST] 21 Nov 2018 2 as continuous intraday trading. We aim to ﬁll this gap by pro- viding precise price estimations for both of these markets. To achieve this, we will consider the most current input factors in German spot trading together with the status quo in forecasting techniques. Another aspect that must not be ignored in this context is the economic eﬀect of an estimation scheme. On the one hand, many forecasting models exist, at least for hourly day-ahead applications (see Weron (2014) for a broader discussion), on the other hand, the majority of these limit their scope to the evaluation of accuracy but neglect the aspect of economic ben- eﬁts. Even the most accurate prediction has no practical value if done in a market or at a point in time where no possibility of a utilization exists. Therefore, our second contribution shall be a quantiﬁcation of attainable gains through precise forecasts in QH spot markets. The rest of this paper is divided into the following sub- sections: Section 2 introduces available German QH spot mar- kets and highlights their peculiarities, followed by section 3 dis- cussing the connected forecast methodology. This comprises the model input parameters, necessary data transformations and the overall estimation algorithm. Section 4 addresses the fore- cast performance in our empirical study and the associated eco- nomic eﬀects of our price predictions followed by a conclusion and a short outlook on further expansions in section 5. 2. Quarter-hourly trading and its relevance in Germany Germany oﬀers a wide variety of possible trading venues for market participants. Other countries usually exhibit a day-ahead spot exchange and continuous intraday trading platforms. These are also to be found for the four German grid areas, but be- sides them, there are two other auctions, as depicted in Fig- ure 1. Spot trading ideally starts with the EXAA (Energy Ex- change Austria) at 10:12am for ﬁnal bid submission. Only 8 minutes later, the EXAA publishes the ﬁrst day-ahead exchange traded quotation for the German delivery area. Although an Austrian exchange, EXAA results can easily be delivered into German market areas. However, we must acknowledge that this situation could be of temporary character with ongoing talks about splitting the German-Austrian bidding zone. 2 As a re- 2As per June 2018, when this paper was ﬁnalized, implementation of a market split had not been achieved. Therefore, possible e ﬀects of a German- sult, EXAA volumes might only be transferred with explicitly sold cross-border capacities or are implicitly regarded by ex- change auctions. One feature only available with EXAA is post-trading. The exchange platform allows for a second bid- ding round with known prices to market a surplus on either the buy or sell side. EXAA trading only occurs on non-holiday weekdays. All weekend or holiday prices are determined in advance on the last weekday before the holiday or weekend. Therefore, we already have a QH indication for delivery date Sunday on Friday, for instance. The next and Exchange traded volume [TWh] 2015 2016 2017 EPEX DA auction 264 235 233 EXAA DA auction 8.2 8.0 5.4 EPEX QH auction 3.9 4.6 5.2 EPEX QH ID 3.9 3.6 4.9 Table 1: Yearly volumes of hourly and quarter- hourly German spot exchanges. All intraday ﬁgures only entail data on Germany, while the day-ahead auction includes Austria and Luxembourg. presumably most important trading opportunity is pro- vided by the Ger- man EPEX day- ahead (DA) auc- tion. A single bidding round with results available at 12:42am marks the primarily traded market quotation in the day-ahead market. At the time of writ- ing, the term ’EPEX day-ahead’ correctly speciﬁes the German hourly day-ahead exchange. Still, the other exchanges, EXAA and Nord Pool Spot, are expanding their activities to the Ger- man day-ahead market. It is planned to unbundle the pricing algorithm from EPEX such that three independent exchanges oﬀer access to the price that is hereinafter referred to as ’EPEX day-ahead’. We stick to that notation to be in line with other literature and due to the fact that these changes are planned but have not been implemented yet. Due to rising renewables infeed and the necessity to balance quarter-hourly deviations, EPEX launched a second auction for quarter-hours in December 2014. Strictly chronologically speaking it takes place day-ahead, nevertheless it is referred to as an intraday call auction because the day-ahead market win- dow ends at d-1, 14:30pm for grid operators, as depicted by the white lines in Figure 1. While all prior marketplaces allow entering a single round of bids determining the price level in a closed-form auction, our last trading opportunity, the EPEX in- traday market, is a continuous one that is tradable up to 30 min- utes before delivery. This lead time was changed per July 2015 Austrian split are uncertain and ignored in the following. 3 12:00 EPEX DA close D − 1 15:00 16:00 EPEX QH close Continuous QH intraday market Intraday Balancing energy DeliveryTrading until 30 min before Delivery10:12 EXAA DA close 10:20 EXAA results EPEX DA results 12:42 15:15 EPEX QH results Assumed forecast time 14:30 Figure 1: Spot trading timeline and its connected trading venues. All mentioned deadlines are assuming usual circumstances with no delayed results, technical problems and a market clearing price determined in the ﬁrst run of the underlying algorithm. Please note that the intraday lead time of 30 minutes applies for cross-grid trades and local trades within the same grid area are allowed until 5 minutes before delivery. from 45 to 30 minutes. We will consider the volume weighted average price (VW AP) of all transactions for the speciﬁc de- livery quarter-hour since continuous trading activities are diﬃ- cult to quantify otherwise. Last but not least, all open positions will be settled by the grid operators in the course of balancing energy at the grid area independent imbalance tari ﬀ (reBAP). Since it is strictly forbidden by regulators to enter imbalance positions intentionally, this market is not a trading alternative and is just mentioned for the sake of comparability. Table 1 hints at the relevance of the di ﬀerent exchanges. The allocation of volumes points towards the immense impor- tance of the hourly EPEX DA auction. It outruns the QH trad- ing venues by far. This phenomenon might be explained by their purposes. As a result of missing liquidity, market play- ers are more likely trading residual positions in QH markets. The majority, i.e., the hourly demand and generation will be bid in the day-ahead exchange for which reason QH liquid- ity only accounts for 2% of the DA liquidity. Unfortunately, EXAA volumes are reported in an aggregated form without any separation into hourly or quarter-hourly amounts. Hence, the mentioned trading volumes only allow for a rough evaluation of importance. The low volumes suggest that the EPEX markets are more momentous when German spot trading is concerned. Whenever liquidity is limited, this could elicit high volatility and price spikes. To detect such occurrences, we have plotted the price series in Figure 2. Both the QH auction and the on- going QH intraday trading can be highly volatile with prices under 0€/MWh or above 100€/MWh. While, in general, both time series appear to follow similar trends, the intraday equiv- alent seems to feature more spikes. However, this e ﬀect is not predominant. The overall picture reﬂects two resemblant price quotations. 3. Forecast methodology 3.1. Data transformation and input parameters The price plots reveal price spikes and the occurrence of neg- ative prices. This is not a general problem but would usually require either an explicit modeling of spikes by means of a price spike component, a spike-robust model or a transforma- tion to stabilize the variance of the time series (Uniejewski et al. (2018)). We have decided on the latter as we do not want to give up the feature selection abilities of our models discussed later. Once transformed, one can use a wider set of algorithms with- out taking greater care of price spikes. We ﬁrstly transform and then inverse the data such that the output of our models still ap- pears in a realistic format. The transformation mainly supports the algorithms by providing a more stable variance but does not change any crucial information. A usual way to transform price series is the logarithm. While a simple logarithmic transformation works in many di ﬀerent scenarios, our time series with negative values necessitates a transformation method that can handle negative values. We stick to current literature ﬁndings to identify the best transfor- mation for our needs. In a large empirical study, Uniejewski et al. (2018) report superior RMSE-related performance for a newly proposed transformation called ’mlog’, which we utilize for this paper. The authors especially propose the transforma- tion for the spike sensitive measure RMSE (root-mean-square- error)3 which makes sense to apply to highly volatile time series such as our intraday one. The mlog transformation showed con- stant results across all markets, which is why we decided to use 3Please refer to section 4.1 for the mathematical formulation of RMSE. 3.1 Data transformation and input parameters 4 2016 2017 2018 −50050 150 Delivery date [08.10.2015−31.05.2018] Price [EUR/MWh] Forecast Training 2016 2017 2018 −50050 150 Delivery date [08.10.2015−31.05.2018] Price [EUR/MWh] 08.10.2015 - 06.10.2016 07.10.2016 - 31.05.2018 out-of-sample 08.10.2015 - 06.10.2016 07.10.2016 - 31.05.2018 out-of-sample a)EPEX QH call auction b) EPEX ID continuous QH VWAP 100 200 2016 2017 2018 −50050 150 Delivery date [08.10.2015−31.05.2018] Price [EUR/MWh] Forecast Training 2016 2017 2018 −50050 150 Delivery date [08.10.2015−31.05.2018] Price [EUR/MWh] 08.10.2015 - 06.10.2016 07.10.2016 - 31.05.2018 out-of-sample b) EPEX ID continuous QH VWAPb)EPEX ID continuous QH VWAP 100 200 Figure 2: Price plot of the EPEX intraday QH auction and EPEX intraday continuous price regime separated into training and forecast sections. The blue partition marks the initial training and parameterization period that is consequently shifted with each iteration of the rolling estimation. The red line depicts the out-of-sample data that our prediction models try to forecast. it for our time series and markets. Before its actual processing, the data requires normalization. Hence, the original time series xqh,t is adjusted to zqh,t = 1 MAD (xqh,t− median) in which MAD describes the median absolute deviation (MAD). Both MAD and median are calculated for xqh,t over the entire period. We purposely introduce a neutral time series notation xqh,t since the transformation procedure is not only executed on prices but on also other external factors like load or wind. Once the data is normalized, its transformation yqh,t is given by (taken from Uniejewski et al. (2018)) yqh,t = sgn(zqh,t) [ log( ⏐⏐zqh,t ⏐⏐ + 1 c ) + log(c) ] , (1) and its inverse function zqh,t = sgn(yqh,t) [ e|zqh,t|−log(c)− 1 c ] , (2) with c = 1 3 . This parameter was likewise used by Uniejewski et al. (2018) and yielded good results across several markets. The time series is a quarter-hourly one which renders a slight transformation necessary. Daylight saving time causes one du- plicate hour as well as a missing value. We follow Weron (2007) and average the duplicative hour. Its omitted equivalent is calculated using multiple imputations as presented in Buuren & Groothuis-Oudshoorn (2011) so that every day in the empir- ical test consists of 96 QHs. We also apply this approach to all other gaps in the time series. Apart from that, no more pre- processing is carried out. We neglect all outlier e ﬀects in our estimation scenario and leave extreme values untouched. Our empirical sample ranges from 08.10.2015 to 31.05.2018. In- structions on how to obtain the diﬀerent data series are provided in Table 2. A solely autoregressive approach is not desirable as many papers suggest the inﬂuence that external factors have. We aim to keep the model simple and easily reproducible and only consider the most common publicly available external parameters like the quarter-hourly ENTSO-E load forecast (e.g. used in Kiesel & Paraschiv (2017)) or wind power reported by the EEX transparency platform (see Pape et al. (2016); Aïd et al. (2016); Garnier & Madlener (2015) for models that in- clude wind infeed). The two input factors are fundamentally driven and might feature ramping e ﬀects. For instance, morn- ing times when industrial shifts begin and people are waking 3.1 Data transformation and input parameters 5 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 123456789101112131415161718192021222324 TSO Forecast PV Production in MW Delivery Hour Non-Solar Prediction Model Non-Solar Prediction Solar-enriched Predictions Figure 3: Averaged photovoltaics (PV) production forecast for Germany based on the publicly available TSO PV forecast. Please note that we have considered our entire time series from 01.10.2015 to 31.05.2018 and averaged across all 24 delivery hours in order to analyze any day and night eﬀects. up cause the grid load to quickly increase, whereas its level is more likely to be stable around noon. We embrace these ef- fects for wind power production and load by regarding not only the load or wind infeed forecast for a speciﬁc hour but also the forecast from one hour previous. Strong di ﬀerences between the two values might indicate ramping e ﬀects and can contain valuable information for our prediction model. Connected to these inputs is the concern over hourly data. Some prices and the wind data are present in hourly formats only. They are trans- formed rather modestly by assuming the hourly values for every quarter-hour without any further processing. Since we do not know anything about the quarter-hourly allocations, this seems to be the most unbiased way to capture these e ﬀects. As for wind, one might also ﬁnd quarter-hourly forecasts by profes- sional providers. We have deliberately chosen the hourly TSO data to ensure high reproducibility, but need to concede that designated vendor data increases forecast accuracy since it pro- vides more accurate QH weather data. Speaking of weather data, one must not forget the other cru- cial component of the German fuel mix: Photovoltaics (PV) generation. A clear sign of its importance is that even the ex- change itself mentions PV infeed as one of the major reasons for the introduction of the QH auction in 2013 (see EPEX (2013) for the press release). Märkle-Huß et al. (2018) support this assessment of importance by stating that QH trading is mostly driven by PV ramp-ups or -downs, i.e., times when PV pro- duction quickly increases or decreases. However, a forecaster needs to be careful with PV data. During the night, the time se- ries features a constant zero due to no production which might cause problems with prediction models. Figure 3 illustrates how this e ﬀect is allocated over an entire day. The averaged PV production only starts to remarkably di ﬀer from zero in a time frame between hours 8 and 19. We have made the expert decision to add PV production data to all QH prediction models from quarter-hours 29 to 76 and ignore PV entirely in case of all other quarter-hours. We also want to capture ramping eﬀects as in wind and load forecasts and consider the oﬃcial TSO PV infeed forecast for the relevant hour together with its equivalent prediction one period before. Hence, our prediction approach accounts for ramp-ups or ramp-downs in PV production. Figure 1 is not strictly limited to quarter-hourly markets, but if we do so, three trading opportunities remain: the EPEX QH auction, continuous intraday trading and the EXAA auc- tion which publishes results at 10:20am a day ahead. There- fore, the ﬁrst quarter-hourly price information is delivered by EXAA prices. Its information might be incorporated into a forecasting scheme for the EPEX markets (see Ziel (2017) for this thought). V olume analysis has shown the importance of EPEX hourly auction prices. Around noon, these prices mark the benchmark for any spot trading activities. They provide an essential price indication for day-ahead trading. Possible im- pacts on this market are expected to have a partial inﬂuence on the intraday market as well. All external determinants and their data sources are summa- rized in Table 2. The calculations are made separately for every quarter-hour of the day. Such a method shrinks the size of all matrices in the calculation by 96 and reduces the computational eﬀort immensely. On the other hand, quarter-hourly interdepen- dencies evoked by ramping costs or similar load events are lost. Traditional thermal power plants have boundaries like start-up times. These might cause one quarter-hour to be profoundly af- fected by the preceding one. A principal component analysis (PCA) acknowledges these eﬀects in yh,t−1 ∽ Λl,tFl,t, (3) 3.1 Data transformation and input parameters 6 Determinant Unit /granularity Description Data source Transformation EPEX day-ahead auction price EUR/MWh, hourly Market clearing price of the EPEX day-ahead auction, physical delivery into German or Austrian grid possible European Power Exchange (EPEX), https://www.epexspot.com/en/ mlog, hourly value for all QHs EPEX intraday auction price EUR/MWh, quarter-hourly Market clearing price of the EPEX intraday auction, physical delivery into German grid European Power Exchange (EPEX), https://www.epexspot.com/en/ mlog EPEX intraday VW AP EUR/MWh, quarter-hourly V olume weighted average of all transactions for speciﬁc QH, physical delivery into German grid European Power Exchange (EPEX), https://www.epexspot.com/en/ mlog EXAA day-ahead auction price EUR/MWh, quarter-hourly Market clearing price of the EXAA day-ahead auction, physical delivery into German and Austrian grid possible Energy Exchange Austria (EXAA), http://www.exaa.at/en mlog ENTSO-E load forecast MW, quarter-hourly Vertical system load for bidding zone Germany/Austria, published around 10:00 d-1 European Network of Transmission System Operators (ENTSO-E), https://transparency.entsoe.eu/ mlog TSO PV forecast MW, hourly Photovoltaics infeed forecast for Germany published by transmission system operators (TSO) at 8:00 d-1 European Energy Exchange (EEX), https://www.eex-transparency.com/ mlog, hourly value for all QHs TSO wind forecast MW, hourly Wind infeed forecast for Germany published by transmission system operators (TSO) at 8:00 d-1 European Energy Exchange (EEX), https://www.eex-transparency.com/ mlog, hourly value for all QHs Table 2: Overview of applied explanatory variables, their characteristics and how to obtain them for the sake of reproducibility. where Λl,t are the load factors and Fl,t the principal compo- nents of all 96 prices of today’s EXAA results, today’s EPEX day-ahead result and yesterday’s lagged prices of the market to be predicted. The components shall comprise all daily price in- formation and are determined using all 96 quarter-hours. Please note that l = 1,..., 96 because 96 quarter-hours yield 96 com- ponents. We run the PCA over the EXAA and EPEX day-ahead prices since they are already available around 10:21 and 12:42 the day ahead and might give a good indication of the most current price interdependencies. In case of EPEX intraday con- tinuous forecasts, we add a PCA on EPEX QH prices based on the same argument and data availability. In addition, a forth PCA on lagged prices tries to capture intraday dependencies in the markets we aim to predict. As with conventional PCA, the ﬁrst few factors comprise suﬃcient information to be included. In our case, three components are utilized. While the ENTSO-E load forecast itself is already expected to contain a good portion of price information, its connected historical time series could deliver additional hints. Suppose that a speciﬁc load proﬁle determines the shape of quarter-hourly demand. If we can identify days with a similar load curve, their observable prices provide valuable input for our forecasts. This idea was used in a comparable pre-ﬁltering set-up by Ma- ciejowska et al. (2016), one of the winning teams in a price fore- casting challenge. We will likewise exploit this thought and aim to locate a similar load day 4 from which to extract prices. The identiﬁed price will serve as another input feature. We aim to extract a vector out of our feature matrix that best approximates the day to be predicted with regards to its Euclidean distance. In other words, the Euclidean distance between the current day and all historical load observations is measured, and the mini- mum is determined. Once found, the prices of the most similar load scenario are plugged into the model assuming that they in- herit crucial information about upcoming price developments. Regarding timing, we do not use any updated forecast data, i.e., intraday predictions are made at the same point in time that the QH auction prices are being estimated even though their computation is not restricted to ﬁxed auction times. This is essential because we want to derive a coinstantaneous trading decision from the predictions, i.e., enter positions in both mar- kets at the same time. However, it leads to a situation in which we use the most current data only for the QH auction. It is a trade-oﬀ for the sake of publicly available data and simultane- ous applications of both forecasts to capture economic beneﬁts. 4For a correct parameter identiﬁcation, the actual process is twofold. First, the calculus is carried out for historical data to retrieve past same day prices for model tuning. In a second phase, the determination is done for d +1 to have a valid input parameter for a live forecast of prices. 3.2 Prediction model 7 3.2. Prediction model The aim is to predict both the EPEX quarter-hourly intraday auction and the intraday continuous market price of the next day. An equivalent model is utilized for both markets which is why the following notations have a general character and are not restricted to one of the exchanges. Our deliberations start with a plain benchmark model, denoted as NaiveEXAA in the rest of this paper. Whilst in other market regimes the best naive guess is provided by yesterday’s price, the German market of- fers an idiosyncrasy in the form of the EXAA auction and its ﬁrst indication for later auctions and continuous trading to fol- low. We exploit the EXAA results and expect them to be the best estimator for the other markets such that ˆyqh,t = yEXAA,qh,t . This model shall serve as an accuracy baseline for the other forecast approaches. Linear concepts tend to show convincing results in energy forecasting (see Maciejowska & Nowotarski (2016) for an ex- ample), which is why this paper sets the technical focus on them. Of course we could have used other predictors, like non- linear ones, but have decided to thoroughly introduce the over- all model architecture instead of applying a wider set of models. For more information on other common forecasting approaches and their accuracy one might refer to Gürtler & Paulsen (2018). With reference to the described input factors, we introduce two general regression approaches that serve as a basis for all up- coming models. Our ﬁrst input set, denoted by the preﬁx Ex- pert_, takes expert decisions on weekly dummies and lags and is described in the following simpliﬁed form exemplarily for yqh,t = EPEX quarter-hourly auction quotation yqh,t =βqh,0 + ∑ j∈{1,2,7} i=(1,...,3) βqh,iyqh,t− j | {z } AR-terms +βqh,4φ1,qh,t | {z } EEX wind (4) +βqh,5φ2,qh−1,t | {z } EEX windlag +1 (29,...,76)(qh) (βqh,6φ3,qh,t | {z } EEX PV +βqh,7φ4,qh−1,t)| {z } EEX PV lag + ∑ k∈{0,1,2,7} i=(1,...,4) βqh,7+iyDA,qh,t−k | {z } EPEX DA lags + ∑ k∈{0,1,2,7} i=(1,...,4) βqh,11+iyEXAA,qh,t−k | {z } EXAA QH lags +βqh,16ymin,t−1 +βqh,17ymax,t−1 | {z } non-linear eﬀects +βqh,18φ5,qh,t | {z } ENTSO load +βqh,19φ6,qh−1,t | {z } ENTSO load lag + ∑ l=(1,...,3) i=(1,...,3) βqh,19+iPCAEXAA,l | {z } daily PCA factors + ∑ l=(1,...,3) i=(1,...,3) βqh,22+iPCAEPEX DA,l | {z } daily PCA factors + ∑ l=(1,...,3) i=(1,...,3) βqh,25+iPCAEPEX QH,l | {z } daily PCA factors + ∑ m={1,6,7} i=(1,...,3) βqh,29+iDm | {z } daily dummies +βqh,30ysimiliar,qh,t | {z } similar load day +εqh,t, with yqh,t−k being the mlog prices of the identical quarter-hour one, two and seven days ago and yEXAA,qh , yDA,qh its equiv- alent lags for the EXAA and EPEX day-ahead market. Obvi- ously, the AR-term changes with the market to be predicted. The terms ymin,t−1 and ymax,t−1 refer to yesterday’s minimum and maximum mlog price and are supposed to reﬂect the non- linear interdependency between the daily price regimes, while φ1,qh,t,...,φ 6,qh,t are the wind, PV and load forecasts for the re- spective delivery day and its lagged values. We use the previous hours’ lagged values to capture ramp-up e ﬀects of our funda- mental variables. The notation ysimilar,qh,t describes prices of the minimum Euclidean distance load scenario as mentioned in the previous sub-chapter, i.e., prices of a day that feature a sim- ilar load proﬁle with regards to the Euclidean distance between the current load forecast and all historical ones. The term Dk is a dummy variable (i.e., taking a value of 1 in case of occurrence) to capture the intra-week term structure with m = 1, 6, 7 for Monday, Saturday and Sunday. Weekly seasonality is a crucial factor for spot electricity prices like the ones present (see also Weron & Misiorek (2008) for an exam- ple on three weekly dummies). Saturday and Sunday di ﬀer from the rest of the week due to their weekend characteristics, with less traders being active and lower load and energy pro- duction levels. Our markets might be traded day-ahead, so even Monday could diﬀer from typical weekdays due to the fact that quantities were traded on a Sunday. The argument certainly holds true for the day-ahead traded QH auction and intraday continuous markets are at least partially traded one day in ad- vance. We therefore apply the set-up on both markets. The notation PCA EXAA,l deﬁnes the l− th principal component of the EXAA QH prices. Besides EXAA, we include PCA’s for EPEX QH and EPEX day-ahead prices. The error term εh,t is assumed to be independent and identically distributed (iid) with εh,t ∼ N(0,σ 2 qh) . In case of EPEX intraday continuous prices we slightly expand Eq. (4) by adding its relevant auto- regressive lags, the current EPEX QH auction price as well as a PCA on the intraday continuous prices. They are available before the continuous trading window starts so it makes sense to exploit them for forecasting models. Please note that our model in Eq. (4) is a multivariate one meaning that we have an independent estimation per quarter-hour or, in other words, 96 3.2 Prediction model 8 autarkic models. Using expert decisions inevitably means subjectivity and leaves room for criticism. We include a second input set called Full_ that overcomes all concerns over possible bias. Instead of week- days for Monday, Saturday and Sunday the full model imple- ments dummies for every day of the week (such that m = 1,..., 7) in equation (4). It also includes all 7 lags for every quarter-hourly price compared to the expert model only using lag 1,2 and 7. Lastly the full model replaces all PCA’s with 96 prices per quarter-hour for EXAA, EPEX QH, EPEX day-ahead and -in case of the intraday continuous prices to be predicted- for EPEX intraday. This expansion causes the model structure to be much more complex than before. The full model fea- tures 254 predictors in case of QH auction predictions and over 300 for intraday continuous forecasts. Such an expansive model might serve as a sensitivity check. If our expert decisions are correct, than the models shall result in similar accuracy. The βqh,1,...,30 parameters in Eq. (4) are determined by the well-known ordinary least squares (OLS) optimization in our ﬁrst model, leading to the estimator calledLM hereinafter. One of the key points of this paper is an evaluation of the ideas in Ziel et al. (2015) and Ziel (2017). Does the EXAA price add accuracy gains in QH markets? We introduce a second model, LMEXAA, with one slight diﬀerence to Eq. (4). All parameters remain unchanged for the prediction of both intraday and auc- tion markets, but we add the EXAA quarter-hourly auction re- sults as another explanatory variable. The sources above found evidence for accuracy gains once EXAA prices were included, which is why we expect them to enhance our models in a simi- lar fashion. Another concern indirectly arises from Eq. (4). We use a large set of input factors where many features are assumed to be correlated. We apply a PCA but include a selection of lagged values which are again inputs for the PCA. Hence, high corre- lation in our predictors needs to be taken into account together with the fact that too many variables could cause overﬁtting. A second linear prediction model, denoted as EN, shall overcome this limitation. Introduced in Zou & Hastie (2005), elastic nets (EN) balance between linear and quadratic penalty factors or between lasso and ridge regression. Its great advantage is that it combines aspects out of the latter two algorithms, such that elastic nets can automatically remove unneeded variables en- tirely from the model while also being more robust to correla- tion than the lasso. We simplify the model in Eq. (4) to the regression form yqh,t = p∑ j=1 βqh,t, jxqh,t, j +εqh,t. (5) The OLS optimization aims to minimize the residual sum of squares (RSS). The elastic net estimator expands this approach by adding a linear penalty factor λqh≥ 0 in ˆβEN = arg min βqh    RS S +λqh  1−α 2 p∑ j=1 β2 qh, j +α p∑ j=1 ⏐⏐βqh, j ⏐⏐   | {z } Penalty Term    , (6) where RSS = T∑ t=1 (yqh,t− p∑ j=1 βqh, jxqh,t, j)2. In case of λqh = 0 we obtain the same results as for the OLS- based LM model. The other extreme case λqh→∞ causes all variables to be shrunken to zero, i.e., removed from the model or tending to zero depending on the weighting between lasso and ridge regression. The allocation between ridge and lasso is described by the parameter α∈ [0,1]. We follow the ﬁnd- ings of an empirical study in Uniejewski et al. (2016) and set α = 0.5 as subjective expert decision, that is justiﬁed by good predictive performance reported in the literature. The optimiza- tion itself might be seen as a trade-o ﬀ between minimizing the RSS and simplifying the model structure. Besides, an elastic net is a form of variable selection due to its ability to cancel out entire input factors. A regularization method such as the elas- tic net urgently necessitates normalization and standardization to yield valid results. The penalty term works by both scale and magnitude of the variables while we desire a sparse solu- tion based solely on the individual magnitude. However, the topic of standardization is of no concern in our context since the mlog transformation explicitly regards this aspect. Please note that in case of standardization there is no necessity for an intercept anymore which is why there is none in Eq. (4). Equation (6) leaves an optimization problem to be solved. We compute a solution using R’sglmnet package by Friedman et al. (2010). The optimization computation requires a mea- sure to be minimized, and in our case that is the mean squared error (MSE). Based on a user-speciﬁed number of 1,000 diﬀer- ent steps for λqh , glmnet automatically creates an exponential 9 grid starting from λ = 0.001 to a data-derived maximum per each quarter-hour and determines the best value based on a 10- fold cross-validation. Despite being more time intensive than a simple optimization, our cross-validation set-up provides gen- eralization with regards to the selected λqh . Just like the pre- vious OLS model, a second predictor ENEXAA comprises the quarter-hourly EXAA quotations of the delivery date. 4. Back-test results 4.1. Point forecast performance Before turning the attention to economic gains stemming from accurate forecasts, the predictive performance of our models in question requires discussion. Rolling estimations assure realis- tic simulation results. Hence, every model is iteratively ﬁtted and predicts on new data, while afterward the entire data ma- trix is shifted by 96 quarter-hours. This modus operandi en- sures that all predictions are made on out-of-sample data and reﬂects realistic behavior in practical applications. We train our model with nearly one year of data so that a period spanning from 08.10.2015 to 06.10.2016 is utilized for the initial train- ing. From 07.10.2016 to 31.05.2017 all values are predicted in an out-of-sample manner such that we have 57,714 individ- ually estimated quarter-hours to be evaluated in all upcoming tests. Given this vast amount of data, we believe the test results to be sound. We report two commonly used measures, the root-mean- square-error (RMSE) and mean-absolute-error (MAE), given by RMSE = vuu√ 1 96T T∑ t=1 96∑ qh=1 (yqh,t− ˆyqh,t)2, (7) MAE = 1 96T T∑ t=1 96∑ qh=1 ( ⏐⏐yqh,t− ˆyqh,t ⏐⏐), (8) where T describes the number of days, yqh,t the observed prices and ˆyqh,t its predicted counterpart. All results are re- ported in Table 3. They suggest that the quarter-hourly auction indeed beneﬁts from forecasts based on external factors since the diﬀerence between the benchmark model and the best per- forming EN estimator is more than 20% in the RMSE case. The LM model is better than the naive benchmark, and the elas- tic net approach tops that by roughly the same accuracy gain Model RMSE MAE RMSE MAE Expert_NaiveEXAA 7.85 4.9 12.81 8.64 Expert_LM 7.09 4.26 12.11 7.88 Expert_EN 6.31 3.76 11.58 7.55 Expert_LMEXAA 6.91 4.17 12.19 7.95 Expert_ENEXAA 6.12 3.65 11.58 7.55 Full_LM 10.28 7.04 215 13.41 Full_EN 5.9 3.62 11.6 7.53 Full_LMEXAA 16.16 11.06 over 1000 over 100 Full_ENEXAA 6.02 3.67 11.61 7.54 EPEX ID continuousEPEX QH auction Table 3: Error measures root-mean-square-error (RMSE) and mean-absolute- error (MAE) for applied forecast models. that separated the LM and the naive model for both RMSE and MAE. Given our range of auction data, advanced linear model- ing seems to add a crucial portion of performance. Interestingly, our choice of expert decision was not entirely correct since the full models feature lower MAE and RMSE values. However, this is not the case with LM models. As expected, they cannot handle the massive set of inputs and feature the highest RMSE and MAE results when enriched with all inputs. At the same time, the EXAA as a model input leaves the im- pression of minor importance. EXAA-enriched EN models out- perform their rivals by around 3% for the QH auction if we con- sider the RMSE. Still, this eﬀect has been expected to be higher and is only limited to the elastic net that can handle numerous input factors. The common OLS-based LM model rather seems to su ﬀer from more inputs. The EXAA provides a quarter- hourly quotation for the same delivery date but only slightly improves the models. This could either be caused by the time lag from result publication at 10am to EPEX bidding at 3pm or the diﬀerent intraday characteristics respectively. Indeed, one might argue that 5 or more hours could lead to new wind fore- casts and changed QH bids. Another thought is connected to the hourly day-ahead auction. Presumably, market participants wait for the most important German spot auction until they ac- tively trade-out their quarter-hourly shapes. Thus, the EXAA auction could be characterized by di ﬀerent market players and changing bidding behavior. However, these thoughts require quantitative backing in further research. The picture changes with the EPEX continuous intraday market. The performance is almost two times worse than QH auction results in case of EN predictions. Both MAE and RMSE are considerably higher for intraday estimations. An initial 4.1 Point forecast performance 10 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 1 5 9 13172125293337414549535761656973778185899397 RMSE_qh / MAE_qh model range RMSE_qh / MAE_qh value Delivery Quarter-hour Range MAE_qh Range RMSE_qh best RMSE_qh model best MAE_qh model 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 1 5 9 13 17 21 25 29 33 37 41 45 49 53 57 61 65 69 73 77 81 85 89 93 RMSE_qh / MAE_qh model range RMSE_qh / MAE_qh value b) EPEX intraday continuous a) EPEX QHauction Figure 4: Quarter-hourly model ﬁt metrics MAE_qh and RMSE_qh and range of MAE_qh and RMSE_qh between best and worst model. The plot is limited to the best performing model per market, in case of the QH auction that is Full_EN and for the intraday continuous market it is Expert_EN. Please note that we have excluded Full_LM and Full_LMEXAA from the plot due to its unreasonably high error metrics. guess might be that this observation is associated with even more substantial intra-model deviations. However, the results suggest a di ﬀerent outcome. The linear models only slightly increase the performance in comparison with the usage of plain EXAA prices as a prediction model input. Whereas elastic net outperforms the OLS-based predictor in QH auctions, its per- formance gain is only marginal in the intraday regime. Our em- pirical test suggests the same results for the question of EXAA inﬂuences on performance. An accuracy increase of around 1% does not support the argument of strong EXAA implications in continuous intraday markets. The market itself features an entirely diﬀerent pricing regime which tends to either be more complicated in prediction or inﬂuenced by other parameters. Besides that, the timing aspect also matters. All intraday fore- casts exploit the same fundamental data that was used for the QH auction. Updated wind or load data could boost accuracy. In terms of input factors our expert models are comparable to the full models with one exception; while the linear model was already struggling for QH auction data, the intraday continuous trading proves it to be unsuitable for large numbers of regres- sors. Its error measures clearly indicate a model issue and un- reasonable point forecasts. Figure 4 provides a graphical representation of the model ﬁt. Please note that we change eq. (7) and (8) to a quarter- hourly representation by adding the identically named su ﬃx. It shows the quarter-hourly term structure of the best perform- ing MAE_qh and RMSE_qh model as well as the range be- tween the best and worst performing model. It appears that each hour’s last quarter-hour is harder to estimate with higher RMSE_qh and MAE_qh results. This results in a characteristic zig-zag pattern in both markets. Besides, the transition phase from oﬀ-peak to peak between hour 7 and 8 and hour 20 to 21 is a common time of higher uncertainty. Additional plants are ramped up to cover tradeable peak proﬁle demands. These ef- fects are observable in higher error measures in Figure 4. The overall QH auction’s error range is constant besides the last QH and oﬀ-peak/peak changes but the intraday continuous plot re- veals higher model deviations for the entire peak time. So this market appears to be more diﬃcult to predict in peak hours. A more advanced test measure is delivered by Diebold & Mariano (1995) in the eponymous Diebold-Mariano (DM) test statistics. It has proven to be a profound measure with energy pricing applications in Nowotarski et al. (2014) and Bordignon et al. (2013) and aims at investigating the outperformance of 4.1 Point forecast performance 11 -5 -3 -1 1 3 5 7 9 1 8 15 22 29 36 43 50 57 64 71 78 85 92 DM test statistics Quarter-hours 5% Significance Expert_EN Expert_LM Expert_ENEXAA Expert_LMEXAA Ful l_EN Ful l_LM Ful l_ENEXAA Ful l_LMEXAA -5 -3 -1 1 3 5 7 9 1 8 15 22 29 36 43 50 57 64 71 78 85 92 b) Quarter-hourlyintraday market a) Quarter-hourlyauction Figure 5: Quarter-hourly Diebold-Mariano test statistics carried out under the absolute loss function and with loss series lagged four times determined by an AR(p) process. one model forecast over the other. The test input parameters are given by the loss di ﬀerential series Ωm1,m2 qh,t of the absolute error of models m1, m2 such that Ωm1,m2 qh,t = ⏐⏐ym1 qh,t− ˆym1 qh,t ⏐⏐p − ⏐⏐ym2 qh,t− ˆym2 qh,t ⏐⏐p . (9) Depending on the choice of p , the quadratic loss or the abso- lute loss is applied. Our tests did not reveal any considerable diﬀerence in the test results for either p = 1 or p = 2 which is why we stick to the former. An essential prerequisite of the test is non-covariance stationarity in errors as discussed in Diebold (2015). Daily test statistics might contradict this postulation since all of the quarter-hours are driven by the same daily fun- damental drivers as proposed by Nowotarski et al. (2016). Our univariate approach eludes this matter by its ﬁner resolution. Another concern arises from autoregressive structures. Since we include at least three lags, the quarter-hours and their con- nected prices must be correlated. This issue is dealt with by using lagged errors for Eq. (9). We inspect the partial auto- correlation function and ﬁt an AR(p) process to the intraday and QH auction time series (see Ziel et al. (2015) for the idea of ﬁtting an AR(p) process to tackle correlation in the DM test) to identify the most suitable lag order. In our case, an error series lagged four times appears to be statistically sound. The test itself is performed at the 5% signiﬁcance level and reﬂects consistent outperformance against the naive benchmark model. Figure 5 provides a graphical representation of the DM test results. The higher the test statistics for every quarter-hour are, the better the model performs in comparison with the bench- mark model. Furthermore, all values under or above the dot- ted gray line depict signiﬁcant overperfomance or underperfor- mance of the respective model. Bearing this in mind, Figure 5 supports the conclusion drawn from the RMSE scores. Nearly all linear models with expert choices tend to improve forecast accuracy for the QH auction with the EXAA-enriched ones better than non-EXAA predictions, and EN estimates slightly more precise than its OLS opponent. The LM models show signiﬁcantly negative performance compared to the benchmark, which again highlights their inability to deal with larger amounts of regressors. All models seem to su ﬀer in the same period around QH 36. We can acknowledge that EXAA slightly mat- ters for the QH auction market based on our empirical study since DM statistics are a bit higher for these models. Still, the eﬀect is very limited. The di ﬀerences among the contin- 4.2 Economic e ﬀects of accurate forecasts 12 0.45 0.5 0.55 0.6 0.65 0.7 1 8 15 22 29 36 43 50 57 64 71 78 85 92 DA test value Quarter-hour 50% Directional correctness a) Directional accuracy test -2 0 2 4 6 1 8 15 22 29 36 43 50 57 64 71 78 85 92 PT test statistics 5% Significance b) Pesaran and Timmermann test Figure 6: Directional forecast evaluations based on a) Directional Accuracy statistics and b) the Pesaran and Timmermann test. The term ’directional’ describes whether the set of forecasts for the EPEX QH auction and ID continuous market is capable of identifying the high price and low price trading venue. uous intraday models are reasonably low. Very few QHs show tendencies of statistical excess performance, and even in these scenarios, it is diﬃcult to favor a speciﬁc model. The majority of observations are to be found in the range below 5% signiﬁ- cance meaning neither LM, EN or EXAA enrichment leads to fewer errors compared to our benchmark. This outcome was unanticipated but might again be due to the time lag between estimations and continuous intraday trading activities. 4.2. Economic e ﬀects of accurate forecasts 4.2.1. Directional forecast portfolio approach A single point forecast has limited value if considered sepa- rately without a translation into a trading decision. We will in- troduce two diﬀerent approaches that shall use the forecasts as an input and transform these into a QH deal. Buying and sell- ing are regarded in diﬀerent portfolios to reﬂect possible gains for net buyers and sellers. Based on these thoughts, we ﬁrstly utilize both predictions in a simpliﬁed binary scheme. Compa- nies need to buy or sell their residual quarter-hourly spot proﬁle on spot exchanges and shall do so based on the simple rule of buying in the cheaper market (low market) and selling in the more expensive one (high market). Hence, a sell position is entered into the market with higher predicted prices, denoted as BaseSell, while the BaseBuy portfolio buys in the lower projected market. Since the previous sub-chapter reﬂected an apparent tendency towards the EN predictors being the best, we consider EN and ENEXAA for our analysis and introduce additional port- folios, BaseSell_EXAAand BaseBuy_EXAA. These will explicitly include the information provided by EXAA prices just as in the EN and LM forecast models. The above idea narrows the deal determination down to a di- rectional forecast based on the high and low market. Therefore, we want to elaborate the directional accuracy of our approach. The common measure (i.e., used in Moosa & Vaz (2015)) Di- rectional Accuracy (DAcc) delivers the ﬁrst hint of the binary accuracy of our forecasts in a directional setting and is deﬁned in a low market/high market application as DAcc = 1 n n∑ i=1 dqh,t, (10) with the connected hit series dqh,t =    1, if (ˆym1 qh,t > ˆym2 qh,t)∧ (ym1 qh,t > ym2 qh,t) 0, if (ˆym1 qh,t < ˆym2 qh,t)∧ (ym1 qh,t > ym2 qh,t). (11) Intuitively speaking, Eq. (11) assigns a value of 1 every time the higher or lower market is correctly predicted. The represen- tation is kept general, but in our given case the model indices m1, m2 denote either the EPEX QH auction or the QH in- traday market. Once we know whether the prediction of the higher market is right or wrong, the DAcc measure in Eq. (10) reports the share of correct directional estimates. The second framework is provided by Pesaran & Timmermann (1992) and supposes independent directions of the observed and predicted 4.2 Economic e ﬀects of accurate forecasts 13 realizations under the null hypothesis, i.e., that estimated direc- tions do not add extra knowledge. Both metrics will be reported quarter-hourly to gain additional insights into the time structure accuracy of the predictions. Figure 6 summarizes the ﬁndings in a combined way. The upper plot shows that using the individual forecasts to estimate the cheaper or more expensive exchange leads to more than 50% correctness in most cases. In general, this is a promis- ing ﬁnding since once we have a higher correctness rate than 50%, there is a possibility to observe economic beneﬁts. How- ever, this postulation only holds true if the losses of an incorrect prediction and the gains of a correct one are equally distributed such that the cost of making a wrong prediction is nearly equal to the beneﬁt of being correct. On the other hand, we see a de- cline in directional accuracy in the peak QHs ranging roughly from quarter-hour 36 to 70. Our estimations seem to be more accurate in o ﬀ-peak regimes given the dataset. This message is supported by the second metrics depicted in the lower part of Figure 6. The Pesaran and Timmermann (PT) test statis- tics exhibit an o ﬀ-peak/peak pattern. The actual test score is contradictory to the measure mentioned before. The majority of quarter-hours do not pass the test, meaning that we found evidence that the correct direction and its predicted equivalent are less independent than desired. This outcome was unfore- seen considering the results of the Directional Accuracy test. To conclude, the tests suggest a promising rate of correctness but do not allow us to reject the null hypothesis of autonomous directional errors. The forecast quality might be biased. Still, we have to acknowledge that we only want to investigate the economic value of our point forecasts and have translated them into a binary framework. So, they could be distorted since the basis is not a designated directional estimation. 4.2.2. Mean-variance portfolio selection A diﬀerent portfolio composition technique is given by mean- variance portfolio selection. Initially introduced in Markowitz (1952), its classical scope covers ﬁnancial markets and the se- lection of stocks under expected return and variance. However, there are a few energy market applications of mean-variance concepts available (the interested reader might refer to a re- cent review of this topic in Calvo-Silvosa et al. (2017)). To apply such, the deﬁnition of return needs to be clariﬁed. Fi- nancial markets assume a ﬁxed asset position with payments of price movements leading to a return given by rtraditional,qh,t = (yqh,t/yqh,t−1)− 1 . This notation makes sense for storable as- sets or long-term power contracts but does not apply to a spot market example. Long-term contracts, like futures, are usually settled daily in a margining process such that only the price dif- ference is paid or received. The same holds true for a stock position. In spot markets, the daily position will most likely be diﬀerent due to changing oﬀ-take or power plant generation. Hence, the resulting cash-ﬂow is di ﬀerent. A consecutive two- day long position of 50MW will not just be settled at the price delta between day one and day two (as done with futures and daily margining), but a market participant has to pay 50 MW times the market price. Therefore, we will regard the price it- self as the return leading to our notation rqh,t = yqh,t . Another diﬀerence is given by the diﬀerentiation into buy and sell port- folios. Once we value a high return (or in our notation a high clearing price) as desirable and optimize with regards to that, we will identify a sell portfolio because a market player obvi- ously demands high prices and high returns. The buy portfolio is the inverse of the particular optimization result and yields lower returns or lower prices for net buyers in the market. The mean-variance theory incorporates expected returns and variance into an optimization framework. Individual assets num- bered by i = 1,..., n are weighted by a factor wi,qh,t to com- pose a portfolio of assets. In our concrete case, the portfolio is restricted to two assets or the choice between the QH intra- day auction and continuous intraday trading. Unlike ﬁnancial applications, we do not include any risk-free benchmark assets. Using our prices as single time series returns in the Markowitz sense leads to a portfolio return in rportfolio,qh,t = 2∑ i=1 wi,qh,tyi,qh,t, (12) where yi,qh,t are the realized values for either the QH auction or the intraday market and wi,qh,t are the connected weights. Yet, Eq. (12) only provides insights into the historical return and does not comprise any future-oriented quantiﬁcation. Markowitz optimizations require expected returns denoted asE(rportfolio,qh,t) which inevitably necessitates expected single i -th returns, i.e., E(ri,qh,t) = E(yi,qh,t) = µi,qh,t . Instead of the traditional mean formulation, we want to approximate the expected return by means of our forecasts so that µi,qh,t∼ ˆyi,qh,t. Pruning the nota- tion to just a single weighting factor and taking into considera- 4.2 Economic e ﬀects of accurate forecasts 14 -2 0 2 1 11 21 31 41 51 61 71 81 91 Spread EPEX QH vs. EPEX ID in EUR/MWh Delivery quarter-hour Ø -Spreadof all quarter-hours:0.76EUR/MWh Figure 7: Quarter-hourly spreads of portfolio strategy Base Sell_EXAA/BaseBuy_EXAA, i.e., sell in the predicted high market and buy in its lower equivalent. The markets under consideration are the continuous QH intraday market and the EPEX QH intraday call auction. Portfolio ID Description Price Min Price Max Price Std.Dev Sharpe- Ratio Benchmark portfolios NaiveEXAA EXAA QH trading of residual volumes 34.95 -102.34 168.85 17.18 2.04 NaiveAUQH EPEX intraday QH auction trading of resuming position 34.66 -134.82 290.65 19.15 1.81 NaiveIDQH EPEX intraday QH VW AP trading of residual position 34.81 -241.83 329.81 20.27 1.72 NaivereBAP Settlement of residual position at reBAP price with grid operator 34.74 -2558.42 24455.05 147.54 0.24 PerfectBuy Full information benchmark portfolio, always buys in lower market 30.74 -241.83 166.42 19.40 1.58 PerfectSell Full information benchmark portfolio, always sells in lower market 38.73 -117.77 329.81 19.22 2.02 Forecast portfolios BaseBuy Buy in market with lowest predicted price using EN 34.38 -173.94 329.81 19.83 1.74 BaseSell Sell in market with highest predicted price using EN 35.09 -241.83 266.17 19.61 1.78 BaseBuy_EXAA Buy in market with lowest predicted price using ENEXAA 34.36* -173.94 329.81 19.84 1.73 BaseSell_EXAA Sell in market with highest predicted price using ENEXAA 35.11** -241.83 266.17 19.59 1.79 MeanVarBuy Mean-variance portfolio with lowest return, i.e., lowest price to pay using EN 34.71 -178.50 245.99 19.09 1.83 MeanVarSell Mean-variance portfolio with highest return, i.e., highest price to sell using EN 34.76 -173.89 213.02 18.62 1.87 MeanVarBuy_EXAA Mean-variance portfolio with lowest return, i.e., lowest price to pay using ENEXAA 34.72 -178.50 245.99 19.00 1.83 MeanVarSell_EXAA Mean-variance portfolio with highest return, i.e., highest price to sell using ENEXAA 34.76 -173.89 213.02 18.62 1.87 Table 4: Empirical test results of di ﬀerent portfolio strategies in the case study period from 07.10.2017 - 31.05.2018. The prices are not volume weighted nor adjusted in any way and reﬂect the price one would buy or sell at given the selected portfolio strategy. Naive prices denote the simple average of the respective price series. Both the lowest buy price (*) and the highest sell price (**) are marked for convenience. tion the thoughts on expected return yields a more simple form such that E(rportfolio,qh,t) = ˆy1,qh,t + w2,qh,t(ˆy2,qh,t− ˆy1,qh,t). (13) The variance is determined by a simplifying relaxation. Instead of complex estimation schemes, we will apply the empirical 5 variance σ2 i,qh,t of the individual exchange return series and as- 5Please note that we apply the described rolling estimation shifts to deter- mine the empirical variance. Hence, the ﬁrst window to calculate the variance ranges from 08.10.2015 until 07.10.2016. This time span is shifted by 96 units for every single day and ensures a unique empirical variance for every day and every quarter-hour. 4.2 Economic e ﬀects of accurate forecasts 15 sume it to be the best estimator in the calculation of the portfolio return in σ2 portfolio,qh,t = (w2 1,qh,tσ2 1,qh,t)+(w2 2,qh,tσ2 2,qh,t)+2w1,qh,tw2,qh,tρ12,qh,t, (14) with ρ12,qh,t being the correlation of the returns. We simplify Eq. (14) to eliminate w1,qh,t : σ2 portfolio,qh,t =σ2 1,qh,t + 2w2,qh,t(ρ12,qh,t−σ2 1,qh,t) (15) +(w2 2,qh,t)(σ2 1,qh,t− 2ρ12,qh,t +σ2 2,qh,t). An important part of portfolio theory is the identiﬁcation of all e ﬃcient portfolios under non-zero weights and a sum of weights equal to one. The latter postulation results in the as- sumption of perfectly divisible asset portions. We follow this traditional concept but must acknowledge that under real-life trading circumstances the exchange pre-deﬁned minimum tick sizes condition small adjustments to the optimization results due to the fact that they are not tradable. We are also not in- terested in computing the entire set of e ﬃcient portfolios but want to ﬁnd the one portfolio that exhibits the highest utility for the market participant. The utility function is deﬁned as an optimization problem in (basic form taken from Calvo-Silvosa et al. (2017)) Uqh,t = arg min w2,qh,t E(rportfolio,qh,t)− 1 2γσ2 portfolio,qh,t (16) s.t. wi,qh,t∈ [0, 1], in which γ denotes a variable to specify the risk-aversion of the market participant. We follow the energy literature and set γ = 2 which is regarded to be a slightly higher average risk appetite (Gökgöz & Atmaca (2012); Liu & Wu (2007)). Given the high variance of the intraday series an adjustment towards less risk aversion appears to be suitable. Otherwise, the op- timization will mostly select the QH auction market. At the same time, the slight changes to the original equations in Eq. (13) and Eq. (15) yield only one weighting parameter w2,qh,t to be optimized. If we consider that possible solutions are re- stricted to be anything between zero or one, it becomes evident that we implicitly meet the requirement ∑2 i=1 wi,qh,t = 1 . We use R’s standard optimization command optim to ﬁnd a so- lution for Eq. (16). The optimization result yields two trad- ing indications; if we value positive returns as desired to sell at high prices, the portfolio MeanVarSell is the important one whereas its counterpart MeanVarBuy sets the focus on negative returns and lower prices for a net buyer. The same contentual separation counts for the EXAA-enriched equivalents Mean- VarSell_EXAA and MeanVarBuy_EXAA respectively. 4.2.3. Economic portfolio assessment Now that we have determined diﬀerent portfolio strategies with EXAA and non-EXAA variations, the last facet to assess is the economic gain or loss resulting from our underlying forecasts and portfolio strategies. For the sake of simplicity, we neglect all kinds of fees and trading charges as well as the price im- pacts possible bids might have. Hence, we assume su ﬃcient market liquidity to absorb additional trading volumes. Last but not least, volume weighted average prices (VW AP) are only an approximation for continuous market prices. Apparently, a market participant does not have direct access to index quota- tions. Instead, regular trading activities could lead to average deal prices near the VW AP. Since the intraday trading activities are up to individual counterparts, with a detailed time series not being available, we apply the VW AP as a best guess. Based on these prices, we carry out a simple portfolio simulation and check the average portfolio price a market participant would pay or receive when following the portfolio strategy. The back- test ranges from 07.10.2016 to 31.05.2018 and is summarized in Table 4 together with a synopsis of all portfolio strategies. We use the original prices to get the most realistic results. The only adaptation we apply is the clock-change adjustment de- scribed under sub-section 3.1. We acknowledge that this causes a small bias but since it only accounts for two hours of each year we ignore the clock-change in the trading simulation. Besides the usual standard measures on time series resolution, we report a common portfolio management criterion called Sharpe-Ratio (adjusted from Calvo-Silvosa et al. (2017)) S = 1 96T ∑T t=1 ∑96 qh=1(ystrategy,qh,t) σstrategy , (17) where the numerator describes the average realized price of the respective portfolio strategy over all days and quarter-hours and σstrategy the standard deviation of the realized prices of each strategy. The strategy prices ystrategy,qh,t are individually deter- mined per strategy, as previously described. In case of Base Sell for instance, the strategy prices equal the market price of the higher predicted exchange. Please bear in mind that in its con- 4.2 Economic e ﬀects of accurate forecasts 16 ventional form the Sharpe-Ratio applies the average excess re- turn, but since we set the risk-free rate to be equal to zero, this step is not necessary, and the realized portfolio price is identical to the excess return. The naive portfolios only buy or sell in one market at the simple average of the time series and consequently yield lower sell and higher buy prices. There is no buy or sell separa- tion with the naive prices while the forecast approaches im- ply a buy and sell market price. Consequently, our naive sin- gular market strategies yield no spread beneﬁts. We likewise report a perfect portfolio strategy under the assumption of com- plete market information. The results are highly unlikely to be achieved in a real-world scenario but represent the obtain- able gains from fully accurate forecasts. However, we will not discuss the perfect portfolio in depth but focus our attention on achieved spreads compared to singular market activities as these depict current market participant behavior more than the postulation for complete ex-ante market knowledge. In general, the forecast portfolios perform well. Our results point towards an outperformance of high/low market interaction referred to as BaseBuy and BaseSell and their EXAA-enriched equivalents. In detail, market participants buy 0.70 - 0.74 €/MWh cheaper and sell 0.74 - 0.78€/MWh higher compared to any other of the individual markets. Interestingly, the addition of EXAA prices yields higher spreads. While the EXAA-aided point forecasts become only a bit more accurate for the QH auction, the direc- tional accuracy tends to improve. This ﬁnding seems contra- dictory at ﬁrst, but might be the case since a directional fore- cast does not advance from a precise point prediction but solely from correct high/low market estimates. The Markowitz approach adds a considerably lower por- tion of economic gains. Its portfolio structure is a trade-o ﬀ be- tween the auction and continuous intraday prices. The realized portfolio price varies between the QH auction and its continu- ous equivalent. A possible explanation might be given by the Markowitz inputs. The optimization has to split between the highly volatile intraday continuous market and the more mod- erate QH auction. Most of the time, this results in a signiﬁcant portion of QH auction prices due to risk aversion tendencies. Hence, if one considers the utility function in Eq. (16), a more risk averse portfolio is created. While the plain prices do not suggest larger beneﬁts from following Markowitz-guided trad- ing in comparison with the base strategies, the Sharpe-Ratio and standard deviation do. Both the Markowitz portfolio and the Sharpe-Ratio include a variance measure in their calculus. Therefore, it does not come as a surprise that the best Sharpe- Ratio results are provided by mean-variance portfolios. Still, we would have expected at least a small portion of economic beneﬁt expressed in better spread levels. An explanation for the performance is the concern over correlation. Our choice of assets was predetermined, and we have not checked the cor- relation between the time series, but in ﬁnancial markets, the co-movement among stocks contributes to a less balanced port- folio composition. The picture might change with less corre- lation between assets. However, the empirical results do not provide evidence for Markowitz approaches to perform better regarding higher spreads but construct a risk-minimizing port- folio. Therefore, we favor the simple base strategies that are grounded on a high/low market scenario and will purely focus on such in the detailed analysis. A simple t-test depicted in Table 5 is supposed to deliver further evidence on the statistical soundness of the identiﬁed excess performance. The p-values propose signiﬁcant di ﬀer- ences between our forecast-aided base portfolio prices and the intraday continuous time series. The QH auction result is less clear and shows signs of correlation with the non-EXAA base strategies. The result at least partially conﬁrms our ﬁndings. Forecast applications translated into a simple buy /sell trading decision result in di ﬀerent portfolio price means compared to the underlying individual prices. There are tests available for the equality of Sharpe-Ratios. They use the portfolio prices as inputs and check for statistically sound di ﬀerences among Sharpe-Ratios. We apply the classical pairwise test of Ledoit & Wolf (2008) and an expansion that considers joint e ﬀects of prices in a multiple Sharp-Ratio test in Leung & Wong (2008) and later for non-iid cases in Wright et al. (2014). Results are reported in Table 5. While the multiple test statistics clearly point towards independent Sharpe-Ratios, some of the pairwise test ﬁndings have to be rejected. However, this does not contra- dict our general statement of independent, considerable di ﬀer- ences in prices when using forecasts since most of the combi- nations that appear to be correlated are using a slightly changed set of inputs and might indeed be nearly equal. Table 4 implies homogeneity across all QHs. We addition- ally want to analyze time structure eﬀects on the economic out- come and turn our attention to the realized spread of the best performing Base Sell/BaseBuy strategy. Based on the forecasts, 17 p-values BaseBuy BaseSell BaseBuy_EXAA BaseSell_EXAA NaiveAUQH 0.016 0.017 0.005 <0.001 NaiveIDQH <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 0.005 Table 5: T-test for statistical signiﬁcance of lower buy and higher sell prices. The two-sided test postulates H0 : µ1−µ2 = 0 and checks for statistically sound diﬀerences in portfolio prices. we observe a high/low spread (the delta between high and low prices) of 0.76€/MWh among all QHs. Figure 7 cascades this singular number into a ﬁner granularity. It depicts limitations for the peak-load ranging from QHs 32 to 75 where spreads are around zero or even negative. This ﬁnding matches the outcome of our directional forecast metrics and suggests an overall lower predictive power during the middle quarter-hours of the day. On the other hand, its surrounding o ﬀ-peak equivalents feature re- markably high spreads. Some hours exhibit price di ﬀerences around 2€/MWh. Even under the assumption of negative peak spreads, the overall average delta of more than 70Cent /MWh allows for the conclusion of economic gains to be made in our case study. Overall, we need to mention that a very primitive strategy based on two point forecasts yields the most attractive eco- nomic beneﬁts albeit the test statistics before have revealed the limitations of our point forecasts to binary prediction applica- tions. The more complex mean-variance optimization approach could not entirely live up to the expectations. The strategy did not provide any spread beneﬁts, only a good Sharpe-Ratio and risk-averse portfolio structures. However, the Markowitz op- timization was the less volatile portfolio choice with the low- est standard deviations. Despite the missing spread beneﬁt, its price level was exactly between the two individual exchanges and marks the best alternative for risk averse market partici- pants. To be more concrete on numbers, we assume an equally dis- tributed 50MW QH spread position based on the Base Sell_EXAA and BaseBuy_EXAA forecasts. If a market participant follows our EXAA base strategy from 07.10.2016 to 31.05.2018, savings of €325,080 for a buyer or additional revenues in the same range for a seller are to be realized under the assumption of no extra fees and access to VW AP prices. 5. Conclusion and outlook We contributed to a blind spot in the current literature by an- alyzing quarter-hourly German spot markets. The general ten- dency towards more volatile power grids necessitated the intro- duction of a quarter-hourly intraday call auction and the pos- sibility to trade quarter-hours in continuous intraday trading. Our paper provides the ﬁrst detailed discussion on how to fore- cast these markets ex-ante. We have applied modern regression techniques, namely the elastic net estimator that automatically penalizes features that do not add any insight, and compared the outcome with classical linear regression models. One of the pe- culiarities of German spot markets is the existence of a variety of trading opportunities. In particular, the Austrian EXAA of- fers a ﬁrst day-ahead indication on quarter-hours that can be de- livered into the German grids. To account for that, we have ap- plied the EXAA as a standalone naive estimate as well as an in- put for our more advanced regression models. We found that the intraday auction is easier to predict compared to ongoing trad- ing. Our EN-based prediction method provides high forecasting accuracy and outperforms the considered benchmark models. When we add the available EXAA prices, the results are even more convincing. This assumption was further conﬁrmed by the popular Diebold-Mariano test that revealed a statistically sound outperformance of all models, but EXAA ones and the EN one in particular, over the naive benchmark. Surprisingly, this ﬁnding does not hold true for the continuous intraday mar- ket. Our forecast models revealed only minor increases in per- formance and fewer quarter-hours where the Diebold-Mariano statistics suggest better results than the benchmark. EXAA prices only mattered to a small extent. Another interesting as- pect occurred in the construction of input factors. We initially expected the expert choice model to comprise all relevant fac- tors, but the outperformance of the full model group proved us wrong. When adding every possible input, the OLS-based LM models ran into problems due to the massive set of regressors but the elastic net and its feature selection revealed lower error metrics. If we recap the times of trading and forecasting, a prob- lem arises. The QH auction is estimated shortly after the data has been published, i.e., uses the most current freely available inputs, whereas the last hours of continuous trading are deter- mined 24 hours later. This situation could lead to new informa- tion. However, we have neglected this last facet and have si- Bibliography 18 EXAA_QH EPEX_ID EPEX_QH EN_Sell EN_BuyEN_SellEXAAEN_BuyEXAAMVC_SellEXAAMVC_BuyEXAA MVC_Buy MVC_Sell EXAA_QH X EPEX_ID <0.001 X EPEX_QH <0.001 <0.001 X EN_Sell <0.001 <0.001 0.05 X EN_Buy <0.001 0.08 <0.001 <0.001 X EN_SellEXAA <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 X EN_BuyEXAA <0.001 0.13 <0.001 <0.001 0.47 <0.001 X MVC_SellEXAA <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 X MVC_BuyEXAA <0.001 <0.001 0.02 <0.001 <0.001 0.83 <0.001 <0.001 X MVC_Buy <0.001 <0.001 0.02 <0.001 <0.001 0.84 <0.001 <0.001 0.21 X MVC_Sell <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 0.39 <0.001 <0.001 X Multiple Sharpe-Ratio test (all 11 price series jointly tested) p-value: <0.001 Table 6: Test results reported as p-values for two Sharpe-Ratio equality tests. The null hypothesis states that Sharpe-Ratios are equal and can be rejected with suﬃciently low p-values. We apply two diﬀerent tests, a pairwise test reported in the table and a test that jointly considers all Sharpe-Ratios. multaneously predicted both markets to evaluate the economic eﬀects of our forecasts. Their standalone information might help regulators or grid operators, but we deliberately focus on a market player application and derive portfolio strategies with both EXAA and non-EXAA-enriched estimations. We intro- duced a straightforward “sell in the high and buy in the low market” rule for the ﬁrst set of portfolios and expanded the sec- ond group by a Markowitz mean-variance approach. We were able to demonstrate that the low /high strategies perform best, leading to considerable spreads and attractive beneﬁts for ei- ther a net buyer or a net seller. The Markowitz approaches did not show any economic improvements in the form of favorable spreads but delivered a maximum Sharpe-Ratio portfolio. So even if market players seek to follow traditional mean-variance strategies under the precept of risk-aversion, a precise quarter- hourly forecast could deliver a suitable input for estimated re- turns. At the same time, we must acknowledge that the basic setup, despite its decent gains, was a rather simple one and could be extended. We assumed a stable net buy or sell position in all QHs and only roughly considered term-structure e ﬀects. A proper analysis of weekends, peak /oﬀ-peak patterns or the aforementioned trading and prediction time could yield bene- ﬁcial insights. The same counts for the point predictions it- self. What if we continuously forecast quarter-hourly prices once new information is published? Or how does accuracy change if we add more accurate vendor data? We have just fo- cused on linear models in our study but of course there are other non-linear prediction models such as random forests available. For instance, a study in Ludwig et al. (2015) has shown that lasso estimators provided comparable results to random forests in EPEX day-ahead predictions. But does this hold true for quarter-hourly markets as well? Another point of possible crit- icism arises from the high /low portfolio. The individual fore- casts were combined to a directional estimation. One could also discuss available directional forecast approaches and simplify the forecasting problem to the binary one that is utilized in the portfolio application. Acknowledgments The valuable contributions of anonymous referees are grate- fully acknowledged. This work was partially supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG, Germany) and the Na- tional Science Center (NCN, Poland) through BEETHOVEN project IMMORTAL (Investigating Market Microstructure and shOrt-term pRice forecasTing in intrA-day eLectricity markets) grant no. 379008354 (to FZ). Appendix A. Supplementary data Supplementary data to this article can be found online at DOI: 10.17632/2trdgv8wrp.3. Bibliography Aïd, R., Gruet, P., & Pham, H. (2016). An optimal trading problem in intraday electricity markets. Mathematics and Financial Economics, 10, 49–85. Bordignon, S., Bunn, D. W., Lisi, F., & Nan, F. (2013). Combining day-ahead forecasts for british electricity prices. Energy Economics, 35, 88–103. Bibliography 19 Buuren, S., & Groothuis-Oudshoorn, K. (2011). mice: Multivariate imputation by chained equations in R. Journal of statistical software, 45, 1–67. Calvo-Silvosa, A., Antelo, S. I., Soares, I. et al. (2017). Energy planning and modern portfolio theory: A review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 77, 636–651. Diebold, F. X. (2015). Comparing predictive accuracy, twenty years later: A personal perspective on the use and abuse of diebold–mariano tests. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 33, 1–1. Diebold, F. X., & Mariano, R. S. (1995). Comparing predictive accuracy. Journal of Business & economic statistics, 13, 253–263. EPEX (2013). 15-minute intraday call auction: 3 pm. the new meeting point for the german market. URL: https://www.epexspot.com/document/ 29113/15-Minute%20Intraday%20Call%20Auction. Friedman, J., Hastie, T., & Tibshirani, R. (2010). Regularization paths for generalized linear models via coordinate descent. Journal of statistical software, 33, 1. Garnier, E., & Madlener, R. (2015). Balancing forecast errors in continuous-trade intraday markets. Energy Systems, 6, 361–388. Gökgöz, F., & Atmaca, M. E. (2012). Financial optimization in the turkish electricity market: Markowitz’s mean-variance approach. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 16, 357–368. Gürtler, M., & Paulsen, T. (2018). Forecasting performance of time series models on electricity spot markets: a quasi-meta-analysis. International Journal of Energy Sector Management, 12, 103–129. Hirth, L. (2013). The market value of variable renewables: The eﬀect of solar wind power variability on their relative price. Energy economics, 38, 218–236. Ketterer, J. C. (2014). The impact of wind power generation on the electricity price in germany. Energy Economics, 44, 270–280. Kiesel, R., & Paraschiv, F. (2017). Econometric analysis of 15-minute intraday electricity prices. Energy Economics, 64, 77–90. Ledoit, O., & Wolf, M. (2008). Robust performance hypothesis testing with the sharpe ratio. Journal of Empirical Finance, 15, 850–859. Leung, P.-L., & Wong, W.-K. (2008). On testing the equality of the multiple sharpe ratios, with application on the evaluation of ishares. Journal of Risk, 10, 15–30. Liu, M., & Wu, F. F. (2007). Portfolio optimization in electricity markets. Electric Power systems research, 77, 1000–1009. Ludwig, N., Feuerriegel, S., & Neumann, D. (2015). Putting big data analytics to work: Feature selection for forecasting electricity prices using the lasso and random forests. Journal of Decision Systems, 24, 19–36. Maciejowska, K., & Nowotarski, J. (2016). A hybrid model for gefcom2014 probabilistic electricity price forecasting. International Journal of Forecasting, 32, 1051–1056. Maciejowska, K., Nowotarski, J., & Weron, R. (2016). Probabilistic forecasting of electricity spot prices using factor quantile regression averaging. International Journal of Forecasting, 32, 957–965. Märkle-Huß, J., Feuerriegel, S., & Neumann, D. (2018). Contract durations in the electricity market: Causal impact of 15min trading on the epex spot market. Energy Economics, 69, 367–378. Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio selection. The journal of ﬁnance, 7, 77–91. Moosa, I., & Vaz, J. (2015). Directional accuracy, forecasting error and the proﬁtability of currency trading: model-based evidence. Applied Economics, 47, 6191–6199. Nowotarski, J., Liu, B., Weron, R., & Hong, T. (2016). Improving short term load forecast accuracy via combining sister forecasts. Energy, 98, 40–49. Nowotarski, J., Raviv, E., Trück, S., & Weron, R. (2014). An empirical comparison of alternative schemes for combining electricity spot price forecasts. Energy Economics, 46, 395–412. Pape, C., Hagemann, S., & Weber, C. (2016). Are fundamentals enough? explaining price variations in the german day-ahead and intraday power market. Energy Economics, 54, 376–387. Paraschiv, F., Erni, D., & Pietsch, R. (2014). The impact of renewable energies on eex day-ahead electricity prices. Energy Policy, 73, 196–210. Pesaran, M. H., & Timmermann, A. (1992). A simple nonparametric test of predictive performance. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 10, 461–465. Uniejewski, B., Nowotarski, J., & Weron, R. (2016). Automated variable selection and shrinkage for day-ahead electricity price forecasting. Energies, 9, 621. Uniejewski, B., Weron, R., & Ziel, F. (2018). Variance stabilizing transformations for electricity spot price forecasting. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 33, 2219–2229. Viehmann, J. (2017). State of the german short-term power market. Zeitschrift für Energiewirtschaft, 41, 1–17. Weron, R. (2007). Modeling and forecasting electricity loads and prices: A statistical approach volume 403. John Wiley & Sons. Weron, R. (2014). Electricity price forecasting: A review of the state-of-the-art with a look into the future. International journal of forecasting, 30, 1030–1081. Weron, R., & Misiorek, A. (2008). Forecasting spot electricity prices: A comparison of parametric and semiparametric time series models. International journal of forecasting, 24, 744–763. Wright, J., Yam, S., & Pang Yung, S. (2014). A test for the equality of multiple sharpe ratios. Journal of Risk, 16, 3–21. Würzburg, K., Labandeira, X., & Linares, P. (2013). Renewable generation and electricity prices: Taking stock and new evidence for germany and austria. Energy Economics, 40, S159–S171. Ziel, F. (2017). Modeling the impact of wind and solar power forecasting errors on intraday electricity prices. In European Energy Market (EEM), 2017 14th International Conference on the (pp. 1–5). IEEE. Ziel, F., Steinert, R., & Husmann, S. (2015). Forecasting day ahead electricity spot prices: The impact of the exaa to other european electricity markets. Energy Economics, 51, 430–444. Zou, H., & Hastie, T. (2005). Regularization and variable selection via the elastic net. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 67, 301–320.