EPJ manuscript No. (will be inserted by the editor) How spread changes aﬀect the order book: Comparing the price responses of order deletions and placements to trades Stephan Grimm and Thomas Guhr Fakult¨ at f¨ ur Physik, Universit¨ at Duisburg-Essen, Lotharstraße 1, 47048 Duisburg, Germany Received: date / Revised version: date Abstract. We observe the eﬀects of the three diﬀerent events that cause spread changes in the order book, namely trades, deletions and placement of limit orders. By looking at the frequencies of the relative amounts of price changing events, we discover that deletions of orders open the bid-ask spread of a stock more often than trades do. We see that once the amount of spread changes due to deletions exceeds the amount of the ones due to trades, other observables in the order book change as well. We then look at how these spread changing events aﬀect the prices of stocks, by means of the price response. We not only see that the self-response of stocks is positive for both spread changing trades and deletions and negative for order placements, but also cross-response to other stocks and therefore the market as a whole. In addition, the self-response function of spread-changing trades is similar to that of all trades. This leads to the conclusion that spread changing deletions and order placements have a similar eﬀect on the order book and stock prices over time as trades. PACS. PACS-key discribing text of that key – PACS-key discribing text of that key 1 Introduction The trading of stocks is central to and of vital importance in the activity of a stock market exchange. Those par- ticipating in the stock market often abide by the saying, buy low and sell high, simply in order to make the most proﬁt on their trades within the market. Although often ignored in the model building, it has a large impact on the price dynamics and thus on the stylized facts as well as on the more speciﬁc features [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9]. Fur- thermore, the relation between trades and price changes has received considerable attention [2,4,10,11,12,13,14, 15,16]. Recent studies [17,18,19,20,21] show that indeed trading of a stock not only has a positive eﬀect on the traded stocks price itself, but also on the prices of other stocks in the market as well. This indicates a more gener- alized impact on the stock market at large. However con- trary to the naive assumption that trading is the predom- inant activity on the market, we will see in the sequel that the stock market is also severely aﬀected by withdrawals of limit orders. In order to compare the eﬀect of limit order deletions to that of trades, we look at events that cause a change in the spread, since trades can only happen at the quote prices of a stock. These events however include the placement of limit orders into the spread, therefore giving us a general overview of the eﬀect of events that cause a spread change in the order book. The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we present our data set of stocks. We then analyze the dif- Send oﬀprint requests to : ferent properties of spread changing events in section 3, ﬁrst the distributions of relative amounts across stocks and then compare these to other observables in the or- der book. In section 4 we ﬁrst introduce the sign of price change and the self-response function to then calculate the price response on a event and physical time scale. Finally in section 5 we look at the individual cross-responses be- tween stock pairs and the average market response to each event type. Our conclusion follows in section 6. Through- out this paper we will only analyze trades, deletions and placements of limit orders that cause a change in spread. For simplicity, each time we use the terms trades, dele- tions and order placement we imply that these are only events which change the spread of the stock. 2 Data set The set of data we used comprises of 96 stocks of the NAS- DAQ100 stock index, as of February 21st, 2015. A detailed listing of all 96 stocks used can be found in appendix A. For every stock we have the intra-day data of each entire day from the 7th to the 11th of March, 2016. This gives us 480 sets of daily stock data. We purposely selected a week without any unusually high price changes and the trad- ing activity being about average for the respective stocks. The format of the raw data set is the TotalView-ITCH format, which contains the order ﬂow. This means that every change in the order book (an order being placed or exiting the order book) is listed with a unique identiﬁ- arXiv:1812.09067v1 [q-fin.TR] 21 Dec 2018 2 Stephan Grimm, Thomas Guhr: How spread changes aﬀect the order book Fig. 1. Frequencies of spread changes due to order placements, trades and deletions across all 96 stocks for every day in the time period from the 7 th to 11th of March, 2016. The ordinate shows the relative amount of spread changes due to each event type. cation number and a millisecond timestamp. In order to avoid overnight eﬀects and any artifacts at the opening and closing of the market, we consider only trades of the same day from 9:40 a.m. to 3:50 p.m. New York local time. 3 Properties of price changes 3.1 Distribution of price changes The price of a stocki at a given timet is given through the midpoint pricemi(t). We use the same notations and con- ventions as in [19,20]. The midpoint price can only change if best bid or best ask changes, so a midpoint price change always involves a change of the spread. The spread can widen through trade or deletions of orders and it can close by orders being placed into the spread. Figure 1 shows the histograms for all three types of spread changes with the respective relative amount occuring in each stock of our data set. We can observe three distinct distributions for trades, deletions and order placements. Most obvious is the very sharp peak for order placements, with the center of mass being around 0.5. The distributions for trades and deletions are much ﬂatter, but each showing a noticable peak at diﬀerent positions. The centers of those peaks are about 0.14 for trades and 0.34 for deletions. The distribu- tion for deletions shows a heavy tail to the left of its peak, whereas the distribution for trades shows a heavy tail to the right. The spread seems to change most often due to placement of orders and least often by trades. Obviously the relationship O +D +T = 1 (1) for spread changes is true for every individual stock, where asO,D andT are the relative amounts of spread changes due to order placements, deletions and trades, respec- tively. Because of the sharp peak in the distribution for Fig. 2. Spread changes due to trades versus deletions shown as relative amounts. Each dot represents one day of the 96 stocks for every day from the 7 th to 11 th of March, 2016. The green dashed line represents the line of balance. order placements we approximate that the percentage of these is constant at 0.5. This yields the relation T≃ 0.5−D . (2) between the relative amounts of trades and deletions. Un- der the assumption of a balance of incoming and exiting orders on the spread level, we get the inverse relationship (2) between the relative amounts of trades and deletions. Since the peak of the distribution for order placements is quite sharp, we see in Fig. 2 this inverse relationship reﬂected in the empirical data when we plot the relative amounts of trades as function of the relative amounts of deletions. However, the data points start to deviate more from the 0.5-line, which is shown as a green dashed line, the higher the relative amount of deletions gets. We will re- fer to the green line as the line of balance , as it marks the point where the sum of spread changes due to dele- tions and trades is equal to the amount of orders placed into the spread, thus causing a balance of orderﬂow on the spread level. The deviation only appears to happen below the green line, as very few data points are found above it. When a data point is below the line of balance, it means that trades and deletions together make up less than half of the events that change the spread in that particular stock. Consequentially this means that more orders are being placed into the spread than the spread being changed through trade or deletion. This corresponds well with the distribution for order placements, as it has a noticable tail to the right of its peak but a very light tail to the left. This means there are more stocks in which the Stephan Grimm, Thomas Guhr: How spread changes aﬀect the order book 3 Fig. 3. Total amount of spread changes on a logarithmic scale versus the relative amounts of spread changes due to trades, deletions and order placements in a stock. Each dot represents one day of the 96 stocks for every day from the 7 th to 11 th of March, 2016. relative amount of order placements at the spread level is above half. Interestingly enough the deviations only ap- pear to happen once a stock has its spread changes caused by deletions more than 0.25 of the time or in other words when the spread is more often changed due to a deletion than a trade. On the other hand, if we have more trades than deletions on the spread level, there always seems to be the aforementioned balance of incoming and exiting orders. If one equates the amount of spread changes caused by exiting orders with the activity in the orderbook, Fig. 3 indicates that activity mostly is made up by deletions. As the activity in a stock increases, spread changes due to trades become less likely. A possible explanation for this is that the more spread changes there are in a stock, the less time there is for volume to be accumulated on the quotes. In other words, there is less time for limit orders to be put into the order book at the same price as the best bid and best ask. Therefore, less individual orders are at the spread level. As there are less orders on the quote, it is more likely that if an order at the spread level is deleted that it is the last remaining order there and therefore changes the spread. The diﬀerence between trades and deletions is that deletions can only aﬀect one order as opposed to trades being able to aﬀect an order either fully, partially or multiple orders at once, depending on the volume of the initiating order. Trades can thus also change the spread even if there is more than one order on the spread level. A relation between the amount of activity and the rel- ative amount of order placements only seems to visible at both ends of the activity spectrum. These stocks are then located on the line of balance, as all of the data points are located at a relative amount of order placements of 0.5. 3.2 Spread changes vs. other observables Figure 4 shows the relation between the distribution of the three event types and the average daily spread. The av- erage spread in our case is the arithmetic mean, weighted with the amount of time the particular quote remains in the orderbook. As the spread size increases, the rel- ative amount of order placements starts to deviate more from 0.5. High relative amounts of trades and low rela- tive amounts of deletions in a stock coincide with narrow average spreads, which is a direct result of the inverse rela- tionship between trade and deletion percentages as shown in Fig. 2. The inverse relationship also is reﬂected in the seemingly mirrored shapes of the two graphs. As before, we again have two disctinct regimes on either side of the 0.25-line, although for both deletions and trades. In the regime when trades exceed the amount of deletions we only ﬁnd narrow spreads which are all slightly above the minimum possible width of an average spread, which is 0.01. Stocks with an average spread close to this value re- main at this spread for most of the day, which impacts the time-weighted average. In the regime where the amount of deletions exceeds the amount of trades, we ﬁnd a wide va- riety of spreads. It appears as if a relationship does not exist between the percentage of deletions or trades and the width of the average spread. If we compare Fig. 4 with Fig. 2, more speciﬁcally the regime in which the amount of trades exceeds the amount of deletions, we see that for this regime stocks that have a narrow average spread close to the minimum are right on the line of balance. This means that if a spread of 0.01 opens up, the next step is an order being placed into the spread, thus closing it again. This process repeats throughout the day, therefore causing or- der placements to be the same amount as orders exiting the order book. In Fig. 5 the stocks with an average spread below 0.02 are highlighted in green. They are all located on the line of balance. So if a stock has an average spread 4 Stephan Grimm, Thomas Guhr: How spread changes aﬀect the order book Fig. 4. Average time-weighted daily spread on a logarithmic scale versus the relative amounts of spread changes due to trades, deletions and order placements in a stock. Each dot represents one day of the 96 stocks for every day from the 7 th to 11 th of March, 2016. close to the miminum, there generally will be the same amount of orders being placed into the spread as orders exiting the orderbook. This is because in those stocks the price levels close to the spread are all occupied with many orders and therefore the spread usually only changes by 0.01. The changes happen between the two smallest pos- sible values 0.01 and 0.02, with the spread alternating be- tween opening and closing. However this balance does not only appear in these particular stocks but also in stocks with a larger average spread as we can also see multiple black dots which are located on the line of balance. 4 Average self-response 4.1 Sign of price change We introduce the sign of price change in stock i for an event at the time t as εi(t) = sgn ( Si(t)−mi(t−δ) ) = { +1 if on ask side, −1 if on bid side, (3) where Si(t) is the price of the limit order which is placed into or exits the order book at the timet andmi(t−δ) the midpoint price immediatly before the event takes place. 4.2 Price response function In order to measure the eﬀect of a spread changing event on the stock price of a stock i over time, we use the loga- rithmic return, deﬁned as ri(t,τ ) = logmi(t +τ)− logmi(t−δ) = logmi(t +τ) mi(t−δ) . (4) Fig. 5. Spread changes due to trades versus deletions shown as relative amounts. Green dots indicate stocks on diﬀerent days which have an average daily spread of below 0.02. Each dot represents one day of the 96 stocks for every day from the 7 th to 11 th of March, 2016. The green dashed line represents the line of balance. To acquire statistical signiﬁcance, the price response func- tion [17,19] Ri(τ) = ⟨ εi(t)ri(t,τ ) ⟩ t (5) is the time average of the product of time-lagged returns and trade signs for the stock i. Stephan Grimm, Thomas Guhr: How spread changes aﬀect the order book 5 Fig. 6. Price response on the logarithmic event time scale for spread changes due to trades (top), deletions (middle) and order placements (bottom). The black line is the average of all the response curves. Each line represents one day of the 96 stocks for every day from the 7 th to 11th of March, 2016. 4.3 Price response on event time scale We calculate the response function of all 96 stocks across each of the ﬁve days, shown in Fig. 6. To do so, we mea- sure the time on the event scale which means that every time step is another event of the same type. Here we only calculate intra-day price responses which means that if the time t +τ is outside of the data for that day, the re- sponse for that event is not included in the calculation. The response functions are calculated for a time lag of up to 10000 events. We see that the graphs for all three events are similar and in the same order of magnitude. To better compare the eﬀect of the three event types we plot the average responses in Fig. 7. Trades show an increas- ing positive price response, with the function returning to zero after about 5000 events, indicating a movement of the price in the direction of the trade. The price response to order placements is increasingly negative and the price response to deletions starts oﬀ positive but than falls be- low zero after about 100 events. After its negative peak it returns back to zero after about 10000 events, indicating a longer lasting eﬀect than trades, but shorter than order placements. The large jump in the response functions of trades at 10000 seconds is likely due to a lack of available data for that time lag. Fig. 7. Average price response on the logarithmic event time scale for spread changes due to trades, deletions and order placements. Each line represents the average over each of the 96 stocks for every day from the 7 th to 11th of March, 2016. 4.4 Price response on physical time scale The time between two events is not constant and not only does the average over all 96 stocks across the ﬁve days produce diﬀerent physical time scales, since the next event can happen at diﬀerent time, but it also only measures the spread change compared to the next event. The response on an event time scale does not register what happens with the price in between events of the same type since there can be other events causing the price to change. In order to see how the price is immediately aﬀected by an event, we now calculate the price response of a spread changing event on a physical time scale, with the results shown in Fig. 8. The response functions are calculated for a time lag of up to 10000 seconds. Again, beyond 1000 seconds or so, the results lose their statistical signiﬁcance. As for the response function on an event time scale, the individual responses for each of the three event types have the same shape. To better compare the eﬀect of the three event types we plot the average responses in Fig. 9. All three averages for each event type show a jump immedi- ately after the spread change takes place, which is result 6 Stephan Grimm, Thomas Guhr: How spread changes aﬀect the order book Fig. 8. Price response on the logarithmic physical time scale in seconds for spread changes due to trades (top), deletions (middle) and order placements (bottom). The black line is the average of all the response curves. Each line represents one day of the 96 stocks for every day from the 7 th to 11 th of March, 2016. of the return deﬁnition. Both the response of trades and order placements is in the same direction as before on the event time scale. Deletions however show a positve price response on a physical time scale. Noticable is also that the price response of deletions decreases after the initial jump, as opposed to trades where the response function increases and then reverses. The responses for trades and order placements are both larger in absolute value than that of deletions. This can be explained by the ability of trades and order place- ments to cover multiple tick levels, as opposed to deletions that are limited to one tick level, of course assuming that the price levels outside of the spread are ﬁlled with limit orders. In total the response on a physical time scale is about one magnitude larger than that on an event time scale. Fig. 9. Average price response on the logarithmic physical time scale in seconds for spread changes due to trades, deletions and order placements. Each line represents the average over each of the 96 stocks for every day from the 7 th to 11 th of March, 2016. 4.5 Quote changing events vs. all events in the order book In Fig. 10 we compare the price responses to events that change the spread to the responses of all events of that type in the order book, regardless if they change the mid- point price or not. The two response curves for trades show remarkable similarity with only a small vertical oﬀset be- tween the two, as the response to all trades in the order book is slightly smaller. This can be explained by the fact that the trades that do not change the midpoint price di- rectly do not exhibit a price jump at τ = 0s. This leads to the conclusion that trades that do not change the spread have a smaller price response than the ones that do, albeit that the diﬀerence between the two is quite small. There- fore in order to measure the price response of trades in a stock, it is suﬃcient to look at quote changing trades. Contrary to this result, the price responses to deletions and order placements are vastly diﬀerent if we only take into account the events that change the spread as opposed to all of them. In both cases the response curve for all events is close to zero, indicating that those events as a whole do not eﬀect the price. This makes sense, because on the one hand limit orders are being placed and deleted in large numbers on both sides of the spread and on the other hand happen not only at the spread level, but also deep inside the order book. Both of these facts lead to the events on both sides of the spread cancelling each other out and causing the price response to drop to zero. That Stephan Grimm, Thomas Guhr: How spread changes aﬀect the order book 7 the averages over all events for both deletions and order placements move away from zero for time lags τ greater than 1000 seconds, is due to the fact that they lose their statistical signiﬁcance. Contrary to trades, deletions and order placements that change the spread seem to carry more information in regards to the price response than those that do not. Fig. 10. Price response on the logarithmic physical time scale in seconds for spread changes due to trades (top), deletions (middle) and order placements (bottom). The colored line is the average response for corresponding events that change the spread and the black line is the response for all corresponding events. Each line represents the average over each of the 96 stocks for every day from the 7 th to 11 th of March, 2016. We notice the diﬀerent abscissae. 5 Average cross-response 5.1 Cross-response for individual stock pairs To calculate the eﬀect of spread changing events in one stock on the prices of other stocks we introduce the cross- response function [19] Rij(τ) = ⟨ εi(t)rj(t,τ ) ⟩ t , (6) as the average over all spread changes in the stock i mul- tiplied with the time-lagged returns in the stock j. When i =j this function gives us the self-response we discussed in section 4.4. For the cross-response we use the physi- cal time scale, because there is no reason to assume that events in diﬀerent stocks are synchronized. If we average the cross-response for every stock pairi,j over all ﬁve days for a ﬁxed value of τ we get a 96× 96-Matrixρ(τ). These matrices are shown in Fig. 11 for diﬀerent time lags τ = 1,2,50,500,2000,10000 seconds. Rows i indicate the stocks in which the spread changing events occur. Columns j indicate the stocks in which the spread change is mea- sured after events occur in other stocks. The stocks are in alphabetical order as shown in appendix A. For better visualization we normalize each matrix element ρij(τ) = Rij(τ) max(Ri⁄=j(τ)) (7) to the largest absolute oﬀ-diagonal value of the corre- sponding cross-response matrix [19,20]. The color scale, as shown to the right of each pair of matrices, ranges from red, indicating a value of 1, to blue, indicating a value of +1. The cross responses for each of the three dif- ferent event types show a visible diagonal line for lower values ofτ, which means that in general the self-response is larger at ﬁrst than the cross-response between stocks, but slowly blends in with the cross-responses for all three event types, as τ increases. Furthermore all matrices dis- play clear patterns of strips that are quite stable over time. The cross-responses for trades is mostly positive, with only a few strips being red. The cross-response matrices for or- der placements are the opposite; mostly positive, with only a few strips being blue. For deletions both blue and red strips appear in equal amounts. The appearance of strips indicates, that there are certain stocks that strongly inﬂu- ence the entire market (active response) and stocks that are inﬂuenced strongly by all the other stocks (passive response), which are deﬁned as R(a) j (τ) =⟨Rij(τ)⟩i and R(p) i (τ) =⟨Rij(τ)⟩j, (8) respectively. The cross-response matrices for trades get darker at ﬁrst and then lighter as τ increases. For order placements the cross-response matrix is the most colorful at ﬁrst and then gets whiter over time. The cross-response for deletions does not change its intensity much over time, as it stays lighter for all values of τ. 8 Stephan Grimm, Thomas Guhr: How spread changes aﬀect the order book Fig. 11. Standardized cross-response matrix with τ = 1,2,50,500,2000,10000 seconds for spread changes due to trades (left), deletions (midle) and order placements (right). Each row i/column j represents one of the 96 stocks averaged over every day from the 7 th to 11th of March, 2016. 5.2 Market response Since the cross-response matrices are a snapshot in time of the average price response of stocks to certain events in other stocks they give us information of the general ef- fect trades, deletions and order placements have on the market as a whole. In order to measure these price im- pacts and acquire statistical signiﬁcance we calculate the market response by averaging over every oﬀ-diagonal el- ement of every matrix and therefore getting the average crossresponse as a function of the time-lag τ [19,20] R(τ) = ⟨⟨ Rij(τ) ⟩ i ⟩ j with i⁄=j. (9) Figure 12 shows that the average market response is pos- itive for both trades and deletions, and negative for or- der placements. This is in line with the results for the self-response on a physical time scale in section 4. Both functions for trades and deletions show a major peak at 2000 and 5000 seconds respectively before reverting back to zero. Before their major peak both functions exhibit a smaller peak. The average market-response function for order placements is negative with a major peak at 500 sec- onds and a minor peak after 2000 seconds, before reverting back to zero. The two-peak structure for all three curves is an eﬀect of averaging over both rows and columns in the matrices, which correspond to active and passive cross- responses. When averaging over the entire market we see a long lasting eﬀect (10 4 seconds) on prices to all three event types. Due to the average over both indices i and j, the results gain a high statistical signiﬁcance, also for long time scales beyond 1000 seconds. These results show the same behaviour as [20]. Fig. 12. Market Response (Averages of the cross responses) on the physical time scale in seconds for spread changes due to trades, deletions and order placements. Each line represents the average of the 96 stocks of every day from the 7 th to 11 th of March, 2016. Stephan Grimm, Thomas Guhr: How spread changes aﬀect the order book 9 6 Conclusion We have looked at events that change the price of a stock. Three events can change the price: An order being placed into the spread and a trade or a deletion of a limit order that changes the quote. We have seen that the price in most stocks is more often changed by deletions of orders than trades and that order placements make up about half of the spread changes and that the ratio of trades to deletions in a stock can have an eﬀect on other observ- ables in the orderbook. Once the amount of trades exceeds the amount of deletions the average daily spread seems to be close to the minimal possible amount. Stocks with this property generally show a balance in spread changes caused by order placements and orders exiting the order- book. To compare the eﬀect of spread changes caused by trades, deletions and order placements on the stock price over time, we calculated the self-response on both an event and a physical time scale. In both cases the price response to trades was positive and negative to order placements. As they were both of similar shape and magnitude, albeit opposite signs, both event types seem to have a compa- rable eﬀect on the price of the stock they occured in. For deletions however the response on an event time scale was negative and positive on a physical time scale. In both cases the response was smaller in value than trades or or- der placements, indicating a lesser impact on prices due to deletions. This however could just be an eﬀect of deletions only being able to change a quote by one tick, as opposed to trades and order placements that can change quotes by multiple ticks at once. Comparing the price responses of the events that change the spread to the price responses of all events, we saw that trades show a remarkable similar- ity for both cases, leading to the conclusion that the price response to trades can be calculated using only trades that change the price. However, for deletions and order place- ments the price responses for all events were close to zero, as opposed to the reponse of events that change the price. This shows that deletions and order placements that do change the spread do carry some kind of additional in- formation over the other deletions and order placements in the order book. We then looked at the eﬀect of spread changing events on the prices of other stocks, by means of the cross-response function. As for the self-response, the cross-response matrices for trades and order place- ments appeared similar when taking into account the sign of spread change. The cross-response matrices for both these event types showed a strong eﬀect in the beginning, indicating a strong eﬀect spanning across the entire mar- ket. For deletions the matrices were mostly white in color, indicating a rather small eﬀect on the market. To bet- ter visualize the impact of the spread changing events we looked at the average market response functions. As the average is ober both the stock indicesi andj (withi⁄=j), the result is statistically signiﬁcant for longer time scales beyond 1000 seconds. All three event types exhibit a non- zero price response across the market with a long term eﬀect that lasts about 10 4 seconds, with the response to trades and deletions being positive and negative to order placements. As with the self-response the market-response to deletions is lower in value than that to trades or order placements. This leads us to the conclusion that deletions and order placements have a comparable eﬀect on the dy- namic in the order book, at least when looking at spread changes due to these events. References 1. R. Cont, “Empirical properties of asset returns: stylized facts and statistical issues,” Quantitative Finance, vol. 1, pp. 223–236, 2001. 2. T. Chordia, R. Roll, and A. Subrahmanyam, “Order Im- balance, Liquidity, and Market Returns,” university of cal- ifornia at los angeles, anderson graduate school of manage- ment, Anderson Graduate School of Management, UCLA, 2000. 3. W. Breymann, “Theory of Financial Risk and Deriva- tive Pricing: From Statistical Physics to Risk Management (2nd ed.). Jean-Philippe Bouchaud and Marc Potters,” Journal of the American Statistical Association , vol. 101, pp. 850–852, 2006. 4. J.-P. Bouchaud, J. Doyne Farmer, and F. Lillo, “How mar- kets slowly digest changes in supply and demand,” ArXiv e-prints, Sept. 2008. 5. A. Chakraborti, I. Muni Toke, M. Patriarca, and F. Abergel, “Econophysics: Empirical facts and agent- based models,” ArXiv e-prints, Sept. 2009. 6. B. T´ oth, Y. Lemp´ eri` ere, C. Deremble, J. de Lataillade, J. Kockelkoren, and J.-P. Bouchaud, “Anomalous Price Impact and the Critical Nature of Liquidity in Financial Markets,” Physical Review X, vol. 1, p. 021006, Oct. 2011. 7. Z. Eisler, J.-P. Bouchaud, and J. Kockelkoren, “The price impact of order book events: market orders, limit orders and cancellations,” ArXiv e-prints, Apr. 2009. 8. T. A. Schmitt, R. Sch¨ afer, M. C. M¨ unnix, and T. Guhr, “Microscopic understanding of heavy-tailed return distri- butions in an agent-based model,” EPL (Europhysics Let- ters), vol. 100, p. 38005, Nov. 2012. 9. T. A. Schmitt, D. Chetalova, R. Sch¨ afer, and T. Guhr, “Non-stationarity in ﬁnancial time series: Generic features and tail behavior,” EPL (Europhysics Letters) , vol. 103, p. 58003, Sept. 2013. 10. J. A. Hausman, A. W. Lo, and A. C. MacKinlay, “An Or- dered Probit Analysis of Transaction Stock Prices,” Work- ing Paper 3888, National Bureau of Economic Research, October 1991. 11. A. Kempf and O. Korn, “Market Depth and Order Size,” vol. 2, pp. 29–48, 02 1999. 12. R. F. Engle, A. Dufour, and C. Jel Classiﬁcation, “Time and the Price Impact of a Trade,” 2000. 13. V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, X. Gabaix, and H. E. Stan- ley, “Quantifying stock-price response to demand ﬂuctua- tions,” Phys. Rev. E , vol. 66, p. 027104, Aug 2002. 14. B. Rosenow, “Fluctuations and Market Friction in Finan- cial Trading,” International Journal of Modern Physics C , vol. 13, pp. 419–425, 2002. 15. J. . Bouchaud, J. Kockelkoren, and M. Potters, “Random walks, liquidity molasses and critical response in ﬁnancial markets,” arXiv eprints, June 2004. 16. S. Mike and J. Doyne Farmer, “An empirical behavioral model of liquidity and volatility,” ArXiv e-prints , Sept. 2007. 10 Stephan Grimm, Thomas Guhr: How spread changes aﬀect the order book 17. J.-P. Bouchaud, Y. Gefen, M. Potters, and M. Wyart, “Fluctuations and response in ﬁnancial markets: the subtle nature of ‘random’ price changes,” Quantitative Finance, vol. 4, pp. 176–190, Apr. 2004. 18. S. Wang and T. Guhr, “Microscopic Understanding of Cross-Responses between Stocks: a Two-Component Price Impact Model,” Market Microstructure and Liquidity , vol. 3, p. 1850008, 2017. 19. S. Wang, R. Sch¨ afer, and T. Guhr, “Cross-response in correlated ﬁnancial markets: individual stocks,” European Physical Journal B , vol. 89, p. 105, Apr. 2016. 20. S. Wang, R. Sch¨ afer, and T. Guhr, “Average cross- responses in correlated ﬁnancial markets,” European Phys- ical Journal B , vol. 89, p. 207, Sept. 2016. 21. M. Benzaquen, I. Mastromatteo, Z. Eisler, and J.-P. Bouchaud, “Dissecting cross-impact on stock markets: an empirical analysis,” Journal of Statistical Mechanics: The- ory and Experiment , vol. 2, p. 023406, Feb. 2017. A Data set The following table shows a detailed list of all the stocks used in this paper. T able 1. List of 96 NASDAQ100 stocks Symbol Name AAL American Airlines Group, Inc. AAPL Apple Inc. ADBE Adobe Systems Incorporated ADI Analog Devices, Inc. ADP Automatic Data Processing, Inc. ADSK Autodesk, Inc. AKAM Akamai Technologies, Inc. ALXN Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc. AMAT Applied Materials, Inc. AMGN Amgen Inc. AMZN Amazon.com, Inc. ATVI Activision Blizzard, Inc AVGO Broadcom Limited BBBY Bed Bath & Beyond Inc. BIDU Baidu, Inc. BIIB Biogen Inc. BMRN BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. CA CA Inc. CELG Celgene Corporation CERN Cerner Corporation CHKP Check Point Software Tech. Ltd. CHRW C.H. Robinson Worldwide, Inc. CHTR Charter Communications, Inc. CMCSA Comcast Corporation COST Costco Wholesale Corporation CSCO Cisco Systems, Inc. CTSH Cognizant Technology Solutions Corp. CTXS Citrix Systems, Inc. DISCA Discovery Communications, Inc. DISH DISH Network Corporation DLTR Dollar Tree, Inc. EA Electronic Arts Inc. EBAY eBay Inc. EQIX Equinix, Inc. ESRX Express Scripts Holding Company EXPD Expeditors International of WA, Inc. FAST Fastenal Company FB Facebook, Inc. FISV Fiserv, Inc. FOXA Twenty-First Century Fox, Inc. GILD Gilead Sciences, Inc. GOOG Alphabet Inc. GRMN Garmin Ltd. Stephan Grimm, Thomas Guhr: How spread changes aﬀect the order book 11 Symbol Name HSIC Henry Schein, Inc. ILMN Illumina, Inc. INTC Intel Corporation INTU Intuit Inc. ISRG Intuitive Surgical, Inc. JD JD.com, Inc. KHC The Kraft Heinz Company KLAC KLA-Tencor Corporation LBTYA Liberty Global plc LLTC Linear Technology Corporation LMCA Liberty Media Corporation LRCX Lam Research Corporation LVNTA Liberty Interactive Corporation MAR Marriott International MAT Mattel, Inc. MDLZ Mondelez International, Inc. MNST Monster Beverage Corporation MSFT Microsoft Corporation MU Micron Technology, Inc. MYL Mylan N.V. NFLX Netﬂix, Inc. NTAP NetApp, Inc. NVDA NVIDIA Corporation NXPI NXP Semiconductors N.V. ORLY OReilly Automotive, Inc. PAYX Paychex, Inc. PCAR PACCAR Inc. PCLN The Priceline Group Inc. QCOM QUALCOMM Incorporated REGN Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc. ROST Ross Stores, Inc. SBAC SBA Communications Corporation SBUX Starbucks Corporation SIRI Sirius XM Holdings Inc. SNDK SanDisk Corporation SPLS Staples, Inc. SRCL Stericycle, Inc. STX Seagate Technology PLC SYMC Symantec Corporation TRIP TripAdvisor, Inc. TSCO Tractor Supply Company TSLA Tesla Motors, Inc. TXN Texas Instruments Incorporated VIAB Viacom Inc. VIP VimpelCom Ltd. VOD Vodafone Group Plc VRSK Verisk Analytics, Inc. VRTX Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated WDC Western Digital Corporation WFM Whole Foods Market, Inc. WYNN Wynn Resorts, Limited XLNX Xilinx, Inc. YHOO Yahoo! Inc.