From Glosten-Milgrom to the whole limit order book and applications to financial regulation ∗ Weibing Huang† Sergio Pulido ‡ Mathieu Rosenbaum § Pamela Saliba ¶ Emmanouil Sfendourakis ‖ April 1, 2025 Abstract We build an agent-based model for the order book with three types of market participants: an informed trader, a noise trader and competitive market makers. Using a Glosten- Milgrom like approach, we are able to deduce the whole limit order book (bid-ask spread and volume available at each price) from the interactions between the different agents. More precisely, we obtain a link between efficient price dynamic, proportion of trades due to the noise trader, traded volume, bid-ask spread and equilibrium limit order book state. With this model, we provide a relevant tool for regulators and market platforms. We show for example that it allows us to forecast consequences of a tick size change on the microstructure of an asset. It also enables us to value quantitatively the queue position of a limit order in the book. Keywords: Market microstructure, limit order book, bid-ask spread, adverse selection, fi- nancial regulation, tick size, queue position valuation. 1 Introduction Limit order book (LOB) modeling has become an important research topic in quantitative finance. This is because market participants and regulators need to use LOB models for ∗This research benefited from the financial support of the ERC grant 679836 Staqamof and the chairs “Deep finance & Statistics” and “Analytics and Models for Regulation” of ´Ecole polytechnique. We thank Alexandra Givry, Philippe Guillot, Charles-Albert Lehalle, Julien Leprun and Ioanid Ro¸ su for their valuable comments. We thank BMLL Technologies for providing the historical market data which made this study possible. †LPSM, Sorbonne Universit´ e.Email: weibing.huang@upmc.fr ‡Universit´ e Paris-Saclay, CNRS, ENSIIE, Univ Evry, Laboratoire de Math´ ematiques et Mod´ elisation d’Evry (LaMME). Email: sergio.pulidonino@ensiie.fr §Centre de Math´ ematiques Appliqu´ ees (CMAP), CNRS,´Ecole polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris. Email: mathieu.rosenbaum@polytechnique.edu ¶Centre de Math´ ematiques Appliqu´ ees (CMAP), CNRS,´Ecole polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris and Autorit´ e des March´ es Financiers.Email: pamela.saliba@polytechnique.edu ‖Centre de Math´ ematiques Appliqu´ ees (CMAP), CNRS,´Ecole polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris. Email: emmanouil.sfendourakis@polytechnique.edu 1 arXiv:1902.10743v2 [q-fin.TR] 29 Mar 2025 many different tasks such as optimizing trading tactics, assessing the quality of the various algorithms operating on the markets, understanding the behaviors of market participants and their impact on the price formation process or designing new regulations at the microstructure level. In the literature, there are two main ways to model the LOB: statistical and equilibrium models. In statistical models, agents order flows follow suitable stochastic processes. In this type of approach, the goal is to reproduce important market stylized facts and to be useful in practice, enabling practitioners to compute relevant quantities such as trading costs, market impact or execution probabilities. Most statistical models are so-called zero-intelligence mod- els because order flows are driven by independent Poisson processes, see for example [1, 6, 7, 26, 41]. This assumption is relaxed in [4, 20, 21] where more realistic dynamics are obtained introducing dependencies between the state of the order book and the behavior of market participants. Market generators, see [23, 25], aim to generate realistic LOB data using deep learning. In equilibrium models, see for instance [10, 12, 36, 38], LOB dynamics arise from interactions between rational agents acting optimally: the agents choose their trading decisions as solutions of individual utility maximization problems. For example in [36], the author investigates a simple model where traders choose the type of order to submit (market or limit order) according to market conditions, and taking into account the fact that their decisions can influence other traders. In this framework, it becomes possible to analyze accurately market equilibria. However, the spread is exogenous and there is no asymmetric information on the fundamental value of the asset so that no adverse selection effect is considered. This is the case in the order-driven model of [38] too, where traders can also choose between market and limit orders. In this approach, all information is common knowledge and the waiting costs are the driving force. This model leads to several very relevant predictions about the links between trading flows, market impact and LOB shape. In this paper, we introduce an equilibrium-type model. It is a simple agent-based model for the order book where we consider three types of market participants like in [24]: an informed trader, a noise trader and market makers. The informed trader receives market information such as the jumps of the efficient price, which is hidden to the noise trader. He then takes advantage of this information to gain profit by sending market orders. Market makers also receive the same information but with some delay and they place limit orders as long as the expected gain of these orders is positive (they are assumed to be risk-neutral). The informed trader and market makers represent the strategic part in the trading activity, while the random part consists in the noise trader who is assumed to send market orders according to a compound Poisson process. Interestingly, the above simple framework allows us to deduce a link between efficient price dynamic, proportion of trades due to the noise trader, traded volume, bid-ask spread and equilibrium state for the LOB. It enables us to derive the whole order book shape (bid-ask spread and volume present at each price) from the interactions between the agents. The question of how the bid-ask spread emerges from the behavior of market participants has been discussed in many works. It is generally accepted that the bid-ask spread is non-zero because of the existence of three types of costs: order processing costs, see [18, 38], inventory costs, see [16, 43], and adverse selection costs, see [12]. In [38], the spread is a consequence of order processing costs: to compensate their waiting costs, traders place their limit orders on different price levels (for example, a sell limit order at a higher level gets a better expected 2 price than one at a lower level but needs longer time to be executed. Thus the case where both orders lead to the same expected utility can be considered). In contrast, our model is inspired by [12]. Liquidity is offered by market makers only and they face an adverse selection issue since a participant agreeing to trade at the market maker’s ask or bid price may be trading because he is informed. Order processing and inventory costs are neglected and we consider the bid-ask spread as a purely informational phenomenon: limit orders are placed at different levels because liquidity providers must protect themselves from traders with superior information. In this framework, in a very similar way as in [12], the bid- ask spread emerges naturally from the fact that limit orders placed too close to the efficient price have negative expected returns when being executed: the presence of the informed trader and the potential large jumps of the efficient price prevent market makers from placing limit orders too close to the efficient price. We also find that the bid-ask spread turns out to be the sum of the tick value and of the intrinsic bid-ask spread, which corresponds to a latent value of the bid-ask spread under infinitesimal tick size. Let us emphasize that several models study the LOB assuming the presence of our three types of market participants and imposing, as we will do, a zero-profit type condition stating that limit orders can only be placed in the LOB if their expected return relative to the efficient price is non-negative. For instance, the papers [12] and [3] share multiple similarities with ours. Compared with [12], there are two main differences. First, in [12], the zero-profit assumption applies only to the two best offer limits: the bid and ask prices at each trade are set to yield zero-profit to the market maker, and time priority plays no role. In our model, we propose a generalized version of the zero-profit condition under which fast market makers can still make profits because of time priority. Second, in [12], one assumes that only unit trades can occur, which is quite restrictive. In our model we relax this assumption, which allows us to retrieve the whole LOB shape and not only the bid-ask spread. In addition to this, we also treat the crucial case for practice where the tick size is non-zero, whereas it is assumed to be vanishing in [12]. In [3], the authors investigate the consequences of a zero-profit condition at the level of the whole liquidity supply curve provided by each market maker. This is an intricate situation where standard equilibria cannot be reached since a profitable deviation (from a Nash equi- librium) for any market maker is to offer the shares at a slightly higher price as explained in [5]. In this work, we rather assume that when a market maker computes his expected profit, he takes into consideration the orders submitted by other market makers. In par- ticular, queue priority plays a key role in our analysis. This is done so that the zero-profit condition holds only for the last order of each queue in the LOB. It in particular means that a market maker can still make positive profit. This enables us to obtain a very operational and tractable framework, where we can deduce the whole LOB shape, compute various important quantities such as priority values of limit orders, and make predictions about consequences of regulatory changes, for example on the tick size. Note that an important point in our model is that we also consider the case where the tick size is non-zero. This allows us to analyze its role in the LOB dynamic. For instance, we derive a new and very useful relationship between the tick size and the spread. We validate this relationship on market data and show how to use it for regulatory purposes, in particular to forecast new spread values after tick size changes. 3 To estimate the model, we use a maximum likelihood approach, inverting the characteristic function of efficient price jumps between regularly spaced time intervals. The distribution of the sizes of trades submitted by noise traders is calibrated so that the average LOB shape in our model matches exactly the one observed empirically. The discreteness of available price levels also enables us to value in a quantitative way the queue position of limit orders. LOBs use a priority system for limit orders submitted at the same price. Several priority rules can be employed such as price-time priority or price-size priority, see [13]. We consider here the widely used price-time mechanism which gives priority to the limit orders in a first in first out way. Therefore, it encourages traders to submit limit orders early. Our model is one of the few approaches allowing to quantify with accuracy the advantage of being at the top of the queue compared to being at its end. A notable exception is the paper [32]. In this work, the authors value queue positions at the best levels for large tick assets in a queuing model taking into account price impact and some adverse selection. In our setting, we are able to compute the effects of the strategic interactions between market participants on queue position valuation. Furthermore, we are not restricted to the best levels of large tick assets. However, as will be seen in our empirical results, our findings are in line with those of [32]. Imposing a discrete tick grid also allows the model to reproduce a well-known stylized fact: the predictive power of the volume imbalance for future price moves, highlighting a relationship between volume imbalance and efficient price as in [37, 42]. The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce our agent-based LOB model with zero tick value. Based on a greedy assumption for the informed trader’s behavior, a link is deduced between traded volume, efficient price jump distribution and LOB shape. We then add the zero-profit condition for market makers, which enables us to compute explicitly the bid-ask spread as well as the LOB shape. In Section 3, the case of non-zero tick value is considered. We show that the bid-ask spread is in fact equal to the sum of the intrinsic bid-ask spread (without the tick value constraint) and the tick value. The LOB shape under positive tick size is also deduced, and we give an explicit formula for the value of the queue position of a limit order. In Section 4, we describe the estimation procedure to retrieve the parameters of the model. In Section 5, we present four applications of our model: spread forecasting under a tick size change, probabilities of price moves with respect to the volume imbalance, waiting time until the next trade and computation of queue position values. Finally, the proofs are relegated to an appendix, as well as the tables with the estimated parameters. 1.1 Notations In this work, N denotes the set of natural integers including 0, N∗ = N\{0}. For an integrable functionf defined on R, ˆf denotes its Fourier transform: ˆf(z) = R Reizxdx. For a measurable function f defined on R, f∗n is f convoluted n∈ N∗ times with itself, if it exists. Thus, f∗1 =f and f∗2 =f∗f. For x∈ R,⌈x⌉ denotes the smallest integer m such that x ⩽m. 4 2 Model and assumptions In our model, we assume the existence of an efficient price modeled by a compound Poisson process and the presence of three different types of market participants: an informed trader, a noise trader and several market makers. In our approach, market makers choose their bid- ask quotes by computing the expected gain of potential limit orders at various price levels. This is done in a context of asymmetric information between the informed and the noise trader regarding the efficient price (the efficient price is actually used as a tool to materialize asymmetry of information). This framework enables us to obtain explicit formulas for the spread and LOB shape. These quantities essentially depend on the law of the efficient price jumps, the distribution of the noise trader’s orders size, and the number of price jumps compared to that of orders sent by the noise trader. Note that contrary to most LOB models which deal only with the dynamics at the best bid/ask limits, or assume that the spread is constant, see for example [6], our model allows for spread variations and applies to the whole LOB shape. We present in this section the case where the tick size is assumed to be equal to zero. The obtained results will help us understand those in Section 3 where we consider a positive tick size. 2.1 Modeling the efficient price We writeP (t) for the market underlying efficient price, whose dynamic is described as follows: P (t) =P0 +Y (t), where Y (t) = PNt j=1Bj is a compound Poisson process and P0 > 0. Here {Nt : t≥ 0} is a Poisson process with intensity λi > 0, and the {Bj : j≥ 1} are independent, identically distributed, integrable and independent of N random variables with non-negative symmetric density fB on R and cumulative distribution function FB. Hence, we consider that new information arrives on the market at discrete times given by a Poisson process with intensity λi. We assume that at the jth information arrival time, the efficient price P (t) is modified by a jump of random size Bj. Furthermore, since E[Bj] = 0, we have that P (t) is a martingale. Thus, E[P (t)] = P0. If Bj is square integrable, Var[P (t)] = λitE[B2 j ]. In this case, we view λiE[B2 j ] as the macroscopic volatility of our asset. In the sequel, for sake of simplicity, we write B for Bj when no confusion is possible. 2.2 Market participants We assume that there are three types of market participants: • One informed trader: by this term, we mean a trader who undergoes low latency and is able to access market data and assess efficient price jumps faster than other partic- ipants, creating asymmetric information in the market. For instance, he can analyze external information, use better technology, or use lead-lag relationships between assets or platforms to evaluate the efficient price (for details about lead-lag see [15, 17, 22]). Therefore, we assume that the informed trader receives the value of the price jump size 5 B (and the efficient price P (t)) just before it happens. He then sends his trades based on this information to make profit. He does not send orders at other times than those of price jumps, and we write Qi for his order size that will be strategically chosen later. Note that he may not send orders at a price jump time if he considers such action would not be profitable. • One noise trader: he sends market orders in a zero-intelligence random fashion. We assume that these trades follow a compound Poisson process with intensity λu. We denote by {Qu j : j ≥ 1} the noise trader’s order sizes which are independent and identically distributed integrable random variables. They are also supposed independent of the efficient priceP . We denote byfQu the density of theQu j which is strictly positive and symmetric on R (a positive volume represents a buy order, while a negative volume represents a sell order) and writeFQu for their cumulative distribution function. Remark that r = λi λi+λu corresponds to the average proportion of price jumps compared to the total number of events happening on the market (efficient price jumps and trades by the noise trader). Recall that informed trades can occur only when there is a price jump. We will assume throughout the paper that r> 0. We denote by Q the order size independently of the issuer of the order (noise or informed trader). • Market makers: they receive the value of the price jump size B (and the efficient price P (t)) right after it happens. We assume that they are risk neutral. In practice, market makers are often high frequency traders and considered informed too. However, contrary to our notion of informed trader, their analyses typically rely on order flows (notably through spread and imbalance) to extract the efficient price rather than on external information. This is because directional trading is not at the core of market making algorithms. We consider like in [12] that market makers know the proportion of price jumps compared to the total number of events happening on the market, that they compete with each other, and that they are free to modify their limit orders at any time after a price jump or a transaction. Market makers place their orders according to their potential profit and loss with respect to the efficient price (no inventory aspects are considered here). Thus, they only send sell orders at price levels above the efficient price and buy orders at price levels below it. We assume here that there is no tick size (this assumption will be relaxed in Section 3). The LOB is made of limit orders placed by market makers around the efficient price P (t). We denote the cumulative available liquidity between P (t) and P (t) +x by L(x)1 for x∈ R. When L(x)≥ 0 (resp. L(x)≤ 0), it represents the total volume of sell (resp. buy) limit orders with price smaller (resp. larger) than or equal to P (t) +x. This function L is called cumulative LOB shape function. 2.3 Assumptions We suppose the cumulative LOB shape function L is right-continuous and non-decreasing on [0,∞), and, symmetrically, it is left-continuous and non-decreasing on (−∞, 0]. We define its inverseL−1 by: L−1(q) = argmin{x|L(x)≥q}, q ∈ [0,∞). 1This quantity actually depends on time t but for sake of simplicity, we just write L(x). 6 Most of the analysis will be carried on q ⩾ 0 (ask side) and the results concerning q ⩽ 0 (bid side) follow by symmetry. Given the function L, we now specify the behavior of the informed trader in the next as- sumption. This assumption links the traded volume of the informed trader Qi to the LOB cumulative shape L and the size of the price jump B received by the informed trader. Assumption 1. Let t be a jump time of the efficient price. Based on the received value B and the cumulative LOB shape function L provided by market makers, the informed trader sends his trades in a greedy way such that he wipes out all the available liquidity in the LOB until level P (t) +B. Thus, his trade size Qi satisfies: Qi =L(B−) if B >0, Qi =L(B+) if B <0. The informed trader computes his gain according to the future efficient price. If he knows that the price will increase (resp. decrease), which corresponds to a strictly positive (resp. strictly negative) jump B, he consumes all the sell (resp. buy) orders leading to positive ex- post profit. In both cases, his profit is equal to the absolute value of the difference between the future efficient price and the price per share at which he bought or sold, multiplied by the consumed quantity. Note that in the spirit of this work, the informed trader does not accumulate position intraday. What we have in mind is that he unwinds his position passively, or alternates between buy and sell orders. As an illustration, if at a given moment the efficient price is equal to 10 euros and the future price jump is equal to 0.05 euros, the informed trader consumes all the sell orders at prices between 10 and 10.05 euros. He then can potentially unwind his position by submitting passive sell orders at a price equal to or higher than the new efficient price. Knowing that their latent profit is computed with respect to the efficient price, he can afford to submit them close to the new efficient price, thereby making their execution very likely. Remark 2.1. For a given order of size Qi > 0 initiated by the informed trader and for a given quantity q, the probability that the trade size Qi is less than q satisfies: P[Qi<q ] = P[L(B−)<q ] = P[B <L−1(q)] =FB(L−1(q)). In the following, our goal is to compute the spread and LOB shape. We proceed in two steps. First, we derive the expected gain of potential limit orders of the market makers. Second, we consider a zero-profit assumption for market makers (due to competition). Based on these two ingredients, we show how the spread and LOB shape emerge. 2.4 Computation of the market makers expected gain This part is the first step of our approach. We focus here on the gain of passive sell orders. The gain of passive buy orders can be readily deduced the same way. Let L be the shape of the order book. Our goal is to compute the conditional average profit of a new infinitesimal order if submitted at price level x knowing thatQ>L (x) and without 7 any information about the trade’s initiator. We write G(x) for this quantity 2. We consider the profit of new orders with total volume ε> 0, placed between P (t) +x−δp andP (t) +x for somex> 0 andδp> 0, given the fact that these orders are totally executed. The new submitted orders are represented by an additional cumulative LOB shape function denoted by ˜L(x). Note that we work with orders submitted between x−δp and x to take into account two cases: L(x) is continuous at x andL(x) has a mass at x. The function ˜L(x) is defined as follows: • Fors<x −δp, ˜L(s) = 0 and the liquidity available in the LOB up to s is equal to L(s). • Forx−δp≤ s≤ x, the available liquidity is L(s) + ˜L(s), where ˜L(x−δp) = 0 and ˜L(x) =ε. • Fors≥x, the liquidity available in the LOB up to s is equal to L(s) +ε. Furthermore, we assume that for any s<x , ˜L(s)<ε . Let us write: • ν for a random variable that is equal to 1 if the trade is initiated by the informed trader and 0 if it is initiated by the noise trader. • Gu(x−δp,x ) for the gain of new orders with total volume ε submitted between x−δp andx in case the trade is initiated by the noise trader knowing that Qu≥L(x) + ˜L(x). • Gi(x−δp,x ) for the gain of new orders with total volumeε submitted betweenx−δp and x in case the trade is initiated by the informed trader knowing that Qi≥L(x) + ˜L(x). • G(x−δp,x ) for the expected conditional gain of new orders with total volume ε sub- mitted between x−δp and x knowing that Q≥L(x) + ˜L(x) without any information about the trade’s initiator. The quantity G(x−δp,x ) is equal to: Gi(x−δp,x )P[ν = 1|Q≥L(x) + ˜L(x)] +Gu(x−δp,x )P[ν = 0|Q≥L(x) + ˜L(x)]. Our aim being to compute the expected gain of a new infinitesimal order if submitted at price levelx, we make δp and ε tend to 0. Thus, we define G(x) = lim ε→0  lim δp→0 G(x−δp,x ) ε  . We have the following proposition proved in Appendix B.1. It is a natural tail condition, similar to that in [3, 11, 39] but with a different parametrization. Proposition 2.1. Forx≥ 0, the average profit of a new infinitesimal order if submitted at price level x satisfies: G(x) =x− rE[B1B>x] rP[B >x] + (1−r)P[Qu>L (x)] and for x≤ 0 G(x) =−x + rE[B1B<x] rP[B <x] + (1−r)P[Qu<L (x)]. 2Note that the gain depends on time t but we keep the notation G(x) when no confusion is possible. 8 Remark that the average profitG(x) above is well defined even whenL(x) = 0. In fact, when L(x) = 0, G(x) represents the expected gain of an infinitesimal order submitted in an empty order book at x. Note that for a given x, whenL(x) goes large, the expected gain of the limit orders becomes negative. We now describe the way the LOB is built via a zero-profit type condition. Let us take the ask side of the LOB. For any pointx, market makers first consider whether or not there should be liquidity between 0 and x. To do so, they compute the value ˆL(x) which is so that we obtain G(x) = 0 in the expression in Proposition 2.1. If ˆL(x) is positive, then competition between market makers takes place and the cumulative order book adjusts so that L(x) = ˆL(x) in order to obtain G(x) = 0. If ˆL(x) = 0, then there is no liquidity between 0 and x. If ˆL(x) is negative, we deduce that there is no liquidity between 0 and x since this liquidity should be positive. This mechanism makes sense since, as we will see in what follows, ˆL(x) is a non- decreasing function of x, which implies two things. First, it is impossible to come across a situation wherex1<x 2 and where market makers are supposed to add liquidity betweenP (t) and P (t) +x1 but not between P (t) and P (t) +x2. Second, the cumulative shape function for the LOB is indeed non-decreasing. We have thatG(x) = 0 is equivalent to: x =    rE[B1B>x] rP[B>x]+(1−r)P[Qu>ˆL(x)] if x≥ 0 rE[B1B<x] rP[B<x]+(1−r)P[Qu<ˆL(x)] if x≤ 0. This implies: ˆL(x) =    F−1 Qu  1 1−r− r 1−r E[max(B x, 1)]  if x≥ 0 F−1 Qu  −r 1−r + r 1−r E[max(B x, 1)]  if x≤ 0. The details of the computation of ˆL(x) are given in Appendix B.2. We formalize now the zero-profit assumption introduced above. It is the second step of our approach in order to eventually compute the spread and LOB shape. Assumption 2. For every x >0 (resp. x <0), market makers compute ˆL(x). If ˆL(x)≤ 0 (resp. ˆL(x)≥ 0), market makers add no liquidity to the LOB: L(x) = 0. If ˆL(x)> 0 (resp. ˆL(x) < 0), because of competition, the cumulative order book adjusts so that G(x) = 0. We then obtain L(x) = ˆL(x). The above zero-profit assumption can be seen as a generalized version of the zero-profit con- dition proposed in [12], in which zero-profit is only considered for the two best offer limits. It is also interesting to point out that, under this more realistic setting, those very fast market makers can still make profit as their orders are placed earlier in the LOB. In this case where the tick size is zero, it can seem difficult to imagine how competition between different market makers takes place. One can think that every market maker specifies his own L(x) (cumulative liquidity that he provides). Then Assumption 2 means that, when there is still room for future profit at x (G(x)> 0), other market makers will come to the market and increase the liquidity in the LOB until G(x) becomes null. Note again that we consider here 9 that market makers can insert infinitesimal quantities in the LOB. These ideas will be made clearer in Section 3 where the tick size is no longer zero. 2.5 The emergence of the bid-ask spread and LOB shape Based on the expected gain of the market makers, see Proposition 2.1, and the zero-profit condition (Assumption 2), we can derive the bid-ask spread and LOB shape. We have the following theorem proved in Appendix B.2. Theorem 2.1. The cumulative LOB shape satisfies L(x) =−L(−x) for any x∈ R,L(x) = 0 forx∈ [−µ,µ ] andL is continuous strictly increasing forx>µ , whereµ is the unique solution of the following equation: 1 +r 2r = E  max B µ, 1  . (1) Forx>µ , L(x)> 0 and L(x) =F−1 Qu  1 1−r− r 1−r E  max B x, 1  . (2) Forx< −µ, L(x)< 0 and L(x) =F−1 Qu  −r 1−r + r 1−r E  max B x, 1  . (3) In particular, the bid-ask spread is equal to 2µ. Equation (1) shows that the spread is an increasing function of r. This means that market makers are aware of the adverse selection they risk when the number of price jumps increases. As a consequence, they enlarge the spread in order to avoid this effect due to the trades issued by the informed trader just before the price jumps take place. In particular, if there is no noise trader in the market, then r = 1 and the spread tends to infinity. On the contrary, when the number of trades from the noise trader increases, market makers reduce the spread because they are less subject to adverse selection. All these results are consistent with the findings in [12]. Equations (2) and (3) show that the liquidity submitted by the market makers is a decreasing function of r. Let us take x>µ and define h(r) = 1 1−r− r 1−r E[max(B x, 1)]. We have ∂h ∂r (r) = 1− E[max(B x, 1)] (1−r)2 ≤ 0. This means thath is a decreasing function ofr. The function F−1 Qu being increasing, we deduce that L(x) is a decreasing function of r. When the number of price jumps increases, market makers reduce the quantity of submitted passive orders. In contrast, when the number of trades from the noise trader is large, the market becomes very liquid. This is in line with the empirical results in [29] where it is shown that just before certain announcements, in order to avoid adverse selection, market makers reduce their depth and increase their spread. 10 Finally, we recall that in our setting, we do not a priori impose any condition on L(x). Equations (1), (2) and (3) show that the cumulative LOB we obtain is continuous and strictly increasing beyond the spread. Remark also that L(x) tends to infinity as x goes to infinity. This implies that the noise trader can always find liquidity in the LOB, whatever the size of his market order. If the price jumps due to information are bounded, there is infinite liquidity in the order book at prices above that bound: these orders guarantee profit for the market-makers. Proposition 2.2, proved in Appendix B.3, shows that any (up to not very restrictive regularity conditions) LOB shape is attainable in our model, due to the freedom given by the very general shape the density fQu is allowed to take. Restricting fQu to a low-dimensional parametric family may make the model fail to capture the shape of the order book far from the mid-price, as we see in section 4.2.1 (see also [39]). Proposition 2.2. Assume fB is strictly positive on R. Let µ be the associated half-spread given by Equation (1). Let Λ : [µ,∞)→ [0,∞) be a bijective continuous function such that Λ−1 is differentiable. Then, there exists a strictly positive symmetric density fQu on R such that for all x ⩾µ, Λ(x) =F−1 Qu  1 1−r− r 1−r E  max B x, 1  , whereFQu denotes the cumulative distribution function associated to fQu. Proposition 2.3 below, proved in Appendix B.4, computes the shape of the LOB far from the best quotes in the case 1−FB has power-law decay, which is the case of Pareto distributions and L´ evy stables laws, see [34, Theorem 1.2] which are the ones used in our empirical study in Sections 4 and 5. Proposition 2.3. Suppose that the tail probability of B verifies 1−FB(x) ∼ x→∞ cx−a for some c> 0, a> 1. (i) If 1−FQu(x) ∼ x→∞ c′x−b for some c′,b> 0, then L(x) ∼ x→∞ 1−r r c′(a− 1) c  1 b x a b. (ii) If Qu follows a centered Gaussian law with variance σ2, then 1−FQu(x) ∼ x→∞ 1 x √ 2πσe− x2 2σ2 and L(x) ∼ x→∞ σ p 2a ln(x). When the sizes of the trades sent by noise traders follow a power-law distribution, the number of orders present at prices [x,x + dx] is proportional to x a b−1dx. If Qu’s law has a fatter tail than B’s, the liquidity present far for the best quotes tends to increase since the market makers bet on big trades sent by noise traders. On the contrary, if Qu’s law has a thinner tail thanB’s, fewer orders are posted far from the best quotes since the adverse selection risk dominates–recall that the market makers know the distribution of Qu and quote accordingly. If the trades sent by noise traders have sizes that follow a normal distribution, liquidity decreases rapidly, in 1 x √ ln(x), as x increases because big trades are very rare. 11 3 The case of non-zero tick size In this section, we study the effect of introducing a tick size, denoted by α, that constraints the price levels in the LOB. The same efficient price dynamic as that described in the previous section still applies, but the cumulative LOB shape becomes now a piecewise constant func- tion. Due to price discreteness, the discontinuity points of L(x) will depend on the position of the efficient price P (t) with respect to the tick grid. 3.1 Notations and assumptions Notations To deal with the discontinuity points of L(x), the following notations will be used in the sequel. Let us denote by ˜P (t) the smallest admissible price level that is greater than or equal to the current efficient price P (t), and their distance by d(t) := ˜P (t)−P (t), where d(t)∈ [0,α ). We drop the dependence in t and simply write d when no confusion is possible. The cumulative LOB shape function L(x) is now defined by Ld(i): Ld(i) =  L(d + (i− 1)α) for i> 0 L(d +iα) for i< 0. (4) The index i = 1 (resp. i =−1) corresponds to the closest price level that is larger (resp. smaller) than or equal to P (t). When Ld(i) > 0 (resp. Ld(i) < 0), it represents the total volume of sell (resp. buy) passive orders with prices smaller (resp. larger) than or equal to the ith limit. We writeld(i) for the quantity placed at the ith limit: ld(i) = ( Ld(i)−Ld(i− 1) for i> 0 Ld(i)−Ld(i + 1) for i< 0. When ld(i) > 0 (resp. ld(i) < 0), it represents the volume of sell (resp. buy) limit orders placed at the ith limit. Recall that ld(i)≥ 0 (resp. ld(i)≤ 0) for i> 0 (resp. i< 0). Assumptions We adapt Assumption 1 to our tick size setting. We again assume that when he receives new information, the informed trader sends his trades in a greedy way such that he wipes out all the available liquidity at limits where the price is smaller than the new efficient price. This can be translated as follows. Assumption 3. When the informed trader sends a market order, then Qi is equal to Ld(i) for some i∈ Z∗. We have Qi =Ld(i) if and only if B∈ [d + (i− 1)α,d +iα). Remark 3.1. In practice, it is rare that a trade consumes more than one limit in the LOB. Such trade in our model should be interpreted in practice as a sequence of transactions, each of them consuming one limit. Proposition 3.1, proved in Appendix B.5, will be used to compute various quantities of interest, putting a uniform prior on d. 12 Proposition 3.1. The process (d(t))t⩾0 is a time-homogenous Markov process. Its unique invariant probability is the uniform distribution on (0,α ). 3.2 Computation of the market makers expected gain As in the previous section, let us compute the conditional average profit of a new infinitesimal passive order submitted at theith limit, knowing thatQ>L d(i), and without any information about the trade’s initiator. This quantity is denoted by Gd(i) and defined in a similar fashion asG(x) in Section 2.4. The computation of Gd(i) is comparable to that of G(x), and actually even easier since we now have that the volume at the ith limit cannot be infinitesimal. This means that different orders can be submitted at the same price with disparities in their gain according to their position in the queue. For instance, the order placed on top of the queue has the highest expected gain, while we will impose later that the gain of a new order submitted at the rear of the queue is null. We have the following proposition proved in Appendix B.6. Proposition 3.2. Under Assumption 3, for i∈ Z∗, the expected gain of a new infinitesimal passive order placed at the ith level, given that it is executed, satisfies: Gd(i) =G(d + (i− 1)α) =d + (i− 1)α− rE[B1B>d+(i−1)α] rP[B >d + (i− 1)α] + (1−r)P[Qu>L d(i)] for i> 0 and Gd(i) =G(d +iα) =d +iα− rE[B1B<d+iα] rP[B <d +iα] + (1−r)P[Qu<L d(i)] for i< 0. The quantity Gd(i) can be understood as the expected gain of a newly inserted infinitesimal limit order at theith limit, under the condition that it is executed against some market order. For this situation with non-zero tick size, we follow the same reasoning as in the case with zero tick size. Indeed, for all i∈ Z∗, market makers compute ˆLd(i) so that Gd(i) = 0 in Proposition 3.2. The equality Gd(i) = 0 is equivalent to: d + (i− 1)α = rE[B1B>d+(i−1)α] rP[B >d + (i− 1)α] + (1−r)P[Qu> ˆLd(i)] if i> 0 and d +iα = rE[B1B<d+iα] rP[B <d +iα] + (1−r)P[Qu< ˆLd(i)] if i< 0. This is equivalent to: ˆLd(i) =    F−1 Qu  1 1−r− r 1−r E[max( B d+(i−1)α, 1)]  if i> 0 F−1 Qu  −r 1−r + r 1−r E[max( B d+iα, 1)]  if i≤ 0. As in the case without tick size, this leads to the following zero-profit assumption. 13 Assumption 4. For everyi∈ Z+ (resp. i∈ Z−), market makers compute ˆLd(i). If ˆLd(i)≤ 0 (resp. ˆLd(i)≥ 0), market makers add no liquidity to the LOB: Ld(i) = 0. If ˆLd(i)> 0 (resp. ˆLd(i)< 0), because of competition, the cumulative order book adjusts so that Gd(i) = 0. We then obtain then Ld(i) = ˆLd(i). The zero-profit condition applies only to a new order submitted at the bottom of the queue. The expected profit of the other orders is non-zero, maximum gain being obtained for the one on top of the queue. 3.3 Bid-ask spread and LOB formation Based on the expected gain of the market makers, see Proposition 3.2, and the zero-profit condition (Assumption 4), as previously, we deduce the bid-ask spread and LOB shape. We have the following theorem proved in Appendix B.7. Theorem 3.1. The LOB shape function satisfies ld(i) = 0 for all −kd l < i < kd r, where kd l and kd r are two positive integers determined by the following equations: kd r = 1 + µ−d α  , k d l = µ +d α  , with µ defined by (1), and where⌈x⌉ denotes the smallest integer that is larger than x (which can be equal to 0). Furthermore, for i≥kd r : Ld(i) =F−1 Qu  1 1−r− r 1−r E  max  B d + (i− 1)α, 1  and for i≤−kd l : Ld(i) =F−1 Qu  −r 1−r + r 1−r E  max  B d +iα, 1  . For given d, the bid-ask spread ϕd α satisfies: ϕd α =α µ−d α  + µ +d α  . Let us consider the approximation that d follows its stationary distribution and is uniformly distributed on [0,α ] (Proposition 3.1). In this case, we obtain the following corollary proved in Appendix B.8. Corollary 3.1. If d follows a uniform distribution on [0,α ), the average spread ϕα satisfies: ϕα = 2µ +α. (5) When the tick size is vanishing, we have seen in Theorem 2.1 that the spread is equal to 2µ. When it is not, the spread cannot necessarily be equal to 2 µ because of the tick size constraint. What is particularly interesting is that even if α≤ 2µ, the equilibrium spread is not 2µ. There is always a tick size processing cost leading to a spread value of 2 µ +α. 14 4 Parameters estimation This section is dedicated to the calibration of the model on market data. The estimation procedure is carried over 103 stocks traded on the New-York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and European markets operated by Euronext. The stocks are listed in Appendix C. The prices are not normalized, and expressed in their respective currencies. For each stock, the estimation is done on two periods: on trading days between October 1st, 2022 and March 31st 2023 and between April 1st 2023 and September 30th 2023, with LOB data between 10 am and 3 pm in local time. Our estimation procedure requires a constant tick size on the whole estimation period. It is the case for stocks traded on NYSE where the tick is always of $0 .01. For stocks traded on European exchanges, days with non-constant tick size (at the best quotes) are discarded. We keep the days having the most frequent tick size in the trading period. The size of the sample ( N = 36000 for each stock with 120 trading days observed) yield an accurate and stable estimation. 4.1 Estimation of the efficient price dynamics The parameter µ can be estimated in a straightforward way using Corollary 3.1: ˆ µ = ¯ϕα−α 2 where ¯ϕα is the average spread over the observation period. Having an estimate of the law of the price jumps B, one can estimate r using Equation (1): ˆr = 1 2E h max  B ˆµ, 1  − 1 i, where the expectation is computed using the estimate of the law of B. To estimate fB, we observe the reference price ˜P (t) every ∆t = 1 min. We do not observe the efficient price directly, just its rounded version. We do not use a continuous observation of ˜P (t) to avoid short-term effects not captured by our model: after a trade of a noise trader, there is a non-zero delay for the LOB to return to the theoretical state. Also, the new price information is not processed immediately. The quantity ˜P (t) itself is not immediately observable, but it can be recovered using the formulas in Theorem 3.1. Precisely, write µ =αm +p where m∈ N and p∈ [0,α ). Denote by Va and Vb the pending volumes at the best ask and bid respectively. Let Pmid be the mid-price in the conventional sense: the average between the best ask price Pa and the best bid price Pb. Pmid is directly observable. According to Tables 1 and 2, if the spread is odd, ˜P (t) =Pmid + α 2 . If it is even and Va >V b, then ˜P (t) =Pmid, otherwise, ˜P (t) =Pmid +α. Figure 1 provides an illustration of this observation. ˜P (t) takes values in αZ. The probability of observing a variation of kα on a time interval on length ∆t is given by Proposition 4.1, proved in Appendix B.9. It can be computed using the characteristic function of B, taking advantage of the compound Poisson model used for the efficient price jumps. 15 d (0,p ) (p,α−p) (α−p,α ) Pa ˜P + (m + 1)α ˜P +mα ˜P +mα Pb ˜P− (m + 1)α ˜P− (m + 1)α ˜P− (m + 2)α Spread 2(m + 1)α (2m + 1)α 2(m + 1)α ˜P Pmid Pmid + α 2 Pmid +α Volumes Va>V b X Vb>V a Table 1: Quantities of interest at the best prices when p ⩽ α 2 (µ =αm+p,m∈ N,p∈ [0,α )). d (0,α−p) (α−p,p ) (p,α ) Pa ˜P + (m + 1)α ˜P + (m + 1)α ˜P +mα Pb ˜P− (m + 1)α ˜P− (m + 2)α ˜P− (m + 2)α Spread 2(m + 1)α (2m + 3)α 2(m + 1)α ˜P Pmid Pmid + α 2 Pmid +α Volumes Va>V b X Vb>V a Table 2: Quantities of interest at the best prices when p ⩾ α 2 (µ =αm+p,m∈ N,p∈ [0,α )). P d pp P ˜P˜P−α˜P− 2α ˜P +α P d pp P ˜P˜P−α˜P− 2α ˜P +α P d pp P ˜P˜P−α˜P− 2α ˜P +α Figure 1: Illustration of the LOB, in the case m = 0, p ⩽ α 2 (µ =αm +p). In blue the first filled bid pile, in red the first filled ask pile. Upper: d∈ (0,p ). Middle: d∈ (p−α−p). Lower: d∈ (α−p,α ). 16 Proposition 4.1. Suppose d(t) follows a uniform law on [0,α ). Let t∈ [0,∞) and k∈ Z. Then, P h ˜P (t + ∆t)− ˜P (t) =kα i = 4 πα Z ∞ 0 eλi∆t( ˆfB(z)−1) 1 z2 sin zα 2 2 cos (kαz) dz. Having a parametric model for fB, we use a maximum likelihood approach to recover our parameters. Specifically, observing k1,...k n for ˜P (t + ∆t)− ˜P (t), we minimize nX j=1 log Z ∞ 0 eλi∆t( ˆfB(z)−1) 1 z2 sin zα 2 2 cos (kjαz) dz, to recover λi and the parameters of fB. We choose to look for fB in the family of symmetric L´ evy-stable distributions, parametrized bya∈ (1, 2) and σ >0. They have the following characteristic function: ξ7→ exp (−ξaσa). They give two degrees of freedom: the scale σ and the decay of the tail, in power law with exponent a ([34, Theorem 1.2]). The explicit form of its characteristic function allows to compute easily the integral in Proposition 4.1, using a quadrature method. By Proposition 4.2 below, proved in Appendix B.10, it also satisfies an identifiability property: ( λi,a,σ ) are uniquely determined by the law of ˜P (t + ∆t)− ˜P (t). Proposition 4.2. Let t∈ [0,∞). Let λ1,λ 2,σ 1,σ 2 > 0 and a1,a 2∈ (0, 2) .Suppose that for all k∈ N, Z ∞ 0 e λ1  e−σa1 1 za1−1  sin  zα 2 2 z2 cos (kαz) dz = Z ∞ 0 e λ2  e−σa2 2 za2−1  sin  zα 2 2 z2 cos (kαz) dz. Then, λ1 =λ2, σ1 =σ2 and a1 =a2. Remark 4.1. Proposition 4.2 is stated for a∈ (0, 2) but the a ⩽ 1 are discarded in our model since they break the integrability assumption. Estimated values ( ˆλ, ˆa, ˆσ) are recovered optimizing the log-likelihood using the CMA-ES al- gorithm [14, 35] and reported in Appendix D. The majority of the stocks have an estimated ˆa around 1.8. 4.2 Estimation of FQu 4.2.1 The case of a Gaussian distribution We first consider a Gaussian distributionN (0,σ 2 noise) for the trade sizes from the noise traders. Fory ⩾µ, we introduce the notation g(y) := 1 1−r− r 1−r E  max B y, 1  . (6) 17 The function g is non-decreasing. Whend follows its stationary uniform distribution, the expected volume pending on the best ask pile is V 1 = 1 α Z µ+α µ F−1 Qu (g(y)) dy = σnoise α Z µ+α µ F−1 N (g(y)) dy where FN is the cumulative distribution function of N (0, 1). Taking the estimator ˆσnoise := α ˆV 1 Rµ+α µ F−1 N (g(y)) dy where µ and g are estimated with the procedure from Section 4.1, and ˆV 1 is the average volume pending on the best pile, we obtain an estimated model that matches exactly the order book at the best piles. The estimated ˆ σnoise for each stock are reported in Appendix D. As shown in Figure 2, the Gaussian model for Qu is tailored to capture the size of the best pile, but not the ones beyond. 4.2.2 Calibrating multiple piles According to Proposition 2.2, at least in the model with zero tick size, when B satisfies mild assumptions (that L´ evy-stable laws satisfy here), every shape of the LOB should be reproduced by some distribution FQu of the sizes of the trades submitted by noise traders 3. Here, we present a method to calibrate a piecewise constant densityfQu such that the average LOB shape is exactly reproduced by our model. Of course, in the averaged case, such a general density is not unique. There is no guarantee that our method succeeds in finding such a density, but we keep it for its simplicity: there is only a limited number of integrals to compute numerically, and the parameters are computed sequentially. Fori∈ N, we define µi :=µ +iα. We track M = 10 piles. The average volume (supposing d(t) has uniform distribution) pending on the i-th queue, 2 ⩽i ⩽M is Vi = 1 α Z µi µi−1 F−1 Qu (g(y)) dy− 1 α Z µi−1 µi−2 F−1 Qu (g(y)) dy. We focus on modelling F−1 Qu on  1 2,g (µM)  since what is beyond g(µM) has no involvement on our observation and F−1 Qu on  −g(µM), 1 2  can be deduced by symmetry. We suppose that F−1 Qu is continuous on [ −g(µM),g (µM)] and affine on every subinterval [g(µi),g (µi+1)]. More specifically, we suppose there exists ( bi)0⩽i⩽M−1∈ (0,∞)M such that for each i, F−1 Qu (p) =bi(p−g(µi)) + i−1X k=0 bk(g(µk+1)−g(µk)), p ∈ [g(µi),g (µi+1)]. 3A similar property should hold for the version with non-zero tick size: for any LOB shape L, the existence of FQu such that the average LOB shape matches L. 18 2 4 6 8 10 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 True values Gaussian noise fit (a) Carnival Corporation 2 4 6 8 10 0 200 400 600 800 1000 True values Gaussian noise fit (b) ESSILORLUXOTTICA 2 4 6 8 10 0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000 True values Gaussian noise fit (c) OCI 2 4 6 8 10 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 True values Gaussian noise fit (d) Royal Caribbean Group 2 4 6 8 10 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 True values Gaussian noise fit (e) STELLANTIS NV 2 4 6 8 10 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 True values Gaussian noise fit (f) The Boeing Company Figure 2: Mean volume pending on each pile up to 10 ticks from the best (in blue) and the mean volumes given by the model when Qu follows a normal distribution calibrated on the volume pending at the best price. Estimated on data from 2022-10-01 to 2023-03-31. 19 Period 1 Period 2 Estimation succeeded 80 stocks 82 stocks Estimation failed 23 stocks 21 stocks Table 3: Outcome of the calibration of M = 10 piles of the LOB. With Ii := 1 α Rµi+1 µi (g(y)−g(µi)) dy, we have V 1 =b0I0 and, for 2 ⩽i ⩽M, Vi =bi−2 (g(µi−1)−g(µi−2)) +bi−1Ii−1−bi−2Ii−2. Observing an average volume ˆVi on the i-th pile, and computing the Ii with the parameters estimated in Section 4.1, we can estimate the bi sequentially: ˆb0 = ˆV 1 I0 and for i ⩾ 1, ˆbi = ˆVi+1 + ˆbi−1Ii−1− ˆbi−1 (g(µi)−g(µi−1)) Ii . (7) Then, the densityfQu, is constant and equal to 1 bi on every interval [F−1 Qu (g(µi)),F−1 Qu (g(µi+1))]. By construction, the average shape of the LOB (up to M piles) in the calibrated model matches exactly the empirical one. The fit failed for some stocks, in the sense that some the computed ˆbi are negative. These stocks are listed in Tables 6 and 7 in Appendix D.3. They have in common that they are very small tick stocks: their spread is bigger than 4 ticks. That makes the tick increment quite negligible to the market makers, and the liquidity is spread out, leaving many empty piles. Consequently, the average volume posted at non-best prices is low compared to the volume posted at the best price, see Figure 5. Consequently, in Equation (7), ˆV 2 does not make up for the large ˆb0 and ˆb1 is negative. In practice, when the fit fails, the density and the concerned histogram bin can be put to 0, and the procedure (7) can be resumed. The fit will not be perfect, but the average shape of the LOB will be closer to reality. For the majority of the stocks, the estimation succeeds, see Table 3. The cumulative distribu- tion function of the resulting fitted distribution, plotted in Figure 3, suggests that the law of Qu has fat tails, that decay in power law, much slower than the Gaussian distribution. Note that this may be highly dependent on the L´ evy-stable law model chosen for the efficient price jumps. 4.3 Summary of the estimation procedure Observing the reference price ˜P at discrete timestj =j∆t, we are able to infer the parameters of the efficient price dynamics–both their jump intensity λi and the law of the jump sizes B– using a maximum likelihood approach. We consider L´ evy-stable distributions for B which are both flexible enough and computationally convenient. Once they are estimated, we then estimate the noise trade size density fB in order to match the average LOB shape in the best way possible. Two models are considered: a Gaussian one, which allows reproducing perfectly the size of the best bid and ask piles, and a piecewise constant one allowing to match an arbitrary number of queues but is not guaranteed to be compatible in its simplest version. 20 102 103 10 3 10 2 (a) HERMES INTL 103 10 2 10 1 (b) Johnson & Johnson 102 103 10 3 10 2 (c) LVMH 103 10 2 10 1 (d) NIKE, Inc. 103 10 3 10 2 (e) SAFRAN 103 104 10 4 10 3 (f) The Coca-Cola Company Figure 3: 1−FQu in log-log scale for fQu fitted piecewise constant. Estimated on data from 2022-10-01 to 2023-03-31. 21 5 Applications 5.1 Spread forecasting Our model (in particular Equation (5)) allows us to forecast the new value of the spread if the tick size is modified. In the following, we predict the spread changes due to the new tick size regime under the recent European regulation MiFID II, and compare our results to the effective spread values. We expect our model to be relevant for rather liquid assets since it is based on the presence of competitive market makers. We therefore restrict ourselves to this class. Note that there are other models in the literature enabling practitioners to forecast spreads, see notably [8] where the authors propose an approach designed for large tick assets. This methodology is applied for example in [19] on Japanese data and in [27] where spread values before and after MiFID II are compared. The advantage of our procedure is that it can be applied to both small and large tick assets. 5.1.1 The tick size issue and MiFID II regulation In the recent years, trading platforms have raced to reduce their tick sizes in order to offer better prices and gain market share. This broad trend has had adverse effects on the overall market quality: a too small tick leads to unstable LOBs and a degradation of the price formation mechanism. However, a tick that is too large prevents the price from moving freely according to the views of market participants. Therefore, finding suitable tick values is crucial for the fluidity of financial markets. To solve this issue, some regulators tried to use pilot programs, as was the case in Japan and in the United States, see for example [19]. This is a costly practice which does not really rely on theoretical foundations. We believe that using quantitative results such as those presented in this work could lead to a much more efficient methodology. In Europe, MiFID II (Markets in Financial Instruments Directive II) regulation introduced a harmonized tick size regime (Article 49) which is based on a two-entries table: price and liquidity (expressed in terms of number of transactions per day)4. Note that one of the targets for regulators was to obtain for liquid assets spreads between 1.5 and 2 ticks, see [9]. 5.1.2 Empirical study In our dataset, 10 stocks changed liquidity bin and thus of tick size on April 1st, 2024. We compute the average spread on the period 2022-10-01 to 2023-03-31. Then, we predict average spread for the period 2023-04-01 to 2023-09-30 in two ways: with our model (Equation (5)), and supposing it stays constant in nominal value. The results are reported in Table 4. Our model outperforms a constant spread prediction on 9 out of 11 stocks and gives globally a more accurate prediction (relative error of 14% versus 39% on average). LHYFE is a notable outlier. It is the only stock for which the tick size and the average spread go in opposite directions after the tick size modification: the average 4The number of transactions per day is computed on a yearly basis. The liquidity bin in which an asset belongs, and thus the tick size rule it has to follow is updated every year on April 1st. 22 Company tick size period 1 spread period 1 tick size period 2 spread period 2 predicted spread Relative pre- diction error, model Relative pre- diction error, constant spread ADP 0.05 0.131 0.1 0.151 0.181 19.60% 13.45% AMG 0.02 0.039 0.01 0.031 0.029 5.11% 27.18% BORR DRILLING 0.01 0.092 0.05 0.148 0.132 10.41% 37.48% ESSILORLUXOTTICA 0.05 0.067 0.02 0.042 0.037 10.46% 61.63% FDJ 0.01 0.029 0.02 0.041 0.039 3.13% 27.72% HERMES INTL 0.5 0.674 0.2 0.461 0.374 18.85% 46.21% LHYFE 0.001 0.047 0.01 0.043 0.056 29.54% 8.62% MICHELIN 0.005 0.009 0.01 0.014 0.014 1.66% 36.53% OCI 0.02 0.039 0.01 0.028 0.029 1.40% 36.90% OKEA 0.05 0.131 0.02 0.073 0.101 38.17% 79.39% REMY COINTREAU 0.1 0.16 0.05 0.111 0.11 1.13% 43.95% Table 4: Forecasting assets spreads on Period 2 (2023-04-01 to 2023-09-30) using data from Period 1 (2022-10-01 to 2023-03-31). spread (in euros) decreased after the tick size went up. 5.2 Model validation: predictive power of imbalance It is a known stylized fact, see [20, 28, 33, 37, 40], that the volume imbalance, defined as I = Vb−Va Vb+Va where Vb is the volume posted at the best bid and Va the volume posted at the best ask, is a good predictor of upcoming price moves at high frequency, especially for large-tick stocks. Consider a stock that has an average spread below 1.5 ticks, that is a large-tick stock in the sense of [19]. In our model, that corresponds to µ ⩽ α 4 . For d∈ (µ,α−µ), I(d) = F−1 Qu  1 1−r− r 1−r E h max  B α−d, 1 i −F−1 Qu  1 1−r− r 1−r E  max  B d, 1  F−1 Qu  1 1−r− r 1−r E h max  B α−d, 1 i +F−1 Qu  1 1−r− r 1−r E  max  B d, 1 . In the case where fB has unbounded support and fQu is strictly positive on (0,g (µ +a)) (g defined by (6)), which is the case of every example we have seen, I : (µ,α−µ)→ (−1, 1) is strictly increasing and bijective. In this case, to each value y of the imbalance corresponds one and only one value of I−1(i) of d. The probability of an upward jump of the reference price ˜P at horizon ∆t can be computed, recalling that ˜P (t) =P (t) +d(t): P h ˜P (t + ∆t)− ˜P (t)> 0|I(d(t)) =y i = P h ˜P (t + ∆t)− ˜P (t)> 0|d(t) =I−1(y) i = P  P (t + ∆t)−P (t)>I−1(y)  . By symmetry, P h ˜P (t + ∆t)− ˜P (t)< 0|I(d(t)) =y i = P  P (t + ∆t)−P (t)<−I−1(y)  . We compare the empirical price move probabilities at horizon ∆ t = 5s to the ones given by our model. For this subsection only, the model parameters used were estimated on a sampling of 5 seconds instead of 1 minute: the latter gave smaller values of λi, failing to capture many short-term efficient price jumps. 23 In Figure 4, we compare the empirical probabilities of an upwards price with the ones given by the model. The empirical probabilities are symmetrized: to avoid any asymmetry between the bid and the ask, we compute the empirical version of 1 2  P h ˜P (t + ∆t)− ˜P (t)> 0|I(d(t)) =y i + P h ˜P (t + ∆t)− ˜P (t)< 0|I(d(t)) =−y i . To compute them, the values of the imbalance are grouped in intervals of length 0.1. They are reproduced quite well by the model, and the Gaussian choice for the law of Qu seems to perform better than the version with piecewise constant density. The observed probability of an upward price for an imbalance close to 1 goes beyond the theoretical bound of e−λi∆t given by the model (there cannot be a jump of ˜P if P does not jump). Figure 4 (c) and (d) present more lukewarm results: the strongly convex dependence of the price jump probability with respect to the imbalance is difficult to capture by our estima- tion procedure. The histogram model chosen for fQu prevents flexibility around 0 which is important for this exercise. 5.3 Queue position valuation Introducing a tick size in our modeling enables us to study the value of the position of the limit orders in the queues. We can quantify the advantage of an order placed on top of a queue compared to another one placed at the bottom. The difference in the values of the positions in a queue is a crucial parameter for trading algorithms. It has actually led to a technological arms race among high-frequency traders and other algorithmic market participants to establish early (and hence advantageous) positions in the queues, see [2, 32]. Placing limit orders at the front of a queue is very valuable for different reasons. It guarantees early execution and less waiting time. In addition, it reduces adverse selection risk. In fact, as explained in [32], when a limit order is placed at the end of a queue, it is likely that it will be executed against a large trade. In contrast, a limit order placed at the front of the (best) queue will be executed against the next trade independently of the trade size. Large trades are in general sent by informed traders aiming at consuming all limit orders which will generate profit for them. In this way, a limit order submitted at the front of the queue is less likely to undergo adverse selection. In light of this, to optimize their execution, practitioners need to place limit orders in a relevant way. This requires an estimate of the value of a limit order according to its position in the queue. This very problem is studied in [32] for the queues at the best limits for large tick assets. We complement here this nice work providing formulas valid for any queue of a large or small tick asset and taking into account strategic interactions between market participants. Assumption 4 tells us that the expected profit of a new infinitesimal limit order placed at the bottom of a non-empty queue is equal to zero. However, under our zero-profit condition, market makers may still make profit if their orders are placed before. The value of queue position at the ith level, denoted by ˜Gd(i), can be formulated in this model as the difference between the expected profit of the order placed on top and that of a new one that would be placed at the bottom of the ith queue (which makes on average zero profit at equilibrium). Computing this quantity is very similar to deriving the equations in Proposition 3.2. The 24 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 price up, symmetrized price up, Gaussian noise price up, histogram noise (a) AIRBUS 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 price up, symmetrized price up, Gaussian noise price up, histogram noise (b) BNP PARIBAS ACT.A 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40 price up, symmetrized price up, Gaussian noise price up, histogram noise (c) Citigroup Inc. 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40 price up, symmetrized price up, Gaussian noise price up, histogram noise (d) Delta Air Lines, Inc. 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40 price up, symmetrized price up, Gaussian noise price up, histogram noise (e) Halliburton Company 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40 price up, symmetrized price up, Gaussian noise price up, histogram noise (f) Schlumberger Limited Figure 4: Probability of an upward price move in the next 5s with respect to the imbalance. In solid blue, the empirical probabilities, in dashed the probabilities given by the model when the noise is supposed Gaussian, in dot-dashed the probabilities given by the model when the noise has a piecewise constant density. 25 Company spread QPV tick size AIR LIQUIDE 0.0301 0.0126 0.02 ENGIE 0.0033 0.0013 0.002 Freeport-McMoRan Inc. 0.011 0.0053 0.01 Johnson & Johnson 0.0249 0.0083 0.01 OCI 0.0386 0.0146 0.02 Roblox Corporation 0.0197 0.0073 0.01 Table 5: Queue position valuation for some stocks. Period: from 2022-10-01 to 2023-03-31. difference is that now we no longer consider a traded volume totally depleting the limit but a traded volume consuming all the limits before the ith one. This leads to the following theorem. Theorem 5.1. Fori≥kd r, we have ˜Gd(i) =d + (i− 1)α− rE[B1B>d+(i−1)α] 1−rFB(d + (i− 1)α)− (1−r)FQu (Ld(i− 1)). The formula for i≤−kd l is obviously deduced. An integral computation, similar to the ones in the proofs of Proposition 3.1 and Lemma B.6, shows Corollary 5.1, which gives the average value of the highest priority order in the best queue. It is the object of study of [32] and of our subsequent analysis on the data. Remark that since every trade sent by a noise trader consumes the top of the pile, the distribution FQu is not involved in this quantity. Corollary 5.1. If d(t) follows its stationary distribution, the value of the best queue is on average ˜G(best) = 1 α Z µ+α µ  z− rE [B1B>z] 1−rFB(z)  dz. A few examples are given in Table 5, while the complete results are reported in Appendix E. Like [32] we obtain values of the same order of magnitude as the spread. Conclusion In this article, we introduce an agent-based model for the LOB. Inspired by the seminal work by Glosten and Milgrom [12] and its extension to the whole limit order book in [11], we use a zero-profit condition for the market makers which enables us to derive a link between proportion of events due to the noise trader, bid-ask spread, dynamic of the efficient price and equilibrium LOB state. The effect of introducing a tick size is then discussed. We in particular show that the constrained bid-ask spread is equal to the sum of the tick value and the intrinsic bid-ask spread that corresponds to the case of a vanishing tick size. This model allows us to do spread forecasting when one modifies the tick size. We develop an estimation procedure allowing us to recover the parameters of the model, while only observing discrete price changes, using the characteristic function of the compound Poisson model chosen for the efficient price. 26 Price discreteness also enables us to value queue positions in the LOB. In the large-tick stock framework, the model describes accurately the probabilities of price moves conditionally to the volume imbalance. It also allows an exact fit of the average shape of the LOB. In our approach, market makers only are allowed to insert limit orders. In practice, the roles of informed trader and market makers are often mixed, and the informed trader also has the possibility to place passive limit orders. By doing so, he may get better prices but also leak some information to other market participants. Extending our model by taking into account accurately these intricate features is left for future work. References [1] Fr´ ed´ eric Abergel and Aymen Jedidi. “A mathematical approach to order book model- ing”. In: International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance16.05 (2013), p. 1350025. [2] Fr´ ed´ eric Abergel, Charles-Albert Lehalle, and Mathieu Rosenbaum. “Understanding the stakes of high-frequency trading”. In: The Journal of Trading 9.4 (2014), pp. 49–73. [3] Shmuel Baruch and Lawrence R Glosten. “Tail expectation, imperfect competition, and the phenomenon of flickering quotes in limit order book markets”. In: Unpublished Manuscript, David Eccles School of Business, University of Utah (2017). [4] Christian Bayer, Ulrich Horst, and Jinniao Qiu. “A functional limit theorem for limit order books with state dependent price dynamics”. In:The Annals of Applied Probability 27.5 (2017), pp. 2753–2806. [5] Dan Bernhardt and Eric Hughson. “Splitting orders”. In: The Review of Financial Studies 10.1 (1997), pp. 69–101. [6] Rama Cont and Adrien De Larrard. “Price dynamics in a Markovian limit order mar- ket”. In: SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics 4.1 (2013), pp. 1–25. [7] Rama Cont, Sasha Stoikov, and Rishi Talreja. “A stochastic model for order book dynamics”. In: Operations Research 58.3 (2010), pp. 549–563. [8] Khalil Dayri and Mathieu Rosenbaum. “Large tick assets: implicit spread and optimal tick size”. In: Market Microstructure and Liquidity 1.01 (2015), p. 1550003. [9] Autorit´ e des March´ es Financiers. “MiFID II: Impact of the new tick size regime.” In: AMF report (2018). [10] Thierry Foucault. “Order flow composition and trading costs in a dynamic limit order market”. In: Journal of Financial Markets 2.2 (1999), pp. 99–134. [11] Lawrence R Glosten. “Is the electronic open limit order book inevitable?” In: The Journal of Finance 49.4 (1994), pp. 1127–1161. [12] Lawrence R Glosten and Paul R Milgrom. “Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist market with heterogeneously informed traders”. In: Journal of Financial Economics 14.1 (1985), pp. 71–100. [13] Martin D Gould, Mason A Porter, Stacy Williams, Mark McDonald, Daniel J Fenn, and Sam D Howison. “Limit order books”. In: Quantitative Finance 13.11 (2013), pp. 1709– 1742. 27 [14] Nikolaus Hansen. “The CMA evolution strategy: A tutorial”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.00772 (2016). [15] Takaki Hayashi and Yuta Koike. “Wavelet-based methods for high-frequency lead-lag analysis”. In: SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics 9.4 (2018), pp. 1208–1248. [16] Thomas Ho and Hans R Stoll. “Optimal dealer pricing under transactions and return uncertainty”. In: Journal of Financial Economics 9.1 (1981), pp. 47–73. [17] Marc Hoffmann, Mathieu Rosenbaum, and Nakahiro Yoshida. “Estimation of the lead- lag parameter from non-synchronous data”. In: Bernoulli 19.2 (2013), pp. 426–461. [18] Roger D Huang and Hans R Stoll. “The components of the bid-ask spread: A general approach”. In: The Review of Financial Studies 10.4 (1997), pp. 995–1034. [19] Weibing Huang, Charles-Albert Lehalle, and Mathieu Rosenbaum. “How to Predict the Consequences of a Tick Value Change? Evidence from the Tokyo Stock Exchange Pilot Program”. In: Market Microstructure and Liquidity 2.03n04 (2016), p. 1750001. [20] Weibing Huang, Charles-Albert Lehalle, and Mathieu Rosenbaum. “Simulating and analyzing order book data: The queue-reactive model”. In: Journal of the American Statistical Association 110.509 (2015), pp. 107–122. [21] Weibing Huang and Mathieu Rosenbaum. “Ergodicity and diffusivity of Markovian order book models: a general framework”. In: SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics 8.1 (2017), pp. 874–900. [22] Nicolas Huth and Fr´ ed´ eric Abergel. “High frequency lead/lag relationships: Empirical facts”. In: Journal of Empirical Finance 26 (2014), pp. 41–58. [23] Chia-Hsuan Kuo, Chiao-Ting Chen, Sin-Jing Lin, and Szu-Hao Huang. “Improving generalization in reinforcement learning–based trading by using a generative adversarial market model”. In: IEEE Access 9 (2021), pp. 50738–50754. [24] Albert S Kyle. “Continuous auctions and insider trading”. In: Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society (1985), pp. 1315–1335. [25] Badre Labiad, Abdelaziz Berrado, and Loubna Benabbou. “Generative Adversarial Neu- ral Networks for Realistic Stock Market Simulations.” In: International Journal of Ad- vanced Computer Science & Applications 15.3 (2024). [26] Aim´ e Lachapelle, Jean-Michel Lasry, Charles-Albert Lehalle, and Pierre-Louis Lions. “Efficiency of the price formation process in presence of high frequency participants: a mean field game analysis”. In: Mathematics and Financial Economics 10.3 (2016), pp. 223–262. [27] Sophie Laruelle, Mathieu Rosenbaum, and Emel Savku. “Assessing MiFID II regulation on tick sizes: A transaction costs analysis viewpoint”. In: Market Microstructure and Liquidity 5.01n04 (2019), p. 2050003. [28] Charles-Albert Lehalle, Othmane Mounjid, and Mathieu Rosenbaum. “Optimal liquidity- based trading tactics”. In: Stochastic Systems 11.4 (2021), pp. 368–390. [29] Nicolas Megarbane, Pamela Saliba, Charles-Albert Lehalle, and Mathieu Rosenbaum. “The Behavior of High-Frequency Traders Under Different Market Stress Scenarios”. In: Market Microstructure and Liquidity (2017), p. 1850005. [30] Sean Meyn and Richard L Tweedie. “Markov chains and stochastic stability”. In: (2009). 28 [31] Sean Meyn and Richard L Tweedie. “Stability of Markovian processes I: Criteria for discrete-time chains”. In: Advances in Applied Probability 24.3 (1992), pp. 542–574. [32] Ciamac C Moallemi and Kai Yuan. “A model for queue position valuation in a limit order book”. In: Columbia Business School Research Paper 17-70 (2016). [33] Ioane Muni Toke and Nakahiro Yoshida. “Modelling intensities of order flows in a limit order book”. In: Quantitative Finance 17.5 (2017), pp. 683–701. [34] John P Nolan. “Univariate stable distributions”. In: Springer Series in Operations Re- search and Financial Engineering 10 (2020), pp. 978–3. [35] Masahiro Nomura and Masashi Shibata. “Cmaes: A simple yet practical Python library for CMA-ES”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01373 (2024). [36] Christine A Parlour. “Price dynamics in limit order markets”. In: The Review of Fi- nancial Studies 11.4 (1998), pp. 789–816. [37] Sergio Pulido, Mathieu Rosenbaum, and Emmanouil Sfendourakis. “Understanding the least well-kept secret of high-frequency trading”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15599 (2023). [38] Ioanid Ro¸ su. “A dynamic model of the limit order book”. In: The Review of Financial Studies 22.11 (2009), pp. 4601–4641. [39] Patrik Sand˚ as. “Adverse selection and competitive market making: Empirical evidence from a limit order market”. In: The review of financial studies 14.3 (2001), pp. 705–734. [40] Emmanouil Sfendourakis and Ioane Muni Toke. “LOB modeling using Hawkes processes with a state-dependent factor”. In: Market Microstructure and Liquidity (Apr. 2023). [41] Eric Smith, J Doyne Farmer, Laszlo Gillemot, and Supriya Krishnamurthy. “Statistical theory of the continuous double auction”. In: Quantitative finance 3.6 (2003), pp. 481– 514. [42] Sasha Stoikov. “The micro-price: a high-frequency estimator of future prices”. In: Quan- titative Finance 18.12 (2018), pp. 1959–1966. [43] Matthieu Wyart, Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, Julien Kockelkoren, Marc Potters, and Michele Vettorazzo. “Relation between bid–ask spread, impact and volatility in order-driven markets”. In: Quantitative Finance 8.1 (2008), pp. 41–57. 29 Appendix A Supplementary mathematical development: time until next trade A trader looking to sell an asset can either place a market order, incurring the bid-ask spread cost, or submit a limit order and wait for execution, risking a potential price decline. Accurately estimating the expected waiting time for execution is therefore crucial. We first derive the formula for the expected duration until the next trade in a model with zero tick size, followed by an approximation for stocks with small tick sizes. Let τ denote the time until the first trade in the model with continuous transaction prices. The expected value of τ is given in Proposition A.1, with proof in Appendix B.11. Proposition A.1. The average waiting time for a trade in the model with continuous trans- action prices is E [τ] = µ λiE  |B|1{|B|>µ} . Introducing a discrete tick size in the model results in longer waiting times for trades. This occurs because larger quoted spreads reduce the number of efficient price movements that lead to executions. We define τd α as the time until the first trade when the efficient price is at a distance d from ˜P (t). Our objective is to analyze the expected waiting time, given that d follows its stationary uniform distribution u(α) := 1 α Z α 0 E [τz α] dz. Although we are not able to derive explicit expressions for u(α), we can characterize its asymptotic behavior in the cases where the tick size is either very small (α→ 0) or very large (α→∞ ). Note that due to the presence of noise traders, E h τd α i ⩽ 1 λu, d ∈ [0,α ). (8) The asymptotic formulas for u(α) are based on the following equation for E  τd α  proved in Appendix B.12.1. Theorem A.1. Letd∈ [0,α ). Then, E h τd α i = 1 λu +λi +r Z d+α⌈µ−d α ⌉ d−α⌈µ+d α ⌉ E  τ d−z+α⌈z−d α ⌉ α  fB(z)dz. In the small-tick stock limit ( α→ 0), the expected waiting time for a trade is close to the one of the model with no tick. Proposition A.2, proved in Appendix B.13 gives its first order approximation. 30 Proposition A.2. As α→ 0, u(α) = µ λiE  |B|1{|B|>µ}  + 2µ2 λiαE  |B|1{|B|>µ} 2 Z α 0 (α−z)fB(µ +z)dz +oα→0  1 α Z α 0 (α−z)fB(µ +z)dz  . The following corollary follows directly from Proposition A.2. Corollary A.1. If fB is right-continuous at µ, then, u(α) = µ λiE  |B|1{|B|>µ}  + µ2fB(µ)α λiE  |B|1{|B|>µ} 2 +oα→0 (α). In the large-tick stock limit (α→∞ ), Proposition A.3, proved in Appendix B.14, establishes that the average waiting time for a trade matches that of a market driven solely by noise traders, as efficient price jumps rarely lead to executions. Proposition A.3. As α→∞ , lim α→∞ u(α) = 1 λu. B Proofs B.1 Proof of Proposition 2.1 We focus on the gain from passive sell orders, as the corresponding results for buy orders can be derived analogously. First, we compute Gi(x−δp,x ). We have Gi(x−δp,x ) = Z x x−δp (P (t) +s)d˜L(s)− Z x x−δp (P (t) + E[B|B >x])d˜L(s) = Z x x−δp sd˜L(s)− ˜L(x)E[B|B >x]. ForGu(x−δp,x ) we obtain Gu(x−δp,x ) = Z x x−δp (P (t) +s)d˜L(s)− Z x x−δp P (t)d˜L(s) = Z x x−δp sd˜L(s). 31 We deduce that G(x−δp,x ) =Gi(x−δp,x )P[ν = 1|Q≥L(x) + ˜L(x)] +Gu(x−δp,x )P[ν = 0|Q≥L(x) + ˜L(x)] = Z x x−δp sd˜L(s)− P[ν = 1|Q≥L(x) + ˜L(x)]˜L(x)E[B|B >x] = Z x x−δp sd˜L(s)− ˜L(x)E[B|B >x] rP[B >x] P[Q≥L(x) + ˜L(x)] = Z x x−δp sd˜L(s)− ˜L(x) rE[B1B>x] P[Q≥L(x) + ˜L(x)] = Z x x−δp sd˜L(s)− ˜L(x) rE[B1B>x] rP[B >x] + (1−r)P[Qu>L (x) + ˜L(x)] . Integrating by parts we obtain Z x x−δp sd˜L(s) = ˜L(x)x− Z x x−δp ˜L(s)ds =εx− Z x x−δp ˜L(s)ds. When δp tends to 0, the last expression tends to εx. Consequently, we conclude that lim δp→0 G(x−δp,x ) =ε  x− rE[B1B>x] rP[B >x] + (1−r)P[Qu>L (x) + ˜L(x)]  , and G(x) = lim ε→0  lim δp→0 G(x−δp,x ) ε  =x− rE[B1B>x] rP[B >x] + (1−r)P[Qu>L (x)]. B.2 Proof of Theorem 2.1 We consider the passive sell orders ( x >0). We first compute ˆL(x). This is the theoretical liquidity that market makers should add in the LOB in order to obtain G(x) = 0. Under Proposition 2.1, G(x) = 0 is equivalent to P[Qu>L (x)] = r 1−r  E B x 1B>x  − P[B >x]  = r 1−r  E B x 1B>x  − 1 + P[B <x]  = r 1−r  −1 + E  max B x, 1  . We deduce that ˆL(x) =F−1 Qu  1 1−r− r 1−r E  max B x, 1  . We now prove that the spread is positive and finite and deduce the shape of the whole LOB. Recall that ˆL(x), as computed above, is a theoretical value, and that market makers will add liquidity only when ˆL(x)> 0. 32 We have ˆL(x) > 0 when ( 1 1−r− r 1−r E  max(B x, 1)  ) > 1 2. This holds for all x such that E[max(B x, 1)]< 1+r 2r . Equivalently, the inequality is satisfied for any x such thatx>µ , where µ is unique solution of the following equation E  max B µ, 1  = 1 +r 2r . By Assumption 2, we deduce that for any x≤µ, L(x) = 0. Moreover, for any x>µ , L(x) =F−1 Qu  1 1−r− r 1−r E  max B x, 1  . Therefore, µ is the half spread. The cumulative LOB we obtain is unique, continuous and strictly increasing beyond the spread (since the laws of B and Qu have positive densities on R). B.3 Proof of Proposition 2.2 Define g :x∈ [µ,∞)7→ 1 1−r− r 1−r E  max  B x, 1  . Suppose that g is differentiable and define fQu(y) = (Λ−1)′(y)g′  Λ−1(y)  , y ∈ [0,∞). Fory∈ (−∞, 0), setfQu(y) =fQu(−y). Since Λ and g are strictly increasing,fQu > 0 almost everywhere. In addition, Z R fQu(y)dy = 2 Z ∞ 0 (Λ−1)′(y)g′  Λ−1(y)  dy = 2 Z ∞ µ g′(x)dx = 2 lim x→∞ g(x)− 2g(µ) = 1. Thus,fQu is a strictly positive and symmetric density. For x∈ [0,∞), FQu(x) = 1 2 + Z x 0 (Λ−1)′(y)g′  Λ−1(y)  dy =g   Λ−1(x)  , hence, for x∈ [µ,∞), Λ(x) =F−1 Qu (g(x)), as required. The differentiability of g is established in Lemma B.1. Lemma B.1. For all x ∈ [µ,∞), g(x) = r 1−r Rx µ 1 z2 R∞ z yfB(y)dydz. Consequently, g is continuously differentiable. Proof. Let x∈ [µ,∞) and observe that Z x µ 1 z2 Z ∞ z yfB(y)dydz = Z ∞ µ Z min(x,y) µ y z2fB(y)dzdy = Z ∞ µ yfB(y)  1 µ− 1 min(x,y )  dy = 1 µ Z ∞ µ yfB(y)dy− Z x µ fB(y)dy− Z ∞ x y xfB(y)dy 33 By Equation (1), r 1−r Z ∞ µ y µfB(y)dy = 1 1−r− r 1−r Z µ −∞ fB(y)dy. Combining these observations, we conclude that r 1−r Z x µ 1 z2 Z ∞ z yfB(y)dydz = 1 1−r− r 1−r Z x −∞ fB(y)dy− r 1−r Z ∞ x y xfB(y)dy =g(x). Remark B.1. Lemma B.1 holds even if fB is not supposed to be strictly positive almost everywhere. B.4 Proof of Proposition 2.3 Defineg as in the beginning of Section B.3. We start by computing an asymptotic equivalent for g. Lemma B.2. Suppose that 1−FB(x) ∼ x→∞ cx−a for some constants c> 0 and a> 1. Then 1−g(x) ∼ x→∞ r 1−r c a− 1x−a. Proof. Let x∈ R. We have, using Fubini’s theorem, Z ∞ x (1−FB(y))dy = Z ∞ x Z ∞ y fB(z)dzdy = Z ∞ x (z−x)fB(z)dz = Z ∞ x zfB(z)dz−x(1−FB(x)). By the definition of g, g(x) = 1 1−r− r 1−rFB(x)− r 1−r 1 x Z ∞ x yfB(y)dy, therefore g(x) = 1− r 1−r 1 x Z ∞ x (1−FB(y))dy. Integrating the equivalents, we have R∞ x (1−FB(y))dy ∼ x→∞ c a−1x1−a. The desired result follows immediately. We first prove case (i) where 1 −FQu(x) ∼ x→∞ c′x−b for some c′,b > 0. Let x∈ R. Since g(x) =FQu  F−1 Qu (g(x))  and limx→∞F−1 Qu (g(x)) =∞, g(x) = 1−c′F−1 Qu (g(x))−b +ox→∞  F−1 Qu (g(x))−b  . Thus, by Lemma B.2 c′F−1 Qu (g(x))−b ∼ x→∞ 1−g(x) ∼ x→∞ r 1−r c a− 1x−a 34 and the desired result follows (recall that L(x) =F−1 Qu (g(x))). For case (ii), suppose now that Qu has a normal distribution with variance σ2. By [34, Equation (3.41)], 1−FQu(x) ∼ x→∞ σ x √ 2πe− x2 2σ2 . Let x∈ R. Since g(x) =FQu  F−1 Qu (g(x))  and limx→∞F−1 Qu (g(x)) =∞, g(x) = 1− σ F−1 Qu (g(x)) √ 2πe− F−1 Qu (g(x))2 2σ2 (1 +ox→∞ (1)). Thus, by Lemma B.2, σ F−1 Qu (g(x)) √ 2πe− F−1 Qu (g(x))2 2σ2 (1 +ox→∞ (1)) = r 1−r c a− 1x−a (1 +ox→∞ (1)). Taking the logarithm on both sides of the last equation, we obtain − F−1 Qu (g(x))2 2σ2 +ln(σ)−ln  F−1 Qu (g(x)) √ 2π  +ox→∞(1) = ln  r 1−r c a− 1  −a ln(x)+ox→∞(1). Since ln(σ)− ln  F−1 Qu (g(x)) √ 2π  =ox→∞  F−1 Qu (g(x))2  and ln  r 1−r c a−1  =ox→∞(ln(x)), F−1 Qu (g(x))2 2σ2 ∼ x→∞ a ln(x) and the desired result follows. B.5 Proof of Proposition 3.1 Let t ⩾ 0. We have d(t) =d(0)− (P (t)−P (0)) +α −d(0) +P (t)−P (0) α  . Thus, for s∈ [0,t ], d(t) =d(0)− (P (s)−P (0))− (P (t)−P (s)) +α P (s)−P (0) α + P (t)−P (s) α  . =d(s)− (P (t)−P (s)) +α −d(0) +P (s)−P (0) α + P (t)−P (s) α  −α −d(0) +P (s)−P (0) α  =d(s)− (P (t)−P (s)) +α  −d(s) α + P (t)−P (s) α  . Forz∈ [0,α ), s ⩾ 0, and A⊂ (0,α ) a measurable set, we define Qs(z,A ) := P  z− (P (s)−P (0)) +α  −z α + P (s)−P (0) α  ∈A  . 35 For such A and s ⩽ t, since P (t)−P (s) is independent of Fs and has the same law as P (s)−P (0), P [d(t)∈A|Fs] =Qt−s(d(s),A ). Thus, (d(t))t⩾0 is a time-homogenous Markov process with Q as transition kernel. The claim about the invariant measure of ( d(t))t⩾0 follows from Lemma B.3, which provides conditions for a probability measure to be invariant. This reduces the problem to studying discrete-time Markov chain invariance. Lemma B.3. A probability measure is invariant for (d(t))t⩾0 if and only if for all n∈ N∗, it is invariant for the (discrete-time) Markov kernel Q(n) defined by Q(n)(z,A ) := Z R 1A  z−y +α l −z α + y α m f∗n B (y)dy, z ∈ [0,α ), A⊂ [0,α ) measurable. Proof. Let z∈ [0,α ), t ⩾ 0 and A⊂ (0,α ) be a measurable set. Using explicitly the law of P (t)−P (0) we obtain Qt(z,A ) =e−λit +e−λit ∞X n=1 (λit)n n! Z R 1A  z−y +α l −z α + y α m f∗n B (y)dy. Let ν be a probability measure on [0,α ). Using the previous equality yields Z [0,α) Qt(z,A )ν(dz) =e−λitν(A) +e−λit ∞X n=1 (λit)n n! Z [0,α) Q(n)(z,A )ν(dz), which implies Z [0,α) Qt(z,A )ν(dz) ∞X n=0 (λit)n n! =ν(A) + ∞X n=1 (λit)n n! Z [0,α) Q(n)(z,A )ν(dz). Identifying the terms in the power series, we obtain the desired result. We first show that the uniform distribution is invariant for ( d(t))t⩾0. Let n∈ N∗ and let A⊂ (0,α ) be a measurable set. Fix y∈ R. We write y = mα +p with m∈ Z, p∈ [0,α ). Then, Z α 0 1A  z−y +α l −z α + y α m dz = Z p 0 1A (z−y +mα +α) dz + Z α p 1A (z−y +mα) dz = Z y+α mα+α 1A (z−y) dz + Z mα+α y 1A (z−y) dz = Z α 0 1A (z) dz. Thus, 1 α Z α 0 Q(n)(z,A )dz = 1 α Z α 0 1A (z) dz Z R f∗n B (y)dy = 1 α Z α 0 1A (z) dz. 36 Thanks to Lemma B.3, we conclude that the uniform distribution on [0 ,α ) is invariant for (d(t))t⩾0. To show uniqueness, it is sufficient to show that for some n∈ N∗, a Markov chain with transition kernel Q(n) is Harris recurrent. Indeed, if this is the case, then, by [30, Theorem 10.0.01],Q(n) admits a unique invariant measure, and consequently, by Lemma B.3, (d(t))t⩾0 admits at most one invariant measure. The proof of the Harris recurrence property is based on Lemma B.4. Lemma B.4. There exists n∈ N∗, δ >0 and β∈ R such that f∗n B ⩾δ almost everywhere on [β,β +α]. Proof. Since for all n∈ N∗, f∗n B ⩾ min(fB, 1)∗n, we assume from now on (without loss of generality), thatfB ⩽ 1. We do not use the fact that fB integrates to 1, just that it is strictly positive. Since fB is square integrable (thanks to our assumption), f∗2 B is almost everywhere equal to a continuous function, which is the version we use from now on. f∗2 B is non-negative and not identically zero because R f∗2 B =  R fB 2> 0. Hence, there exists an interval [a,b ] with a<b and ε> 0 such that f∗2 B ⩾ε on [a,b ]. Thus, f∗2n B ⩾εn1∗n [a,b], n ∈ N∗. (9) We will show that for all n∈ N∗, 1∗n [a,b] > 0 in (na,nb ). Then, for n∈ N∗ big enough, by the continuity of 1∗n [a,b], there exists c(n) > 0 and an interval of length bigger than α such that 1∗n [a,b] > c(n) on that interval, which implies the claim we wanted to prove by injecting the last inequality in (9). The claim is true forn = 1. Let n ⩾ 2 andx∈ (na,nb ). Let η >0 be such that [x−(n−1)η,x + (n− 1)η] ⊂ (na,nb ). In particular, x n− η n, x n + η n n−1 ⊂ h x n− (n−1)η n , x n + (n−1)η n in−1 ⊂ (a,b )n−1. We have 1∗n [a,b](x) = Z Rn−1 1[a,b](x−y1−···− yn−1)1[a,b](y1)... 1[a,b](yn−1)dy1... dyn−1 = Z [a,b]n−1 1[a,b](x−y1−···− yn−1)dy1... dyn−1 ⩾ Z [x n−η n,x n +η n] n−1 1[a,b](x−y1−···− yn−1)dy1... dyn−1. Let (y1,...,y n−1)∈ x n− η n, x n + η n n−1. Then, a< x n− n− 1 n η ⩽x−y1−···− yn−1 ⩽ x n + n− 1 n η <b. Thus, 1∗n [a,b](x) ⩾ Z [x n−η n,x n +η n] n−1 1dy1... dyn−1> 0, which is what we wanted to prove. 37 Let n,δ and β be given by Lemma B.4. Let z∈ R and let A⊂ (0,α ) be a measurable set. Then, Q(n)(z,A ) ⩾δ Z β+α β 1A  z−y +α l −z α + y α m dy =δ Z α 0 1A(y)dy, the last equality follows from a similar computation as in the proof of invariance of the uniform measure. Hence, a Markov chain Φ with Q(n) as transition kernel is ϕ-irreducible and a T-chain, ϕ being the Lebesgue measure, see [31, Parts 1 and 2]. Endowing [0 ,α ) with the topology of the torus (i.e. with a distance D(x,y ) = min(|x−y|,α−|x−y|)) makes [0,α ) compact. Furthermore, this topology has the same Borel sets as the standard one. In this topology, [0,α ) is compact, hence Φ is bounded in probability [31, Topological stability condition 2]. Thus, by [31, Corollary following Theorem 2.1], Φ is positive Harris recurrent, which is what we wanted to prove. B.6 Proof of Proposition 3.2 We provide only a sketch of the proof, as the computations are essentially the same as in the proof of Proposition 2.1. In particular, we omit the introduction of the limit order volume ε and directly work in the asymptotic regime where ε tends to zero. We analyze the gain of passive sell orders, noting that the gain for passive buy orders can be derived analogously. First, we computeGd inf(i), which denotes the gain of a new order placed at the ith limit when the trade is initiated by an informed trader, knowing that Qi>L d(i).*, Gd inf(i) =d + (i− 1)α− E[B|B >d + (i− 1)α]. Second, we compute Gd noise(i), which denotes the gain of a new order placed at the ith limit when the trade is initiated by a noise trade, knowing that Qu>L d(i), Gd noise(i) =d + (i− 1)α. Therefore, Gd(i) is given by Gd(i) =Gd inf(i)P[ν = 1|Q>L d(i)] +Gd noise(i)P[ν = 0|Q>L d(i)] =d + (i− 1)α− rE[B1B>d+(i−1)α] P[Q>L (d + (i− 1)α]) =d + (i− 1)α− rE[B1B>d+(i−1)α] rP[B >d + (i− 1)α] + (1−r)P[Qu>L (d + (i− 1)α)]. B.7 Proof of Theorem 3.1 We consider the ask side. We first show that the spread is positive and finite. Then we prove that beyond the spread, market makers insert limit orders on all possible limit prices. We showed in the null-tick size case that there exists µ such that for all x≤µ,L (x) = 0 and for all x > µ,L(x) > 0. The LOB being now discrete, the previous findings remain true for kd r instead of µ where kd r satisfies 38 kd r = min{k∈ N+|d + (k− 1)α>µ }. Equivalently, kd r = 1 + µ−d α  . Similarly, for the first non-empty limit at the bid side, we get kd l = µ +d α  . From Equation (4), the spread is equal to ( kd r +kd l )α−α. Thus, the conditional constrained bid-ask spread ϕd α, given the value of d, is given by ϕd α =α µ−d α  + µ +d α  . Under Assumption 4, we have for any i≥kd r, L(d + (i− 1)α) =F−1 Qu  1 1−r− r 1−r E  max  B d + (i− 1)α, 1  . We deduce that the cumulative LOB is unique and increasing beyond the spread. B.8 Proof of Corollary 3.1 The parameter d being approximately uniformly distributed between [0,α ), we can compute the average value of the constrained bid-ask spread by integrating ϕd α ϕα = Z α 0 ⌈µ−s α ⌉ +⌈µ +s α ⌉ds. Let u := µ α. We have ϕu =α Z 1 0 ⌈u−x⌉ +⌈u +x⌉dx. We decompose u as u =ui +uf, where ui represents the integer part of u. We obtain ϕα =α Z 1 0 ⌈ui +uf−x⌉ +⌈ui +uf +x⌉dx ϕα =α Z uf 0 (ui + 1)dx + Z 1 uf uidx + Z 1−uf 0 (ui + 1)dx + Z 1 (1−uf ) (ui + 2)dx ! ϕα =α (uf(ui + 1) + (1−uf)ui + (1−uf)(ui + 1) +uf(ui + 2)) ϕα =α(2ui + 2uf + 1) =α + 2µ =α +ϕ. 39 B.9 Proof of Proposition 4.1 Throughout the proof, we use the following notations: ∆ ˜P := ˜P (t + ∆t)− ˜P (t) and ∆P := P (t + ∆t)−P (t). Observe that P h ∆ ˜P =kα i = P [−d(t) + ∆P∈ ((k− 1)α,kα )] = 1 α Z α 0 P [−u + ∆P∈ ((k− 1)α,kα )] du. By the L´ evy-Khintchine formula, the characteristic function of ∆P is given by E [exp (iz∆P )] = exp  λi∆t  ˆfB(z)− 1  , z ∈ R. The characteristic function is not necessarily integrable, we only know it is bounded by exp(2λi∆t). Thus, we cannot invert it directly, instead, we will use test functions. Let ϕ∈ C∞(R) supported in [0 , 1], non-negative-valued and with integral equal to 1. For n∈ N∗, we define χn by χn(x) = Z ∞ −n(x−(k−1)α) ϕ(y)dy− Z n(x−kα) −∞ ϕ(y)dy, x ∈ R. Note that χn∈C∞(R),χn’s support is included in  (k− 1)α− 1 n,kα + 1 n  , and χn takes the value 1 in [( k− 1)α,kα ], is non-decreasing on  (k− 1)α− 1 n, (k− 1)α  and non-increasing on  kα,kα + 1 n  . For x ∈  (k− 1)α− 1 n, (k− 1)α  , χ′ n(x) = nϕ(−n(x− (k− 1)α)) and χ′′ n(x) = −n2ϕ′(−n(x− (k− 1)α)). For x∈  kα,kα + 1 n  , χ′ n(x) = −nϕ(n(x−kα)) and χ′′ n(x) =n2ϕ′(n(x−kα)). By dominated convergence, P h ∆ ˜P =kα i = lim n→∞ 1 α Z α 0 E [χn (−u + ∆P )] du. Fix n∈ N∗. By the Fourier inversion formula applied to the test function χn(−u +·), Z α 0 E [χn (−u + ∆P )] du = Z α 0 Z R eλi∆t( ˆfB(z)−1)  1 2π Z R χn(−u +y)e−izydy  dzdu. Since Z α 0 Z R eλi∆t( ˆfB(z)−1)  1 2π Z R χn(−u +y)e−izydy  dzdu ⩽ e2λi∆t 2π Z α 0 Z R Z R χn(y)e−izye−izudy  dzdu ⩽ e2λi∆t 2π α Z R Z R χn(y)e−izydy dz <∞, 40 (the last inequality holds because z7→ R Rχn(z)e−izydy belongs to the Schwartz space, and it is therefore integrable), we can apply the Fubini theorem to deduce Z α 0 E [χn (−u + ∆P )] du = Z R eλi∆t( ˆfB(z)−1) Z α 0 e−izu  1 2π Z R χn(y)e−izydy  dudz = Z R eλi∆t( ˆfB(z)−1)e−iαz 2 z sin zα 2  1 π Z R χn(y)e−izydy  dz. Let z∈ R. We have Z kα (k−1)α χn(y)e−izydy = Z kα (k−1)α e−izydy = 2e−ikαz+iαz 2 z sin αz 2  . Sincez7→ 2 πeλi∆t( ˆfB(z)−1)e−ikαz z2 sin  zα 2 2 is integrable, the following function is also integrable z7→eλi∆t( ˆfB(z)−1)e−iαz 2 z sin zα 2  1 π Z R\[(k−1)α,kα] χn(y)e−izydy ! . Defining hn :z7→ p |z| R R\[(k−1)α,kα]χn(y)e−izydy, we have Z α 0 E [χn (−u + ∆P )] du = 2 π Z R eλi∆t( ˆfB(z)−1)e−ikαz z2 sin zα 2 2 dz + 1 π Z R eλi∆t( ˆfB(z)−1)e−iαz 2 |z| 3 2 sin zα 2  hn(z)dz. The goal now is to show that the second term tends to 0 as n tends to infinity. The function z7→ 1 z sin  zα 2  is bounded near 0 and z7→ 1√ |z|eλi∆t( ˆfB(z)−1) is integrable on [−1, 1]. Furthermore, z7→eλi∆t( ˆfB(z)−1)e−iαz 2 |z| 3 2 sin  zα 2  is integrable on R\ [−1, 1]. Hence, to show the desired result, it is sufficient to show that hn(z) is bounded uniformly in n and z, and that for eachz∈ R∗,hn(z)→ 0 asn goes to infinity. Dominated convergence then allows us to conclude. Letz∈ R∗. Using integration by parts, and the fact that χn   (k− 1)α− 1 n  =χn   kα + 1 n  = 0, χ′ n   (k− 1)α− 1 n  = χ′ n   kα + 1 n  = 0, χn ((k− 1)α) = χn (kα) = 1, χ′ n ((k− 1)α) = χ′ n (kα) = 0, we obtain hn(z) = ip |z| e−iz(k−1)α−e−izkα− Z (k−1)α (k−1)α− 1 n χ′ n(y)e−izydy− Z kα+ 1 n kα χ′ n(y)e−izydy ! (10) = 1p |z| ie−iz(k−1)α−ie−izkα− 1 z Z (k−1)α (k−1)α− 1 n χ′′ n(y)e−izydy− 1 z Z kα+ 1 n kα χ′′ n(y)e−izydy ! . 41 Since R (k−1)α (k−1)α− 1 n χ′ n(y)dy = 1 and Rkα+ 1 n kα χ′ n(y)dy =−1, (10) can be rewritten as hn(z) = ip |z| e−iz(k−1)α Z 1 n 0 nϕ(1−ny)(1−e−izy+iz n )dy−e−izkα Z 1 n 0 nϕ(ny)(1−e−izy)dy ! . For all y∈ R,|χ′′ n(y)| ⩽n2 sup|ϕ′|, R 1 0 ϕ(y)dy = 1 and ϕ ⩾ 0. The following two inequalities follow |hn(z)| ⩽ 2p |z| sup − 1 n ⩽y⩽ 1 n 1−e−izy ⩽ 2 p |z| n , (11) |hn(z)| ⩽ 2p |z| + 2n |z| 3 2 sup|ϕ′|. (12) From (11), we deduce that lim n→∞ hn(z) = 0 and that for z ⩽ n 2 3 ,|hn(z)| ⩽ 2. From (12), we have that for z ⩾n 2 3 ,|hn(z)| ⩽ 2 + 2 sup|ϕ′|. B.10 Proof of Proposition 4.2 Rearranging the integrals, and noticing that z7→e λ1  e−σa1 1 |z|a1−1  1 z2 sin  zα 2 2 cos (kαz) is an even function on R, we have that for all k∈ N, Z π α −π α ∞X n=−∞ e λ1  e −σa1 1|z+ 2nπ α| a1 −1  sin  zα 2 2   z + 2nπ α 2 ! cos (kαz) dz = Z π α −π α ∞X n=−∞ e λ2  e −σa2 2|z+ 2nπ α| a1 −1  sin  zα 2 2   z + 2nπ α 2 ! cos (kαz) dz. The integrands having identical Fourier series (they are even functions therefore the Fourier coefficients in sine are zero) and being continuous, they are equal, that is for all z∈  −π α, π α  , ∞X n=−∞ e λ1  e −σa1 1|z+ 2nπ α| a1 −1  sin  zα 2 2   z + 2nπ α 2 = ∞X n=−∞ e λ2  e −σa2 1|z+ 2nπ α| a2 −1  sin  zα 2 2   z + 2nπ α 2. This leads to the equality e λ1  e−σa1 1 |z|a1−1  +z2 X n∈Z\{0} e λ1  e −σa1 1|z+ 2nπ α| a1 −1    z + 2nπ α 2 =e λ2  e−σa2 2 |z|a2−1  +z2 X n∈Z\{0} e λ2  e −σa2 2|z+ 2nπ α| a2 −1    z + 2nπ α 2 (13) for all z∈  −π α, π α  . Doing an asymptotic expansion near 0 + of (13), noting that the second term of both sides of the equality is Oz→0+   z2 , we have 1−λ1σa1 1 za1 +oz→0+ (za1) = 1−λ2σa2 2 za2 +oz→0+ (za2). 42 By identification, we get a1 =a2, which will now be denoted by a, and b :=λ1σa 1 =λ2σa 2. Suppose that a< 1. Taking the asymptotic expansion of (13) a step further, one has 1−bza +z2a 2   λ1σ2a 1 +λ2 1σ2a 1  +oz→0+   z2a = 1−bza +z2a 2   λ2σ2a 2 +λ2 2σ2a 2  +oz→0+   z2a . Identifying the terms in z2a, we obtain bσa 1 +b2 = bσa 2 +b2, hence σ1 = σ2 and, from the formula of b, it follows that λ1 =λ2. Suppose now that a = 1. Doing the asymptotic expansion of (13) and cancelling the terms of order 1 and z which have been shown to be equal on the left and right-hand side, one gets z2 2   λ1σ2 1 +λ2 1σ2 1  +z2 X n∈Z\{0} e λ1  e −σa 1( 2nπ α ) a −1    2nπ α 2 +oz→0+   z2 = z2 2   λ2σ2 2 +λ2 2σ2 2  +z2 X n∈Z\{0} e λ2  e −σa 2( 2nπ α ) a −1    2nπ α 2 +oz→0+   z2 . Using the definition of b and g from Lemma B.5, the equality becomes b2 2λ1 + X n∈Z\{0}  α 2πn 2 g( 2nπ α ) a(λ1) = b2 2λ2 + X n∈Z\{0}  α 2πn 2 g( 2nπ α ) a(λ2). By Lemma B.5, λ7→ b2 2λ +P n∈Z\{0}   α 2πn 2g( 2nπ α ) a(λ) is strictly decreasing hence injective. Thus,λ1 =λ2. Then, by the definition of b, σ1 =σ2. In the case a∈ (1, 2), the asymptotic expansion of (13) leads to z2 X n∈Z\{0} e λ1  e −σa 1( 2nπ α ) a −1    2nπ α 2 +oz→0+   z2 =z2 X n∈Z\{0} e λ2  e −σa 2( 2nπ α ) a −1    2nπ α 2 +oz→0+   z2 , and we can conclude exactly as in the case a = 1. Lemma B.5. Let c ∈ (0,∞). Then, gc : λ ∈ (0,∞) 7→ exp  λ  e−c λ− 1  is strictly decreasing. Proof. Let λ∈ (0,∞). The function gc is differentiable at λ. The inequality ex > 1 +x, x̸= 0, yields g′ c(λ) =gc(λ)  e−c λ− 1 + c λe−c λ  =gc(λ)e−c λ  1 + c λ−e−c λ  < 0. 43 B.11 Proof of Proposition A.1 In the continuous transactions prices framework, a transaction is triggered by one of the following events: • A trade by a noise trader. • A jump of the efficient price with absolute value bigger than µ. When an event occurs (trade by a noise trader or jump of the efficient price of any size), the probability of it triggering a trade is thus (1 −r) +rP [|B|>µ ]. By thinning, the counting process of trades is therefore a Poisson process with intensity (λu+λi) ((1−r) +rP [|B|>µ ]). Hence, the time of the first trade verifies E [τ] = 1 (λu +λi) ((1−r) +rP [|B|>µ ]). By the definition of µ in (1), 1 +r 2r = P [B <µ] + 1 µ E  B1{B>µ}  = 1 2 + 1 2 P [|B|<µ ] + 1 2µ E  |B|1{|B|>µ}  , which leads to rP [|B|>µ ] =r− 1 + r µ E  |B|1{|B|>µ}  . Combined with the fact that r(λu +λi) =λi, we conclude that E [τ] = µ λiE  |B|1{|B|>µ} . B.12 Proofs for expected time until next trade in the model with a nonzero tick size B.12.1 Proof of Theorem A.1 Letd∈ [0,α ). When ˜P (t)−P (t) is at d, a trade occurs if one of the following events happen: • A trade by a noise trader. • A jump of the efficient price above d +α l µ−d α m (ask informed trade). • A jump of the efficient price below d−α l µ+d α m (bid informed trade). If the efficient price jumps byz∈ h d +α l µ−d α m ,d−α l µ+d α mi , which happens with probability rfB(z)dz, then after the jump, d(t) jumps to d−z +α z−d α  . The first event arrival time is on average 1 λu+λi . Thus, by the strong Markov property, E h τd α i = 1 λu +λi | {z } Mean arrival time of the first event + r Z d+α⌈µ−d α ⌉ d−α⌈µ+d α ⌉ E  τ d−z+α⌈z−d α ⌉ α  fB(z)dz | {z } If the first event was not a trade, mean waiting time for a trade at this point. 44 B.12.2 Preliminary lemmas We begin by proving a preliminary lemma that is mainly computational but will simplify the formulas of interest. Lemma B.6. Letf : [0,α )→ R be a measurable function. Then, Z α 0 Z y+α⌈µ−y α ⌉ y−α⌈µ+y α ⌉ f  −z +y +α z−y α  fB(z)dzdy = Z α 0 f(α−y) Z µ −µ−α fB(z +y)dzdy. Proof. There exist m∈ N and p∈ [0,α ) such that µ =mα +p. Denoting by I the left-hand side of the desired equality, we have I = Z α 0 Z α⌈µ−y α ⌉ −α⌈µ+y α ⌉ f  −z +α lz α m fB(z +y)dzdy = Z α 0 mX i=−m Z αi α(i−1) f(−z +αi)fB(z +y)dzdy + Z p 0 Z αm+α αm f(−z +αm +α)fB(z +y)dzdy + Z α α−p Z −αm−α −αm−2α f(−z−αm−α)fB(z +y)dzdy. Let i∈{−m,...,m }. Then, by the change of variables z−α(i− 1)→z, y +α(i− 1)z, Z α 0 Z αi α(i−1) f(−z +αi)fB(z +y)dzdy = Z α 0 f(α−z) Z αi α(i−1) fB(z +y)dydz. In the same fashion, Z p 0 Z αm+α αm f(−z +αm +α)fB(z +y)dzdy = Z α 0 f(α−z) Z αm+p αm fB(z +y)dydz and Z α α−p Z −αm−α −αm−2α f(−z−αm−α)fB(z +y)dzdy = Z α 0 f(α−z) Z −αm−α −αm−α−p fB(z +y)dydz. Hence, I = Z α 0 f(α−z) Z αm+p −αm−α−p fB(z +y)dydz. From Lemma B.6 and Theorem A.1, we deduce immediately that u(α) = 1 λu +λi + r α Z α 0 E  τα−y α Z µ+y −µ−α+y fB(z)dzdy. By the bid-ask symmetry of our model, E h τα−y α i = E [τy α], hence the previous equation becomes u(α) = 1 λu +λi + 2r α Z α 0 E [τy α] Z µ+y 0 fB(z)dzdy. (14) 45 Lemma B.7. Lety∈ [0,α ). Then, 1 (λu +λi) (1−rP [|B|<µ ]) ⩽ E [τy α] ⩽ 1 (λu +λi) (1−rP [|B|<µ +α]) Remark B.2. The upper bound comes from the fact that an uninformed trade or a jump of |B| larger than µ +α will always trigger a trade. The lower bound comes from the fact that an informed trade must be associated to a jump of |B| larger than µ. Proof. Let y∈ [0,α ). Define M := supd∈[0,α) E  τd α  and M′ := infd∈[0,α) E  τd α  . These two quantities are finite by Equation (8). Since y−α µ+y α  ⩾−µ−α and y +α µ−y α  ⩽µ +α, Theorem A.1 implies that E [τy α] ⩽ 1 λu +λi +r Z µ+α −µ−α MfB(z)dz = 1 λu +λi +rM P [|B|<µ +α]. Taking the sup on the left-hand side, the upper bound follows. Since y−α µ+y α  ⩽−µ and y +α µ−y α  ⩾µ, Theorem A.1 implies that E [τy α] ⩾ 1 λu +λi +r Z µ −µ M′fB(z)dz = 1 λu +λi +rM′P [|B|<µ ]. Taking the inf on the right-hand side, the lower bound follows. Corollary B.1. sup y,y′∈[0,α) E [τy α]− E h τy′ α i ⩽ r λu +λi P [|B|∈ [µ,µ +α]] (1−rP [|B|<µ +α]) (1−rP [|B|<µ ])−−−→ α→0 0. B.13 Proof of Proposition A.2 From Equation (14) and the fact that 1 α Z α 0 (E [τy α]−u(α)) Z µ+y µ fB(z)dzdy =oα→0  1 α Z α 0 Z µ+y µ fB(z)dzdy  , which is a direct consequence of Corollary B.1, we have u(α)  1−rP[|B| ⩽µ]−r 2 α Z α 0 Z µ+y µ fB(z)dzdy  = 1 λu +λi +oα→0  1 α Z α 0 Z µ+y µ fB(z)dzdy  . By Equation (1), 1−rP[|B| ⩽µ] = r µ E  |B|1{|B|>µ}  . Hence, u(α) = µ (λu +λi)rE  |B|1{|B|>µ}  1 1− 2µ αE[|B|1{|B|>µ}] Rα 0 Rµ+y µ fB(z)dzdy +oα→0  1 α Z α 0 Z µ+y µ fB(z)dzdy  . 46 Expanding the second fraction, and using the fact that Z α 0 Z µ+y µ fB(z)dzdy = Z α 0 (α−z)fB(µ +z)dz, we get the desired result. B.14 Proof of Proposition A.3 From Equation (14), we deduce u(α) = 1 λu +λi +ru(α)−v(α), where v(α) = 2r α Z α 0 E [τy α] Z ∞ µ+y fB(z)dzdy. Let ϵ> 0. We can rewrite v(α) as v(α) = 2r α Z (1−ϵ)α ϵα E [τy α] Z ∞ µ+y fB(z)dzdy + 2r α Z [0,ϵα]∪[(1−ϵ)α,α] E [τy α] Z ∞ µ+y fB(z)dzdy. Using (8), we obtain v(α) ⩽ 2r λu Z ∞ µ+αϵ fB(z)dzdy + 4ϵr λu. We deduce lim sup α→∞ v(α) ⩽ 2ϵr λu . Since this holds for all ϵ and v(α) is non-negative, it follows that lim α→∞ v(α) = 0. Thus, lim α→∞ u(α) = 1 (1−r)(λu +λi) = 1 λu. C Stocks used in the study Company Stock Exchange Currency Sector ADP Euronext Paris EUR Industrials AIR FRANCE -KLM Euronext Paris EUR Industrials AIR LIQUIDE Euronext Paris EUR Materials AIRBUS Euronext Paris EUR Industrials AMG NYSE USD Financials ATOS Euronext Paris EUR Information Technology AXA Euronext Paris EUR Financials AbbVie Inc. NYSE USD Health Care Accenture plc NYSE USD Information Technology Alibaba Group Holding Limited NYSE USD Communication Services American Express Company NYSE USD Financials BNP PARIBAS ACT.A Euronext Paris EUR Financials BORR DRILLING NYSE USD Energy 47 Bank of America Corporation NYSE USD Financials Berkshire Hathaway Inc. NYSE USD Financials Best Buy Co., Inc. NYSE USD Consumer Discretionary Block, Inc. NYSE USD Information Technology CREDIT AGRICOLE Euronext Paris EUR Financials Carnival Corporation NYSE USD Consumer Discretionary Carvana Co. NYSE USD Consumer Discretionary Caterpillar Inc. NYSE USD Industrials Chevron Corporation NYSE USD Energy Citigroup Inc. NYSE USD Financials ConocoPhillips NYSE USD Energy D.R. Horton, Inc. NYSE USD Consumer Discretionary DANONE Euronext Paris EUR Consumer Staples DASSAULT SYSTEMES Euronext Paris EUR Information Technology DERICHEBOURG Euronext Paris EUR Industrials Delta Air Lines, Inc. NYSE USD Industrials Devon Energy Corporation NYSE USD Energy DoorDash Inc NYSE USD Consumer Discretionary EDENRED Euronext Paris EUR Industrials ENGIE Euronext Paris EUR Utilities EOG Resources, Inc. NYSE USD Energy ESSILORLUXOTTICA Euronext Paris EUR Consumer Discretionary Exxon Mobil Corporation NYSE USD Energy FDJ Euronext Paris EUR Consumer Discretionary FLOW TRADERS Euronext Amsterdam EUR Financials FORVIA Euronext Paris EUR Consumer Discretionary Fidelity National Information Services, Inc. NYSE USD Information Technology Ford Motor Company NYSE USD Consumer Discretionary Freeport-McMoRan Inc. NYSE USD Materials General Motors Company NYSE USD Consumer Discretionary HERMES INTL Euronext Paris EUR Consumer Discretionary Halliburton Company NYSE USD Energy JPMorgan Chase & Co. NYSE USD Financials Johnson & Johnson NYSE USD Health Care KERING Euronext Paris EUR Consumer Discretionary KLEPIERRE Euronext Paris EUR Real Estate L’OREAL Euronext Paris EUR Consumer Discretionary LHYFE Euronext Paris EUR Utilities LVMH Euronext Paris EUR Consumer Discretionary Lamb Weston Holdings, Inc. NYSE USD Consumer Staples Lowe’s Companies, Inc. NYSE USD Consumer Discretionary MICHELIN Euronext Paris EUR Consumer Discretionary Marathon Petroleum Corporation NYSE USD Energy Marsh & McLennan Companies, Inc. USD NYSE Financials Mastercard Incorporated NYSE USD Information Technology McDonald’s Corporation NYSE USD Consumer Discretionary NIKE, Inc. NYSE USD Consumer Discretionary NIO Inc. NYSE USD Consumer Discretionary Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings Ltd. NYSE USD Consumer Discretionary OCI Euronext Amsterdam EUR Materials 48 OKEA Oslo Stock Exchange NOK Energy ORANGE Euronext Paris EUR Communication Services ORPEA Euronext Paris EUR Health Care Occidental Petroleum Corporation NYSE USD Energy Oracle Corporation NYSE USD Information Technology Pfizer Inc NYSE USD Health Care REMY COINTREAU Euronext Paris EUR Consumer Discretionary RENAULT Euronext Paris EUR Consumer Discretionary Roblox Corporation NYSE USD Communication Services Royal Caribbean Group NYSE USD Consumer Discretionary SAFRAN Euronext Paris EUR Industrials SAINT GOBAIN Euronext Paris EUR Materials SANOFI Euronext Paris EUR Health Care SCHNEIDER ELECTRIC Euronext Paris EUR Industrials SOCIETE GENERALE Euronext Paris EUR Financials STELLANTIS NV Euronext Amsterdam EUR Consumer Discretionary STMICROELECTRONICS Euronext Paris EUR Information Technology Salesforce, Inc. NYSE USD Information Technology Schlumberger Limited NYSE USD Energy Sea Limited NYSE USD Communication Services Shopify Inc. NYSE USD Information Technology Snowflake Inc. NYSE USD Information Technology Synchrony Financial NYSE USD Financials TOTALENERGIES Euronext Paris EUR Energy Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company Ltd. NYSE USD Information Technology The Boeing Company NYSE USD Industrials The Coca-Cola Company NYSE USD Consumer Staples The Home Depot, Inc. NYSE USD Consumer Discretionary The Procter & Gamble Company NYSE USD Consumer Staples The Progressive Corporation NYSE USD Financials The Walt Disney Company NYSE USD Communication Services Uber Technologies, Inc. NYSE USD Consumer Discretionary Union Pacific Corporation NYSE USD Industrials VALEO Euronext Paris EUR Consumer Discretionary VALLOUREC Euronext Paris EUR Materials VINCI Euronext Paris EUR Industrials Valero Energy Corporation NYSE USD Energy Visa Inc. NYSE USD Information Technology Wells Fargo & Company NYSE USD Financials Welltower Inc. NYSE USD Real Estate D Estimation results The tables present the estimation results for the efficient price jump distribution, and the standard deviation of the Gaussian distribution fitted for the sizes of the trades by a noise trader. Additionally, the number of trading days used in the estimation dataset is reported. Some Euronext stocks have fewer trading days included, as certain days are discarded due to a different tick size. 49 D.1 From 2022-10-01 to 2023-03-31 Company ˆλi ˆ a ˆσ ˆµ ˆ r ˆσnoise α days ADP 0.0149 1.73 0.0442 0.04047 0.583 71.1 0.05 129 AIR FRANCE -KLM 0.0422 1.69 0.0004 0.00029 0.491 11562.8 0.0005 129 AIR LIQUIDE 0.0638 1.86 0.0185 0.00506 0.22 202.3 0.02 129 AIRBUS 0.0579 1.82 0.0179 0.00418 0.184 308.5 0.02 115 AMG 0.0309 1.76 0.0111 0.00969 0.577 554.7 0.02 129 ATOS 0.0351 1.72 0.0055 0.0045 0.534 1262.9 0.005 82 AXA 0.0604 1.78 0.0035 0.00091 0.197 1371.7 0.005 129 AbbVie Inc. 0.084 1.85 0.0217 0.01737 0.57 292.2 0.01 124 Accenture plc 0.0763 1.82 0.0474 0.07728 0.846 639.6 0.01 124 Alibaba Group Holding Limited 0.075 1.73 0.0216 0.00657 0.223 516.9 0.01 124 American Express Company 0.082 1.8 0.0276 0.03985 0.797 336.0 0.01 124 BNP PARIBAS ACT.A 0.0666 1.7 0.008 0.00196 0.178 627.4 0.01 101 BORR DRILLING 0.0264 1.41 0.0233 0.04119 0.65 4904.0 0.01 66 Bank of America Corporation 0.0548 1.79 0.0072 0.00014 0.015 2713.1 0.01 124 Berkshire Hathaway Inc. 0.0865 1.82 0.0377 0.04741 0.752 318.4 0.01 124 Best Buy Co., Inc. 0.0788 1.87 0.0179 0.01406 0.568 292.6 0.01 124 Block, Inc. 0.081 1.8 0.0263 0.01915 0.517 458.7 0.01 124 CREDIT AGRICOLE 0.0701 1.81 0.0013 0.00051 0.311 1987.3 0.001 65 Carnival Corporation 0.0411 1.88 0.0053 5e-05 0.007 4329.7 0.01 124 Carvana Co. 0.0476 1.58 0.01 0.00243 0.157 916.4 0.01 123 Caterpillar Inc. 0.0809 1.82 0.0396 0.05117 0.764 493.6 0.01 124 Chevron Corporation 0.0912 1.87 0.029 0.01398 0.378 291.1 0.01 123 Citigroup Inc. 0.0655 1.79 0.0093 0.00031 0.026 652.1 0.01 124 ConocoPhillips 0.0862 1.87 0.0266 0.01462 0.424 374.7 0.01 123 D.R. Horton, Inc. 0.0756 1.81 0.019 0.01507 0.552 315.6 0.01 123 DANONE 0.0484 1.85 0.0072 0.0023 0.254 618.3 0.01 61 DASSAULT SYSTEMES 0.0696 1.8 0.0056 0.00257 0.345 534.7 0.005 129 DERICHEBOURG 0.0107 1.75 0.0031 0.00347 0.674 1079.2 0.005 91 Delta Air Lines, Inc. 0.0636 1.85 0.0088 0.00038 0.035 449.9 0.01 124 Devon Energy Corporation 0.0817 1.85 0.017 0.00571 0.268 459.3 0.01 123 DoorDash Inc 0.0699 1.79 0.0231 0.02335 0.652 446.8 0.01 124 EDENRED 0.0258 1.8 0.0104 0.00546 0.39 370.0 0.02 89 ENGIE 0.0591 1.81 0.0019 0.00064 0.254 1625.7 0.002 129 EOG Resources, Inc. 0.0849 1.88 0.031 0.02711 0.619 371.8 0.01 123 ESSILORLUXOTTICA 0.0472 1.86 0.0306 0.00863 0.226 249.7 0.05 129 Exxon Mobil Corporation 0.0818 1.87 0.0205 0.00464 0.185 475.0 0.01 124 FDJ 0.015 1.63 0.0083 0.0097 0.64 195.1 0.01 129 FLOW TRADERS 0.0069 1.68 0.0121 0.01319 0.636 639.6 0.02 55 FORVIA 0.053 1.8 0.0054 0.00353 0.47 1036.0 0.005 107 Fidelity National Information Services, Inc. 0.0728 1.78 0.0155 0.01192 0.532 349.9 0.01 124 Ford Motor Company 0.0341 1.87 0.0047 1e-05 0.002 6150.4 0.01 123 Freeport-McMoRan Inc. 0.0697 1.84 0.0109 0.00048 0.036 467.7 0.01 123 General Motors Company 0.0641 1.86 0.0097 0.00053 0.045 558.0 0.01 124 HERMES INTL 0.0577 1.85 0.2931 0.08708 0.238 30.3 0.5 129 Halliburton Company 0.0682 1.87 0.0116 0.00112 0.079 446.5 0.01 124 50 Company ˆλi ˆ a ˆσ ˆµ ˆ r ˆσnoise α days JPMorgan Chase & Co. 0.0824 1.77 0.0198 0.00769 0.291 348.7 0.01 124 Johnson & Johnson 0.0815 1.84 0.0182 0.00747 0.321 272.9 0.01 124 KERING 0.0621 1.79 0.0916 0.02402 0.202 57.4 0.1 91 KLEPIERRE 0.0361 1.84 0.006 0.00409 0.5 884.2 0.01 107 L’OREAL 0.0692 1.85 0.0551 0.01511 0.22 77.8 0.05 129 LHYFE 0.0036 1.1 0.0032 0.02287 0.589 7937.6 0.001 129 LVMH 0.0721 1.83 0.1074 0.01726 0.128 44.8 0.1 129 Lamb Weston Holdings, Inc. 0.0474 1.81 0.0186 0.02353 0.752 321.4 0.01 123 Lowe’s Companies, Inc. 0.0773 1.8 0.0377 0.055 0.804 409.8 0.01 124 MICHELIN 0.0586 1.84 0.0049 0.00205 0.326 759.2 0.005 129 Marathon Petroleum Corporation 0.0817 1.86 0.0277 0.02507 0.629 496.0 0.01 124 Marsh & McLennan Companies, Inc. 0.0613 1.8 0.0273 0.04465 0.842 342.7 0.01 124 Mastercard Incorporated 0.081 1.81 0.0542 0.09013 0.851 705.6 0.01 124 McDonald’s Corporation 0.0796 1.84 0.0307 0.03765 0.75 405.7 0.01 124 NIKE, Inc. 0.0868 1.85 0.0198 0.00824 0.325 311.5 0.01 124 NIO Inc. 0.0386 1.78 0.0067 9e-05 0.011 3248.2 0.01 123 Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings Ltd. 0.0526 1.86 0.0072 0.00026 0.029 622.4 0.01 124 OCI 0.0176 1.74 0.0153 0.00928 0.425 454.2 0.02 129 OKEA 0.0068 1.73 0.0372 0.04029 0.658 3843.1 0.05 129 ORANGE 0.0651 1.88 0.001 0.0004 0.306 1914.4 0.001 96 ORPEA 0.0258 1.29 0.0033 0.00637 0.564 3906.5 0.002 70 Occidental Petroleum Corporation 0.0789 1.87 0.0169 0.00464 0.222 471.6 0.01 124 Oracle Corporation 0.0706 1.84 0.0138 0.00384 0.221 308.5 0.01 124 Pfizer Inc 0.0558 1.81 0.008 0.00019 0.018 689.8 0.01 124 REMY COINTREAU 0.0306 1.8 0.0423 0.02983 0.501 137.0 0.1 129 RENAULT 0.0676 1.79 0.0072 0.00322 0.334 547.6 0.005 129 Roblox Corporation 0.0698 1.79 0.0155 0.00485 0.24 459.9 0.01 124 Royal Caribbean Group 0.0794 1.82 0.0192 0.01342 0.503 342.6 0.01 124 SAFRAN 0.0546 1.83 0.0187 0.00543 0.229 238.4 0.02 120 SAINT GOBAIN 0.0719 1.83 0.0069 0.00311 0.345 408.8 0.005 67 SANOFI 0.0673 1.85 0.0113 0.00295 0.21 293.7 0.01 125 SCHNEIDER ELECTRIC 0.0752 1.85 0.0214 0.00648 0.241 194.6 0.02 129 SOCIETE GENERALE 0.0609 1.75 0.0042 0.00127 0.226 1154.0 0.005 123 STELLANTIS NV 0.0656 1.79 0.0023 0.00119 0.384 2326.8 0.002 129 STMICRO- ELECTRONICS 0.0703 1.73 0.0062 0.0028 0.326 664.7 0.005 129 Salesforce, Inc. 0.0833 1.82 0.0347 0.02532 0.523 504.1 0.01 123 Schlumberger Limited 0.0772 1.87 0.0136 0.00249 0.149 480.6 0.01 124 Sea Limited 0.074 1.79 0.0241 0.02454 0.652 517.0 0.01 123 Shopify Inc. 0.0759 1.79 0.0151 0.00303 0.156 732.0 0.01 124 Snowflake Inc. 0.0825 1.78 0.0545 0.08507 0.82 800.6 0.01 124 Synchrony Financial 0.0616 1.83 0.0094 0.00133 0.114 442.7 0.01 124 TOTALENERGIES 0.0661 1.85 0.0091 0.00125 0.112 716.9 0.01 125 Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company Ltd. 0.077 1.8 0.0147 0.00287 0.152 472.3 0.01 124 The Boeing Company 0.0871 1.79 0.0377 0.04635 0.733 530.1 0.01 124 The Coca-Cola Company 0.0663 1.88 0.008 0.00028 0.03 482.9 0.01 124 51 Company ˆλi ˆ a ˆσ ˆµ ˆ r ˆσnoise α days The Home Depot, Inc. 0.0851 1.81 0.0506 0.07316 0.802 632.7 0.01 124 The Procter & Gamble Company 0.0836 1.88 0.0182 0.00722 0.318 344.9 0.01 124 The Progressive Corporation 0.0692 1.8 0.0225 0.02539 0.702 347.2 0.01 124 The Walt Disney Company 0.0843 1.85 0.0193 0.00867 0.349 414.6 0.01 123 Uber Technologies, Inc. 0.0622 1.8 0.0099 0.00039 0.031 556.1 0.01 123 Union Pacific Corporation 0.0735 1.8 0.0348 0.0481 0.784 485.3 0.01 124 VALEO 0.053 1.79 0.0049 0.0037 0.528 920.8 0.005 99 VALLOUREC 0.0344 1.72 0.0045 0.0035 0.515 1245.7 0.005 125 VINCI 0.065 1.87 0.011 0.0035 0.256 240.8 0.01 71 Valero Energy Corporation 0.0853 1.87 0.0342 0.03606 0.697 436.1 0.01 124 Visa Inc. 0.0853 1.84 0.0313 0.0209 0.491 394.5 0.01 124 Wells Fargo & Company 0.0585 1.79 0.0093 0.00032 0.027 668.7 0.01 124 Welltower Inc. 0.0586 1.86 0.0163 0.0176 0.703 277.7 0.01 124 D.2 From 2023-04-01 to 2023-09-30 Company ˆλi ˆ a ˆσ ˆµ ˆ r ˆσnoise α days ADP 0.012 1.88 0.0424 0.02564 0.463 123.3 0.1 127 AIR FRANCE -KLM 0.0364 1.73 0.0004 0.00027 0.476 10952.5 0.0005 105 AIR LIQUIDE 0.055 1.92 0.0185 0.00582 0.261 187.8 0.02 127 AIRBUS 0.0591 1.86 0.0171 0.00574 0.268 282.7 0.02 127 AMG 0.0277 1.57 0.0092 0.01048 0.596 506.5 0.01 127 ATOS 0.0316 1.58 0.0037 0.00403 0.591 1158.7 0.005 82 AXA 0.0558 1.92 0.0038 0.0013 0.286 1363.8 0.005 127 AbbVie Inc. 0.0736 1.87 0.0178 0.01516 0.605 236.7 0.01 124 Accenture plc 0.0606 1.83 0.0437 0.07104 0.85 594.5 0.01 124 Alibaba Group Holding Limited 0.0707 1.7 0.0148 0.0038 0.185 481.2 0.01 124 American Express Company 0.0722 1.86 0.0232 0.03087 0.79 266.9 0.01 124 BNP PARIBAS ACT.A 0.0682 1.88 0.0092 0.00229 0.205 750.2 0.01 127 BORR DRILLING 0.0095 1.66 0.0429 0.04888 0.646 1660.0 0.05 122 Bank of America Corporation 0.0413 1.88 0.0061 6e-05 0.009 2795.7 0.01 124 Berkshire Hathaway Inc. 0.0735 1.89 0.0329 0.04612 0.82 253.3 0.01 124 Best Buy Co., Inc. 0.066 1.89 0.0137 0.00955 0.522 235.3 0.01 124 Block, Inc. 0.0734 1.82 0.0172 0.0094 0.41 317.1 0.01 124 CREDIT AGRICOLE 0.0584 1.87 0.0015 0.0006 0.326 2327.3 0.002 127 Carnival Corporation 0.0421 1.82 0.0055 7e-05 0.011 2215.6 0.01 124 Carvana Co. 0.0565 1.43 0.0185 0.01759 0.446 1054.6 0.01 124 Caterpillar Inc. 0.0732 1.81 0.0386 0.05421 0.793 501.2 0.01 124 Chevron Corporation 0.0772 1.9 0.0228 0.01092 0.382 334.5 0.01 124 Citigroup Inc. 0.0576 1.84 0.008 0.00022 0.022 495.9 0.01 124 ConocoPhillips 0.0827 1.9 0.0191 0.01082 0.443 284.1 0.01 124 D.R. Horton, Inc. 0.0713 1.87 0.0201 0.01988 0.668 310.1 0.01 124 DANONE 0.0462 1.87 0.0064 0.00276 0.338 503.4 0.01 127 DASSAULT SYSTEMES 0.0571 1.83 0.0052 0.00288 0.417 475.1 0.005 127 DERICHEBOURG 0.0045 1.74 0.0031 0.00344 0.675 906.7 0.005 82 52 Company ˆλi ˆ a ˆσ ˆµ ˆ r ˆσnoise α days Delta Air Lines, Inc. 0.0598 1.87 0.0085 0.00025 0.024 367.3 0.01 124 Devon Energy Corporation 0.0712 1.9 0.0108 0.00148 0.114 408.6 0.01 124 DoorDash Inc 0.0611 1.84 0.0213 0.02302 0.697 379.9 0.01 124 EDENRED 0.0233 1.79 0.01 0.00521 0.384 378.4 0.02 127 ENGIE 0.0492 1.84 0.0019 0.00089 0.356 1567.9 0.002 127 EOG Resources, Inc. 0.0821 1.88 0.0215 0.02273 0.702 313.3 0.01 124 ESSILORLUXOTTICA 0.058 1.86 0.0226 0.01081 0.372 133.0 0.02 127 Exxon Mobil Corporation 0.0736 1.9 0.0177 0.00324 0.153 421.3 0.01 124 FDJ 0.0074 1.7 0.0097 0.01034 0.637 258.6 0.02 127 FLOW TRADERS 0.0051 1.66 0.009 0.00839 0.563 544.3 0.02 62 FORVIA 0.033 1.81 0.0073 0.00483 0.482 791.8 0.01 69 Fidelity National Information Services, Inc. 0.0579 1.88 0.0121 0.00678 0.434 281.9 0.01 124 Ford Motor Company 0.0203 1.93 0.0048 1e-05 0.001 5284.3 0.01 124 Freeport-McMoRan Inc. 0.0561 1.89 0.009 0.00028 0.026 396.0 0.01 124 General Motors Company 0.0507 1.87 0.0081 0.00017 0.018 568.7 0.01 124 HERMES INTL 0.0686 1.89 0.289 0.13054 0.36 16.7 0.2 117 Halliburton Company 0.0605 1.9 0.0093 0.00047 0.042 426.7 0.01 124 JPMorgan Chase & Co. 0.079 1.87 0.0175 0.00625 0.286 303.3 0.01 124 Johnson & Johnson 0.0741 1.82 0.0171 0.00697 0.314 298.8 0.01 124 KERING 0.0524 1.87 0.0839 0.02964 0.283 63.1 0.1 82 KLEPIERRE 0.0271 1.87 0.0057 0.00338 0.452 846.0 0.01 127 L’OREAL 0.0638 1.92 0.0554 0.01741 0.26 66.3 0.05 127 LHYFE 0.0009 1.56 0.0072 0.01651 0.831 1196.7 0.01 127 LVMH 0.0658 1.89 0.1109 0.01459 0.109 41.7 0.1 127 Lamb Weston Holdings, Inc. 0.0396 1.73 0.0178 0.02537 0.764 346.8 0.01 124 Lowe’s Companies, Inc. 0.0674 1.85 0.03 0.0404 0.792 322.2 0.01 124 MICHELIN 0.0369 1.91 0.0051 0.00217 0.342 1015.4 0.01 127 Marathon Petroleum Corporation 0.0755 1.88 0.0262 0.02556 0.665 411.9 0.01 124 Marsh & McLennan Companies, Inc. 0.0567 1.85 0.0217 0.03569 0.86 249.6 0.01 124 Mastercard Incorporated 0.0679 1.84 0.0445 0.07186 0.851 607.2 0.01 124 McDonald’s Corporation 0.0743 1.9 0.0263 0.03206 0.771 311.8 0.01 124 NIKE, Inc. 0.0769 1.88 0.0161 0.00596 0.299 271.4 0.01 124 NIO Inc. 0.0264 1.74 0.0059 5e-05 0.006 3777.9 0.01 124 Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings Ltd. 0.0433 1.87 0.0067 0.00011 0.013 552.3 0.01 124 OCI 0.0138 1.58 0.009 0.00908 0.556 429.4 0.01 127 OKEA 0.0075 1.65 0.018 0.02639 0.735 3557.3 0.02 122 ORANGE 0.0447 1.83 0.0013 0.00058 0.348 2550.3 0.002 126 ORPEA 0.0084 1.12 0.0007 0.00271 0.495 19206.2 0.0005 83 Occidental Petroleum Corporation 0.0681 1.89 0.0111 0.00169 0.126 427.1 0.01 124 Oracle Corporation 0.0742 1.78 0.0166 0.00662 0.3 332.4 0.01 124 Pfizer Inc 0.0381 1.85 0.0067 0.00004 0.005 952.5 0.01 124 REMY COINTREAU 0.0285 1.72 0.0304 0.03045 0.618 113.4 0.05 127 RENAULT 0.0597 1.79 0.0066 0.00388 0.425 486.6 0.005 127 Roblox Corporation 0.0626 1.81 0.0127 0.00425 0.258 323.4 0.01 124 Royal Caribbean Group 0.0718 1.84 0.0212 0.02019 0.644 306.9 0.01 124 SAFRAN 0.0575 1.86 0.0176 0.00717 0.321 200.2 0.02 127 53 Company ˆλi ˆ a ˆσ ˆµ ˆ r ˆσnoise α days SAINT GOBAIN 0.0556 1.87 0.0084 0.00362 0.343 423.4 0.01 124 SANOFI 0.0676 1.9 0.0114 0.00405 0.288 226.6 0.01 79 SCHNEIDER ELECTRIC 0.0709 1.91 0.0207 0.0067 0.267 172.4 0.02 127 SOCIETE GENERALE 0.0604 1.83 0.004 0.00148 0.291 1191.2 0.005 127 STELLANTIS NV 0.0661 1.89 0.0023 0.00115 0.395 1866.9 0.002 127 STMICRO- ELECTRONICS 0.07 1.79 0.0062 0.00286 0.348 579.1 0.005 127 Salesforce, Inc. 0.0869 1.86 0.0319 0.03468 0.708 383.1 0.01 124 Schlumberger Limited 0.071 1.91 0.0118 0.00118 0.085 374.5 0.01 124 Sea Limited 0.0627 1.76 0.017 0.01416 0.556 449.7 0.01 124 Shopify Inc. 0.0725 1.86 0.0176 0.00352 0.163 521.0 0.01 124 Snowflake Inc. 0.0833 1.79 0.0432 0.06019 0.782 568.3 0.01 124 Synchrony Financial 0.0498 1.88 0.0075 0.00033 0.037 401.7 0.01 124 TOTALENERGIES 0.0586 1.91 0.0082 0.00149 0.152 1017.5 0.01 127 Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company Ltd. 0.0743 1.8 0.0137 0.00304 0.173 330.3 0.01 124 The Boeing Company 0.0778 1.78 0.0326 0.04245 0.752 450.0 0.01 124 The Coca-Cola Company 0.0462 1.92 0.0069 0.00012 0.015 522.7 0.01 124 The Home Depot, Inc. 0.078 1.87 0.0378 0.04916 0.784 439.3 0.01 124 The Procter & Gamble Company 0.0758 1.93 0.0159 0.00697 0.359 260.9 0.01 124 The Progressive Corporation 0.0578 1.79 0.0206 0.02414 0.713 332.7 0.01 124 The Walt Disney Company 0.0725 1.84 0.0131 0.00331 0.201 354.6 0.01 124 Uber Technologies, Inc. 0.06 1.84 0.0108 0.00057 0.043 435.1 0.01 124 Union Pacific Corporation 0.0665 1.84 0.028 0.03948 0.804 371.3 0.01 124 VALEO 0.0387 1.8 0.0044 0.00389 0.593 955.9 0.005 102 VALLOUREC 0.0282 1.77 0.0036 0.00332 0.601 1160.2 0.005 118 VINCI 0.0501 1.91 0.0133 0.00471 0.291 320.9 0.02 126 Valero Energy Corporation 0.0789 1.85 0.0267 0.02791 0.687 351.7 0.01 124 Visa Inc. 0.0831 1.87 0.0248 0.02045 0.588 337.5 0.01 124 Wells Fargo & Company 0.0553 1.86 0.0081 0.00013 0.014 662.5 0.01 124 Welltower Inc. 0.0556 1.92 0.0157 0.0172 0.729 238.3 0.01 124 D.3 Failed calibration of a piecewise constant fQu 54 Company tick size spread (ticks) days Accenture plc 0.01 16.46 124 American Express Company 0.01 8.97 124 BORR DRILLING 0.01 9.24 66 Berkshire Hathaway Inc. 0.01 10.48 124 Caterpillar Inc. 0.01 11.23 124 DoorDash Inc 0.01 5.67 124 EOG Resources, Inc. 0.01 6.42 123 LHYFE 0.001 46.73 129 Lamb Weston Holdings, Inc. 0.01 5.71 123 Lowe’s Companies, Inc. 0.01 12.0 124 Marathon Petroleum Corporation 0.01 6.01 124 Marsh & McLennan Companies, Inc. 0.01 9.93 124 Mastercard Incorporated 0.01 19.03 124 McDonald’s Corporation 0.01 8.53 124 ORPEA 0.002 7.37 70 Salesforce, Inc. 0.01 6.06 123 Sea Limited 0.01 5.91 123 Snowflake Inc. 0.01 18.01 124 The Boeing Company 0.01 10.27 124 The Home Depot, Inc. 0.01 15.63 124 The Progressive Corporation 0.01 6.08 124 Union Pacific Corporation 0.01 10.62 124 Valero Energy Corporation 0.01 8.21 124 Table 6: Stocks where the piecewise constant calibration of fQu failed, with their spread. Period: 2022-10-01 to 2023-03-31. Company tick size spread (ticks) days Accenture plc 0.01 15.21 124 American Express Company 0.01 7.17 124 Berkshire Hathaway Inc. 0.01 10.22 124 Caterpillar Inc. 0.01 11.84 124 DoorDash Inc 0.01 5.6 124 LHYFE 0.01 4.3 127 Lamb Weston Holdings, Inc. 0.01 6.07 124 Lowe’s Companies, Inc. 0.01 9.08 124 Marathon Petroleum Corporation 0.01 6.11 124 Marsh & McLennan Companies, Inc. 0.01 8.14 124 Mastercard Incorporated 0.01 15.37 124 McDonald’s Corporation 0.01 7.41 124 ORPEA 0.0005 11.84 83 Salesforce, Inc. 0.01 7.94 124 Snowflake Inc. 0.01 13.04 124 The Boeing Company 0.01 9.49 124 The Home Depot, Inc. 0.01 10.83 124 The Progressive Corporation 0.01 5.83 124 Union Pacific Corporation 0.01 8.9 124 Valero Energy Corporation 0.01 6.58 124 Welltower Inc. 0.01 4.44 124 Table 7: Stocks where the piecewise constant calibration of fQu failed, with their spread. Period: 2023-04-01 to 2023-09-31. 55 2 4 6 8 10 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 True values Gaussian noise fit (a) LHYFE 2 4 6 8 10 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 True values Gaussian noise fit (b) Mastercard Incorporated Figure 5: Mean volume pending on each pile up to 10 ticks from the best (in blue) and the mean volumes given by the model when Qu follows a normal distribution calibrated on the volume pending at the best price. Period: 2023-04-01 to 2023-09-30. 56 E Queue position valuation estimation Here we report the estimated mean queue position values (QPV) of the best piles. E.1 From 2022-10-01 to 2023-03-31 Company spread QPV tick size days ADP 0.1309 0.0433 0.05 129 AIR FRANCE -KLM 0.0011 0.0004 0.0005 129 AIR LIQUIDE 0.0301 0.0126 0.02 129 AIRBUS 0.0284 0.0121 0.02 115 AMG 0.0394 0.0151 0.02 129 ATOS 0.014 0.0045 0.005 82 AXA 0.0068 0.003 0.005 129 AbbVie Inc. 0.0447 0.0118 0.01 124 Accenture plc 0.1646 0.0287 0.01 124 Alibaba Group Holding Limited 0.0231 0.008 0.01 124 American Express Company 0.0897 0.0184 0.01 124 BNP PARIBAS ACT.A 0.0139 0.006 0.01 101 BORR DRILLING 0.0924 0.0221 0.01 66 Bank of America Corporation 0.0103 0.0051 0.01 124 Berkshire Hathaway Inc. 0.1048 0.0209 0.01 124 Best Buy Co., Inc. 0.0381 0.0106 0.01 124 Block, Inc. 0.0483 0.0126 0.01 124 CREDIT AGRICOLE 0.002 0.0007 0.001 65 Carnival Corporation 0.0101 0.005 0.01 124 Carvana Co. 0.0149 0.0062 0.01 123 Caterpillar Inc. 0.1123 0.0219 0.01 124 Chevron Corporation 0.038 0.0109 0.01 123 Citigroup Inc. 0.0106 0.0052 0.01 124 ConocoPhillips 0.0392 0.0111 0.01 123 D.R. Horton, Inc. 0.0401 0.0111 0.01 123 DANONE 0.0146 0.0062 0.01 61 DASSAULT SYSTEMES 0.0101 0.0037 0.005 129 DERICHEBOURG 0.0119 0.0042 0.005 91 Delta Air Lines, Inc. 0.0108 0.0052 0.01 124 Devon Energy Corporation 0.0214 0.0076 0.01 123 DoorDash Inc 0.0567 0.0137 0.01 124 EDENRED 0.0309 0.0131 0.02 89 ENGIE 0.0033 0.0013 0.002 129 EOG Resources, Inc. 0.0642 0.015 0.01 123 ESSILORLUXOTTICA 0.0673 0.0298 0.05 129 Exxon Mobil Corporation 0.0193 0.0072 0.01 124 FDJ 0.0294 0.0093 0.01 129 FLOW TRADERS 0.0464 0.0164 0.02 55 FORVIA 0.0121 0.0041 0.005 107 Fidelity National Information Services, Inc. 0.0338 0.01 0.01 124 Ford Motor Company 0.01 0.005 0.01 123 Freeport-McMoRan Inc. 0.011 0.0053 0.01 123 General Motors Company 0.0111 0.0053 0.01 124 57 Company spread QPV tick size days HERMES INTL 0.6742 0.299 0.5 129 Halliburton Company 0.0122 0.0056 0.01 124 JPMorgan Chase & Co. 0.0254 0.0085 0.01 124 Johnson & Johnson 0.0249 0.0083 0.01 124 KERING 0.148 0.0622 0.1 91 KLEPIERRE 0.0182 0.0072 0.01 107 L’OREAL 0.0802 0.0324 0.05 129 LHYFE 0.0467 0.0114 0.001 129 LVMH 0.1345 0.0588 0.1 129 Lamb Weston Holdings, Inc. 0.0571 0.0135 0.01 123 Lowe’s Companies, Inc. 0.12 0.0228 0.01 124 MICHELIN 0.0091 0.0035 0.005 129 Marathon Petroleum Corporation 0.0601 0.0143 0.01 124 Marsh & McLennan Companies, Inc. 0.0993 0.0195 0.01 124 Mastercard Incorporated 0.1903 0.0324 0.01 124 McDonald’s Corporation 0.0853 0.0177 0.01 124 NIKE, Inc. 0.0265 0.0087 0.01 124 NIO Inc. 0.0102 0.0051 0.01 123 Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings Ltd. 0.0105 0.0051 0.01 124 OCI 0.0386 0.0146 0.02 129 OKEA 0.1306 0.0436 0.05 129 ORANGE 0.0018 0.0007 0.001 96 ORPEA 0.0147 0.0038 0.002 70 Occidental Petroleum Corporation 0.0193 0.0072 0.01 124 Oracle Corporation 0.0177 0.0068 0.01 124 Pfizer Inc 0.0104 0.0051 0.01 124 REMY COINTREAU 0.1597 0.0676 0.1 129 RENAULT 0.0114 0.004 0.005 129 Roblox Corporation 0.0197 0.0073 0.01 124 Royal Caribbean Group 0.0368 0.0105 0.01 124 SAFRAN 0.0309 0.0127 0.02 120 SAINT GOBAIN 0.0112 0.0039 0.005 67 SANOFI 0.0159 0.0065 0.01 125 SCHNEIDER ELECTRIC 0.033 0.0132 0.02 129 SOCIETE GENERALE 0.0075 0.0032 0.005 123 STELLANTIS NV 0.0044 0.0016 0.002 129 STMICROELECTRONICS 0.0106 0.0038 0.005 129 Salesforce, Inc. 0.0606 0.0149 0.01 123 Schlumberger Limited 0.015 0.0062 0.01 124 Sea Limited 0.0591 0.0141 0.01 123 Shopify Inc. 0.0161 0.0065 0.01 124 Snowflake Inc. 0.1801 0.032 0.01 124 Synchrony Financial 0.0127 0.0057 0.01 124 TOTALENERGIES 0.0125 0.0057 0.01 125 Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company Ltd. 0.0157 0.0064 0.01 124 The Boeing Company 0.1027 0.0209 0.01 124 The Coca-Cola Company 0.0106 0.0052 0.01 124 The Home Depot, Inc. 0.1563 0.0283 0.01 124 The Procter & Gamble Company 0.0244 0.0082 0.01 124 58 Company spread QPV tick size days The Progressive Corporation 0.0608 0.0142 0.01 124 The Walt Disney Company 0.0273 0.0088 0.01 123 Uber Technologies, Inc. 0.0108 0.0052 0.01 123 Union Pacific Corporation 0.1062 0.0209 0.01 124 VALEO 0.0124 0.0042 0.005 99 VALLOUREC 0.012 0.0041 0.005 125 VINCI 0.017 0.0067 0.01 71 Valero Energy Corporation 0.0821 0.0175 0.01 124 Visa Inc. 0.0518 0.0133 0.01 124 Wells Fargo & Company 0.0106 0.0052 0.01 124 Welltower Inc. 0.0452 0.0116 0.01 124 E.2 From 2023-04-01 to 2023-09-30 Company spread QPV tick size days ADP 0.1513 0.0657 0.1 127 AIR FRANCE -KLM 0.001 0.0004 0.0005 105 AIR LIQUIDE 0.0316 0.0129 0.02 127 AIRBUS 0.0315 0.0129 0.02 127 AMG 0.031 0.0096 0.01 127 ATOS 0.0131 0.0044 0.005 82 AXA 0.0076 0.0032 0.005 127 AbbVie Inc. 0.0403 0.0109 0.01 124 Accenture plc 0.1521 0.0266 0.01 124 Alibaba Group Holding Limited 0.0176 0.0068 0.01 124 American Express Company 0.0717 0.0154 0.01 124 BNP PARIBAS ACT.A 0.0146 0.0062 0.01 127 BORR DRILLING 0.1478 0.0466 0.05 122 Bank of America Corporation 0.0101 0.005 0.01 124 Berkshire Hathaway Inc. 0.1022 0.0193 0.01 124 Best Buy Co., Inc. 0.0291 0.0091 0.01 124 Block, Inc. 0.0288 0.0091 0.01 124 CREDIT AGRICOLE 0.0032 0.0013 0.002 127 Carnival Corporation 0.0101 0.005 0.01 124 Carvana Co. 0.0452 0.0127 0.01 124 Caterpillar Inc. 0.1184 0.0226 0.01 124 Chevron Corporation 0.0318 0.0097 0.01 124 Citigroup Inc. 0.0104 0.0051 0.01 124 ConocoPhillips 0.0316 0.0096 0.01 124 D.R. Horton, Inc. 0.0498 0.0124 0.01 124 DANONE 0.0155 0.0065 0.01 127 DASSAULT SYSTEMES 0.0108 0.0038 0.005 127 DERICHEBOURG 0.0119 0.0042 0.005 82 Delta Air Lines, Inc. 0.0105 0.0051 0.01 124 Devon Energy Corporation 0.013 0.0058 0.01 124 DoorDash Inc 0.056 0.0134 0.01 124 EDENRED 0.0304 0.013 0.02 127 ENGIE 0.0038 0.0014 0.002 127 EOG Resources, Inc. 0.0555 0.0132 0.01 124 ESSILORLUXOTTICA 0.0416 0.015 0.02 127 59 Company spread QPV tick size days Exxon Mobil Corporation 0.0165 0.0066 0.01 124 FDJ 0.0407 0.0154 0.02 127 FLOW TRADERS 0.0368 0.0145 0.02 62 FORVIA 0.0197 0.0074 0.01 69 Fidelity National Information Services, Inc. 0.0236 0.008 0.01 124 Ford Motor Company 0.01 0.005 0.01 124 Freeport-McMoRan Inc. 0.0106 0.0051 0.01 124 General Motors Company 0.0103 0.0051 0.01 124 HERMES INTL 0.4611 0.1589 0.2 117 Halliburton Company 0.0109 0.0053 0.01 124 JPMorgan Chase & Co. 0.0225 0.0079 0.01 124 Johnson & Johnson 0.0239 0.0081 0.01 124 KERING 0.1593 0.0651 0.1 82 KLEPIERRE 0.0168 0.0068 0.01 127 L’OREAL 0.0848 0.0335 0.05 127 LHYFE 0.043 0.012 0.01 127 LVMH 0.1292 0.0575 0.1 127 Lamb Weston Holdings, Inc. 0.0607 0.0143 0.01 124 Lowe’s Companies, Inc. 0.0908 0.0182 0.01 124 MICHELIN 0.0143 0.0063 0.01 127 Marathon Petroleum Corporation 0.0611 0.0142 0.01 124 Marsh & McLennan Companies, Inc. 0.0814 0.0165 0.01 124 Mastercard Incorporated 0.1537 0.0268 0.01 124 McDonald’s Corporation 0.0741 0.0156 0.01 124 NIKE, Inc. 0.0219 0.0077 0.01 124 NIO Inc. 0.0101 0.005 0.01 124 Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings Ltd. 0.0102 0.0051 0.01 124 OCI 0.0282 0.0091 0.01 127 OKEA 0.0728 0.0212 0.02 122 ORANGE 0.0032 0.0013 0.002 126 ORPEA 0.0059 0.0015 0.0005 83 Occidental Petroleum Corporation 0.0134 0.0059 0.01 124 Oracle Corporation 0.0232 0.008 0.01 124 Pfizer Inc 0.0101 0.005 0.01 124 REMY COINTREAU 0.1109 0.0401 0.05 127 RENAULT 0.0128 0.0042 0.005 127 Roblox Corporation 0.0185 0.007 0.01 124 Royal Caribbean Group 0.0504 0.0126 0.01 124 SAFRAN 0.0343 0.0136 0.02 127 SAINT GOBAIN 0.0172 0.0068 0.01 124 SANOFI 0.0181 0.0069 0.01 79 SCHNEIDER ELECTRIC 0.0334 0.0133 0.02 127 SOCIETE GENERALE 0.008 0.0033 0.005 127 STELLANTIS NV 0.0043 0.0015 0.002 127 STMICROELECTRONICS 0.0107 0.0038 0.005 127 Salesforce, Inc. 0.0794 0.017 0.01 124 Schlumberger Limited 0.0124 0.0056 0.01 124 Sea Limited 0.0383 0.0108 0.01 124 Shopify Inc. 0.017 0.0067 0.01 124 60 Company spread QPV tick size days Snowflake Inc. 0.1304 0.0248 0.01 124 Synchrony Financial 0.0107 0.0052 0.01 124 TOTALENERGIES 0.013 0.0058 0.01 127 Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company Ltd. 0.0161 0.0065 0.01 124 The Boeing Company 0.0949 0.0196 0.01 124 The Coca-Cola Company 0.0102 0.0051 0.01 124 The Home Depot, Inc. 0.1083 0.0208 0.01 124 The Procter & Gamble Company 0.0239 0.0081 0.01 124 The Progressive Corporation 0.0583 0.0138 0.01 124 The Walt Disney Company 0.0166 0.0066 0.01 124 Uber Technologies, Inc. 0.0111 0.0053 0.01 124 Union Pacific Corporation 0.089 0.0179 0.01 124 VALEO 0.0128 0.0043 0.005 102 VALLOUREC 0.0116 0.0041 0.005 118 VINCI 0.0294 0.0125 0.02 126 Valero Energy Corporation 0.0658 0.015 0.01 124 Visa Inc. 0.0509 0.0128 0.01 124 Wells Fargo & Company 0.0103 0.0051 0.01 124 Welltower Inc. 0.0444 0.0114 0.01 124 61