WORKING PAPER Improved Stock Price Forecasting Algorithm based on Feature-weighed Support Vector Regression by using Grey Correlation Degree Quanxi Wang ABSTRACT With the widespread engineering applications ranging from artificial intelligence and big data decision -making, originally a lot of tedious financial data processing, processing and analysis have become more and more convenient and effective. This paper aims to improve the accuracy of stock price forecasting. It improves the support vector machine regression algorithm by using grey correlation analysis (GCA) and improves the accuracy of stock prediction. This article first divides the factors affecting the stock price movement into behavioral factors and technical factors. The behavioral factors mainly include weather indicators and emotional indicators. The technical factors mainly include the daily closing data and the HS 300 Index, and then measure relation through the method of grey correlation analysis. The relationship between the stock price and its impact factors during the trading day, and this relationship is transformed into the characteristic weight of each impact factor. The weight of the impact factors of all trading days is weighted by the feature weight, and finally the support vector regression (SVR) is used. The forecast of the revised stock trading data was compared based on the forecast results of technical indicators (MSE, MAE, SCC, and DS) and unmodifie d transaction data, and it was found that the forecast results were significantly improved. Keywords: support vector regression (SVR) , grey correlation analysis(GCA), behavioral finance, stock forecast 1. Introduction With the applica tion of computer science, data processing and data analysis of high-volume financial data have become easier and easier. People prefer to depend on computer to deal with financial problems rather than traditional artificial statistics, especial in stock price forecasting, one of the p revalent parts that many researchers focus on. The discuss with regard to the predictability of stock price in the actual market never ceases, since stock market is a complex nonlinear dynamic system and the estimation and extrapolation of classical nonlinear function values are far from being able to adapt to the complexity of the stock market. Despite its complexity , many m achine learning methods stand out to show their applications for stock price forecasting due to their exceptional nonlinear adaptability. Baba N and Kozaki M (1992) use a hybrid algorithm , combined the modified BP (back propagation) method with the random optimization method, to train the parameters in the neural network and develop the algorithm for forecasting stock prices in the Japanese market . Xing Chen (2001) and Weidong Meng and Taihua Yan present a method for stock market modeling and forecasting via fuzzy neural network based on T -S model. Yiwen Yang (2001) and Guizhong Liu and Zongping Zhang provide a method for predicting chaotic data with combining embedding theory and artificial neural networks and apply this method for stock market prediction. Tay F E H and Cao L (2007) propose a modified version of support vector machines to model non-stationary financial time series. One of core problems of stock price forecasting is how to choose an effective quantitative financial technique. Support Vector Machine (SVM) is different from the traditional machine learning methods and has exceptional nonlinear adaptability. Its optimization goal is to minimize the confidence range value, and its optimization constraint is the training error. Besides that, The solution problem of SVM is finally transformed into the solution of quadratic programming problem, so the only global optimal solution can be obtained. We usually call SVM Regression SVR when SVM is applied for the regression problems. However, classical SVR method (c-SVR) has some limitations when applying for stock price forecasting since t he prediction results are greatly affected by the input feature vector . Therefore, the feature weights of each feature vector should be considered in predicting the model establishment, and certain feature selection should be performed. Grey Correlation Analysis (GCA) is a method for measuring similarity among the factors based on nearness to the models which considering similarity and nearness respectively . By u sing this method, the feature weight of the feature vector can be determined. Interestingly, feature-weighted SVR (FWSVR) is not a brand -new model. In fact, it has already been examined by James N. K. Liu and Yanxing Hu (2012), developed a feature-weighted support vector machine regression algorithm for the China Shenzhen A-share market. However, until very recently FWSVR has not been considered as a mainstream SVR caused the limited test samples and untested robustness. Another core problems of stock price forecasting is how to select precise forecasting factors. Stock price fluctuations are often af fected by multiple factors . In 1 the essence, stock prices fluctuate around their intrinsic value and are affected by the supply and demand of stocks according to the intrinsic value theory. At the same time , on the basis of behavioral finance theory , s tock prices also fluctuate as investors' psychological expectations of various factors change . Hence, when considering the factors of stock price forecasting, we should combine both t echnical factors and behavioral factors. The rest of the paper is structure d as follows. In Section 2, we provide a detailed classification of the factors of stock price forecasting in both technical factors and behavioral factors . Section 3 covers two basic theories for stock price forecasting algorithm and the derivation of my improved algorithm named f eature-weighed support vector regression by using grey correlation degree. Section 4 is devoted to the specific preparation for my improved algorithm. And two groups of forecasting results are presented in Section 5 and conclusive remarks are given in Section 6. 2. Impact factors of stock price forecasting In this section, we mainly discuss the impact factors of stock price forecasting in two parts: technical impact factors and behavioral impact factors. And behavioral impact factors mainly includes weather indicators and emotional indicators. 2.1 Technical impact factors Stock price forecasting research is inseparable from historical data, the most direct impact factors affecting the daily price of stocks is the performance of the market data of the day. They are the daily highest price 11X , the daily lowest price 12X , the daily trading volume 13X and daily amount 14X . Besides, according to the Prospect theory, t raders are extremely sensitive to stock returns. Therefore, we include the daily close of the last day 15X as stock returns ' reference. Moreover, the performance of a single stock can be seen as a microcosm of the entire stock market trading and the market index is often introduced as a reference factor in forecasting. And in this article we use HS300 index 16X . In brief, we regard impact factors from 11X to 16X as technical impact factors. 2.2 Behavioral impact factors The stock market trader's investment behavior is rooted in the investor's own cognition, emotion, attitude, and psychology, and is formed in the process of investor decision making and execution. Due to the complexity of s tock market trader's psychology, there is not clear definition for the behavioral impact factors of s tock market among the researchers around the world. In this article, we consider the behavioral impact factors of stock price as internal factors and external factors and we use weather factors to represent external factors and use emotional factors refer to as emotional factors. 2 2.2.1 Weather indicators The weather effect of behavior means that a person’s behavioral state can be affected by meteorology. Meteorological conditions are important factors that make up the human living environment. Meteorological conditions and their changes not only affect people's physical health, but also have a significant impact on people's psychological emotions. The weather effect in stock market refers to the phenomenon of changes in the volatility of the stock market due to the weather. This paper mainly studies the impact of wea ther indicators on stock prices and selects temperature 21X , humidity 22X , atmospheric pressure 23X and visibility 24X . In addition, t his paper mainly collects urban weather indicators in Beijing and Shanghai, and uses the total amount of city transactions as the weight of the weather indicators. 2.2.2 Emotional indicators At present, there are generally two methods for constructing emotional indicators for stock traders: direct investor emotion al indicators like American Associatio n of Individual Investor s ' Index and indirect investor emotion al indicators like turnover rate. Considering the objectiveness of indicators , this articles uses indirect investor emotional indicators. They are turnover rate in the past 20 trade days 31X , average idiosyncrasy rate (IVR) in the past 20 trade days 32X , AR 33X , ADTM 34X and OBV 35X and detailed computational procedure of each indicator are listed in appendix. 3.Basic theory of stock price forecasting and improved algorithm In this section, we mainly discuss two basic theories for my stock price forecasting algorithm and my derivation of my improved algorithm named f eature-weighed support vector regression by using grey correlation degree (FWSVR). 3.1 Support vector machine regression The basic concept of support vector machine regression (SVR) is to map the training data set x in the input space X to the high- dimensional linear space F by a nonlinear mapping Φ, thus converting the nonlinear function estimation problem in X into a linear function estimation problem in F and doing linear regression in space F. Finally return the regression result to the original input space X through inverse mapping, and obtain the regression result y. And the SVR function is formulated as follows. () ()fx w x bϕ= + ( 1) where: The regression estimated data set{ } ( ), , 1, 2,...,iixy i N = , n ixR∈ is system input vector and iyR∈ is system output. ()xϕ is a nonlinear mapping from input space X to 3 high-dimensional Helbert space. w is the linear combination of mapping function ()xϕ and it reflects the complexity of the data sample function. b is offset. The coefficients w and b could be estimated by minimizing: 2 1 11( ) ( , ( ))2 n ii i Rf w c L y fx n ε = = + ∑ ( 2) where: 0( () ) ( , ( ))= () , ( () ) y fx L yfx y fx y fx ε ε εε − ≤ −−−> ， ( 3) C is penalty factor. The larger the value of C, the greater the penalty for data that exceeds Lε . ()Rf is composed of empirical error and a regularization term. By applying Lagrange equation, dual problem conversion and kernel function K( , )= ( ) ( )ij i jxx x x ϕϕ , we could simplify the regression function as follows: n * 1 ( ) ( )K( , ) i i ij i fx xx bαα = = −+∑ ( 4) where: * iα is optimal solution. * iiαα≠ There are mainly two kinds of SVR models: ε -SVR and γ -SVR. This paper uses nonlinear ε -SVR. 3.2 Grey correlation analysis The concept of grey correlation analysis (GCA) is originated from grey system theory by Julong Deng (1981). GCA measures the similarity according to the topological properties of the sequence curve in order to judge its similarity. The closer the curve topology distance is, the higher the correlation between the corresponding sequences, vice versa. The a lgorithm step of GCA is as follows. Step 1 : Find the initial value of each sequence. Set system feature sequences 000 0{ (1), (2), , (n)}XXX X=  . Then set the factor sequences 12 m, ,...,XX X . In this article, system feature sequences are the daily close price of stock and factor sequences are technical impact factors and behavioral impact factors 11 12 35, ,...,XX X . Step 2 : Calculate the range of sequences. 0( ) ( ) ( ) , 1, 2,...,ii k X k Xk i m∆= − = ( 5) Step 3 : Calculate the maximum range of sequences and the minimum range of sequences. 4 max max (k), min min (k)ii ikik Mm= ∆= ∆ ( 6) Step4 : Calculate grey correlation coefficients. ( ) , (0,1); 1,2,..., ; 1,2,...,() i i mMk k ni mkM τγτ τ += ∈= =∆+ ( 7) where: τ is resolution ratio，τ =0.5 in this paper. Step 5 : Calculate grey correlation degree. 1 1 (k), 1, 2, , n ii k imnδγ = = =∑  ( 8) iδ could indicate the degree of correlation between each factor and the reference value (close price). 3.3 Feature-weighed support vector regression In Euclid space, the distance of two vectors 12 1 2( , ,..., ) ( , ,..., )i i i in j j j jnX xx x X x x x= = could be represented as 2 1(,) n i j ik jkkdX X x x == −∑ . And classical SVR also use this method to calculate the distance of sample points in high-dimensional space. And c-SVR is based on the assumption that all the features of the sample points supply the same contribution to the target output value. However, in real life, stock traders do not treat equally for the many impact factors of stock price, even the attitude towards the same impact factor varies from person to person. Hence, it is not reasonable to assume that all the features have the same weights. And grey correlation analysis exactly provides the degree of correlation between each factor sequence and the system feature sequence. So the contributions of each impact factors of stock price iw could be obtained by normalizing grey correlation degree iδ : 1 , 1,2, , (k) i i n i k wi mδ δ = = = ∑  ( 9) Therefore, we could obtain the feature -weighed vector: 12 1 2( , ,..., ) ( , ,..., )i i i in j j j jnijX xx x X x x w xw= = Supposed m impact factors' weights are 12(w , w ,..., w )imW = , so the distance of two feature vectors could be represented as: 2 1(,) n i j k ik jkkdX X w x x == −∑ ( 10) The new kernel function is K(W ,W )= (W ) (W )ij i jxx x x ϕϕ and the final regression function of feature-weighed SVR (FWSVR) is formulated as follows: 5 n * 1 ( ) ( ) K(W , W )ii i j i fx x x bαα = = −+∑ ( 11) 4.Preparation for the improved algorithm In the last section, we conduct the basic regression function of FWSVR and the process to get its weights. In this section, we mainly discuss the basic preparation for FWSVR, including data preparation, data pre-processing, technical parameter setting and selection , evaluation system of forecast results setting and f actor screening system. 4.1 Data preparation Based on the previous studies on SVR for forecasting the China stock market, the range of the s elected stock data for research only limit in s everal to dozens of stocks . So it could not completely proved the generalization of SVR algorithm in China stock market. However, considering that if the stocks of the entire market are selected as the research samples, the calculation speed is quite slower. Therefore, this paper selects the constituent stocks of the Shanghai and Shenzhen 300 Index (HS300) as the research object to test the performance of the algorithm in the entire market. After the completion of the share reform in China's securities market, the stock index futures contract was officially listed and traded on April 16, 2009. On October 30, 2009, the China Growth Enterprise Market was opened for trading. With the gradual improvement of the system of China's securities market, the composition of investors in the market, the market environment and the original investment philosophy have changed accordingly. The investment style, investment philosophy and investment strategy of the market have begun t o diversify. Small-cap stock investment strategy has become popular in stock market trading, and small -cap stock investment strategy is also the embodiment of stock trader's trading behavior adjustment. Hence, this paper selects the period when small -cap stock strategy is prevalent. The period range is from January 1, 2009 to December 31, 2016. Classify the constituent stocks of the HS 300 Index in 2009 based on the CITIC Level 1 industry classification. It shows that the constituent stocks of the HS300 cover 28 industries and have a certain representativeness. 6 Fig. 1 Industrial distribution of constituent stocks of HS300 index All the technical impact factors and turnover rate and idiosyncrasy rate (IVR) of emotional indicators come from Wind F ilesync database. AR, ADTM and OBV of emotional indicators come from uqer database. All the weather indicators come from NOAA（National Oceanic and A tmospheric Administration）database. Due to data compilation and sample issues, there are 298 stocks eventually incl uded in the calculation. 4.2 Data pre-processing Data pre -processing mainly consists of abnormal value handing and data regularization. First, the data for each stock during the suspension period is removed. Then use MAD method ( Median Absolute Deviation) to screen and process extreme abnormal value in the sample . The MAD method is an improvement for the mean standard deviation method and its specific steps are as follows: Step 1 : Calculate sample standard deviation { } , 1, 2,...,imd median x i n= = ( 12) Step 2 : Calculation threshold (median deviation) { }, 1, 2,...,iMAD median x md i n= −= ( 13) Step 3 : Abnormal value correction. In this paper, 5 times the threshold is selected as the confidence interval. 5*iif x md MAD>+ = 5*ix md MAD+ 5*ielse if x md MAD<− = 5*ix md MAD− ( 14) After processing the corrected abnormal value, the sample data is regularized between intervals [-1, 1] using range normalization. On the one hand, it eliminates the influence of factors with large distribution range or small distribution range on the Compr Nonmt Bank Pharm Comm Food&Bvrg Petrlchmc Retailtd Lightindus Automb AFAHF Coal Trans Cons Bdmt Homapp Cmpt Bschmc Mach Natldf Steel Nonfn Txtl&gmt RE Elcmp Powereqp Elec&utlt Media Cater&trv 7 results, and on the other hand it can solve the over -fitting problem of support vector machine regression. It is formulated as follows: ' min2 1 , 1, 2,...,max min ix i xx xx in−= × −= − ( 15) where: ' ix is \transformed sample data, ix is raw sample data, minx is the minimum of sample data and maxx is maximum of sample data. 4.3 Technical parameter setting and selection The key to support vector machine regression prediction lies in the t echnical parameter setting and selection . It directly determines whether the optimal solution can be found, and determines the generalization ability and generalization of the model. This paper selects RBF (radial basis function) as kernel function in ε -SVR. In grey correlation degree calculation, the ratio between samples used to get the weight value and the total samples is 1:20. In SVR, the ratio between samples used to train and the samples used as testing data is 4:1. Moreover, this paper uses k -fold Cross Validation to obtain the other three core parameters: insensitive parameter ε , regularization parameter c and RBF kernel parameter γ . And its specific steps are as follows: Step 1 : Randomly divide the sample set S into k disjoint subsets, and the number of samples in each subset is m/k. These subsets are recorded separately as S1, S2,..., Sk . Step 2 : For each model Mi: for j=1 to k： Set 1 11 ... ...jj kS SS S −+∪∪ ∪ ∪∪ as training sets and train model M i, then get the training function. Set jS as test sets and calculate the generalization error. Step 3 : Calculate the average generalization error for each model and select the parameters from the model Mi that has the minimum average generalization error. This paper uses Grid Regression Search to process the k-fold Cross Validation to obtain the optimal parameters. 4.4 Evaluation system of forecast results In order to For measur e the accuracy of forecast results, this paper mainly uses the following four evaluation indices: M ean Squared Error (MSE) refers to the e xpected value of the square of the difference between the parameter estimate and the true value of the parameter . MSE could evaluate the d egree of change in data. The smaller MSE values, the better precision the model is. It is formulated as follows: 2 1 1=( ) N tt t MSE observed predictedN = −∑ ( 16) 8 M ean Absolute Error (MAE) refers to the a verage of absolute error . MAE c an better reflect the actual situation of the predicted value error. The smaller MAE values, the better precision the model is. It is formulated as follows: 1 1= N tt t MAE predicted observedN = −∑ ( 17) Directional S ymmetry (DS) indicates the correctness of the predicted direction of predicted value in terms of percentages. The bigger DS values, the better precision the model's trend forecasting ability is. It is formulated as follows: 1 11 1= *100% 1 ( )( ) 0 0 N i t tt t t i DS d N if observed observed predicted predictedd otherwise = −−− −≥=  ∑ ( 18) S quared Correlation Coefficient (SCC) measures the degree of correlation between the parameter estimate and the true value of the parameter. The bigger SCC values, the better correlation the model is. It is formulated as follows: 2 1 11 22 22 1 11 1 11 (* ) = ( )( ) N NN tt t t t tt N NN N NN t tt t tt t tt t tt N xy x y SCC Nx x xNy y y = = = = = = = = = − −− ∑ ∑∑ ∑ ∑∑ ∑ ∑∑ ( 19) where: x is raw data, y is predicting data. 4.5 Factor screening system Because of the selection of 15 impact indicators including technical factors and behavioral factors, and not all of the selected impact indicators have a good ability to predict stock price. Therefore, a factor screening system should be set up before the final forecast to eliminate the indicators with poor predictive ability. In this way, we can not only avoid over-fitting of the final support vector machine regression, but also improve computational efficiency and reduces system resource waste. This paper mainly designs a two-step screening method based on grey correlation degree. 4.5.1 Preliminary screening based on grey correlation Based on the explanation in Section 3, the grey correlation degree can better describe the similarity between the system reference sequence and the factor sequence. Hence, we take the first step to calculate the grey correlation degree of each forecasting indicator. Step 1: Select stock i, i=1,2,...,298, calculate the grey correlation degree between all 15 impact indicators and the close price of stock i, and record them as 1 2 15, ,...,ii irr r . Step 2: Calculate the average grey correlation degree of all impact indicators. 1 1= , 298, 1, 2,...,15 [0,1] n i ji i j r rn i rn = = = ⊂∑ ， ( 20) 9 Step 3: S et the threshold of average grey correlation degree as 0.6. The impact indicators with average grey correlation degree below 0.6 are marked as the indicators to be observed 12, ,..., ,0 15ihh h i ≤≤ and these indicators need to follow the second step: random screening of SVR. The impact indicators with average grey correlation degree above 0.6 are marked as the basic forecasting indicators 12, ,..., ,0 15jll l j ≤≤ and these indicators could be directly used for FWSVR. 4.5.2 Random screening of SVR The indicators to be observed 12, ,..., ,0 15ihh h i ≤≤ need to process random screening of SVR. It refers to the selection of all basic forecasting indicators 12, ,..., ,0 15jll l j ≤≤ and a the indicator to be observed ih each time to form a quasi-predicted indicator group. Randomly select stocks with a total number of stocks of 1/10 as test samples and separately process c-SVR and FWSVR and compare average of the evaluation indices: DS, MSE, MAE and SCC. Count the number of evaluation indices that FWSVR perform better than c-SVR and record them as NDS , NMSE, NMAE and NSCC. Repeat 3 times and then replace ih . If the NDS , NMSE, NMAE and NSCC. are lower than half number of the total samples, it indicates that the indicator ih has poor predictive ability .So eliminate the indicator ih . If not, ih could be regarded as one of the basic forecasting indicators. After the above two-step screening method, all the weather indicators and ADTM of emotional indicators are eliminated. All the technical factors and turnover rate, IVR, AR and OBV are allowed to the basic forecasting indicators. 5. Forecasting results In this section, we mainly use basic forecasting indicators got from Section 4 as our final forecasting factors. The paper firstly uses only technical factors to exanimate whether FWSVR performs better than c -SVR. Then paper adds behavioral factors to test the effectiveness of behavioral and the advantages of FWSVR. 5.1 Technical factors forecasting Since technical factors are widely used in the studies to forecast the stock price, the paper initially processes FWSVR and c-SVR separately by only using technical factors. Here is the figure 2 about normalizing grey correlation degree of technical factors for one stock. It can be seen that the weights of the five technical factors are relatively average, and all have a certain impact on the close price of the day. And the highest and lowest prices on the day performs more prominently. 10 Fig. 2 The weights of the five technical factors Then use the gridregression function of toolbox libsvm in python 3.5 to process k-fold Cross Validation to obtain the optimal parameters in c-SVR: insensitive parameter ε , regularization parameter c and RBF kernel parameter γ . The default value of k is 10. Table 1 Several optimal parameters obtained from k-fold Cross Validation c gama epsilon 000001.SZ 64 0.003906 0.003906 000002.SZ 64 0.03125 0.015625 000009.SZ 64 0.007813 0.015625 000012.SZ 64 0.007813 0.007813 000021.SZ 64 0.015625 0.015625 000024.SZ 64 0.03125 0.03125 000027.SZ 64 0.003906 0.03125 000031.SZ 64 0.007813 0.003906 000039.SZ 64 0.015625 0.007813 Finally, based on the optimal parameters, process FWSVR and c -SVR separately. Figure 3 is a comparison of the raw data and predicted results of two stocks of 000001 and 600143 under FWSVR. 0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.2 Pre_close High Low Volume AMT HS300 11 ( a) 000001 raw data and predicted results (b) 600143 raw data and predicted results Fig. 3 Comparison of the raw data and predicted results under FWSVR Count the number of FWSVR performing better than C-SVR under each evaluation index. Fig. 4 The number of FWSVR performing better than C-SVR under each evaluation index The results show: Except for the SCC index which FWSVR is slightly better than the C -SVR, the other three evaluation indices of FWSVR are obviously dominant. By comp aring the SCC index between FWSVR and C-SVR, it indicates that the difference between both SCC indices is lower than 0.01, which we could conjure that FWSVR has less improvement to SCC index. Further statistics to analyze the improved evaluation indices, MSE has the highest improvement with an average increase of 65.30%. The improvement of MAE is second, and the average improvement is 37.02%. DS is also improved with an average increase of 23.52%. SCC has the lowest improvement with an increase of 5.38%. Therefore, the results on the one hand indicate that the technical factors can indeed predict the stock. On the other hand, it has also proved that FWSVR model can improve the C-SVR model and improve the error and trend. 5.2 Technical factors and behavioral factors forecasting 5.2.1 Comparison of forecasting results to results in C-SVR Add behavioral factors (turnover rate, IVR, AR and OBV) to the basic forecasting indicators. 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 MSE MAE SCC DS FW-SVR C-SVR 12 Fig. 5 The weights of the 10 impact factors The figure about normaliz ing grey correlation degree of each factor for one stock is shown above. It can be seen that the weights of the 10 factors are alsorelatively average, and all have a certain impact on the close price of the day. And the highest and lowest prices on the day still performs more prominently. After obtaining the optimal parameters from k- fold Cross Validation, process FWSVR and c-SVR separately. Figure 5 is a comparison of the raw data and predicted results of two stocks of 000001 and 600143 under FW-SVR. ( a) 000001 raw data and predicted results (b) 600143 raw data and predicted results Fig. 6 New comparison of the raw data and predicted results under FWSVR Count the number of FWSVR performing better than C-SVR under each evaluation index. 0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 13 Fig. 7 The new number of FWSVR performing better than C-SVR under each evaluation index The results show: After a dding behavioral factors, all the evaluation indices of FWSVR are obviously dominant in comparison to C-SVR It indicates that impact factors do not change the stability of FWSVR model and FWSVR model has a strong robustness. Further statistics to analyze the improved evaluation indic es, MSE has the highest improvement with an average increase of 66.59%. The improvement of MAE is second, and the average improvement is 46.56%. DS is also improved with an average increase of 38.26%. SCC has the lowest improvement with an increase of 3.49%. Therefore, the results on the one hand indicate that the technical factors and behavioral factors can indeed predict the stock. On the other hand, it has also proved that FWSVR model can improve the C-SVR model and improve the error and trend. 5.2.2 Comparison of forecasting results to that only contain technical factors From the number of stocks in which FWSVR is better than C-SVR under each evaluation index: Table 2 The number of stocks in which FWSVR is better than C-SVR for each evaluation index MSE MAE SCC DS FW-SVR1 287 282 150 272 FW-SVR2 270 255 157 293 where: FW-SVR1 refers to the number of stocks that only include technical factors, and FW-SVR2 refers to the number of stocks that include both technical and behavioral factors. The results show that after considering the behavioral factors, FWSVR model reduces the number of prediction errors and improves the trend and correlation of prediction results. From the average degree of improvement of evaluation indicators : 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 MSE MAE SCC DS FW-SVR C-SVR 14 Table 3 The average degree of improvement of evaluation indicators for each evaluation index MSE MAE SCC DS FW-SVR1 65.30% 37.02% 5.38% 23.52% FW-SVR2 66.59% 46.56% 3.49% 38.26% The results show that after considering the behavioral factors, FWSVR model has a certain degree of improvement on the prediction error and prediction trend, and the degree of improvement of the prediction correlation has a certain degree of reduction. From the perspective of each stock : Separately count evaluation indices of each stock that with only technical factors and including both technical and behavioral factors. For each stock ,if the latter evaluation index is better than the former, then count as 1 for corresponding factors. Table 4 The number of stock which the latter evaluation index is better than the former MSE MAE SCC DS FW-SVR3 257 256 31 26 FW-SVR4 41 42 267 272 The results show that adding behavioral factors can significantly improve the trend and correlation of prediction results for each stock, but at the same time it will improve the prediction error. (a) SCC industrial distribution of improved stocks (b) DS industrial distribution of improved stocks Fig. 8 Industrial distribution of improved stocks Further statistics on the industry classification of stocks with improved evaluation indicators (CITIC Level 1). By calculating the proportion of the industry, it was found that behavioral factors are more prominent in the power equipment, textile and apparel, coal, commercial retail, petrochemical and food and beverage industries, especially in the power equipment and petrochemical industries that the improved stocks dominate large proportion. In summary, after adding behavioral factors, the improvement of evaluation indices has the characteristics of small amount and great improvement, and the trend of Food&Bv rg Petrlchm c Retailtd Lightindu s Coal Txtl&gmt RE Bank Pharm Comm Food&Bvr g Petrlchmc Retailtd Lightindus 15 prediction results has been significantly improved, but the number of stocks with improved prediction error is small. Moreover, from the perspective of a single stock, the improved stocks are mainly concentrated in power equipment, petrochemicals, textiles and clothing, coal, commercial retail and food and beverage, reflecting to some extent the behavioral factors have certain predictive power in these industries. 5.3 Ideas for real trading strategy Based on the aforementioned forecasting results, it is demonstrated that FWSVR model has a certain effect on the stock to improve the accuracy of stock forecasting. As a result, this model can be used as a stock selection system in stock trading strategies and this paper provides some ideas for applying this method to real trading. And the specific steps of the stock selection strategy constructed are as follows: Step 1: Set stock pool s (the range of stocks), stock selection time span and factor pools. For Chinese stock market, generally we can choose HS 300 constituent stocks or CSI 500 constituent stocks. In order to ensure the accuracy of stock selection, the stock selection time span should be more than 3 years. Factor pools should include behavioral factors based on the premise that technical factors are included. Step 2: Run the FWSVR model program for data back testing. Through the data processing of the program, the setting and selection of technical parameters, the factor screening and other steps, the result values of each evaluation index of each stock under the time span can be obtained. Step 3: The stocks are screened according to the performance of the stock evaluation indices, and the stocks with better evaluation indicators are included in the forecast set. Run the FWSVR model program for the next-day stock price forecasting in the forecast set. If a positive rate of return is generated, the stock can be bought and vice versa. Also, perform daily data updates for stocks in the forecast set and repeat the steps from Steps 2 to Steps 3. 6. Conclusions In this paper, we expand the range of impact factors for feature- weighted SVR algorithm and set a longer period to exanimate it robustness. We first divide the factors affecting the stock price movement into behavioral factors and technical factors and t he behavioral factors mainly include weather indicators and emotional indicators. And then measure relation through the method of grey correlation analysis. The relationship between the stock price and its impact factors during the trading day, and this relationship is transformed into the characteristic weight of each impact factor. The weight of the impact factors of all trading days is weighted by the feature weight, and finally the support vector regression (SVR) is used. In comparison to classical SVR model, forecast ing results are significantly improved in FWSVR model and FWSVR has robustness and generality. In addition, we compare the two situations that contain only technical factors and that include 16 both technical factors and behavioral factors . The results indicate that both technical factors and behavioral factors can indeed be applied to predict the stock . Technical factors are more applicable, and the application of behavioral factors is narrower. But the behavioral factors also have a greater improvement on the average of the evaluation indices, especially in power equipment, petrochemicals, textiles and clothing, coal, commercial retail and food and beverage industries. 17 References Ang A, Hodrick R J, Xing Y , et al. The Cross-Section of V olatility and Expected Returns[J]. Nber Working Papers, 2006, 61(1):259-299. Baba N, Kozaki M. An intelligent forecasting system of stock price using neural networks[C] . International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 1992,371-377. Baker M, Stein J C. Market liq uidity as a sentiment indicator [J]. Journal of Financial Markets, 2004, 7(3):271-299. Chalimourda A, Schölkopf B, Smola A J. Experimentally optimal ν in support vector regression for different noise models and parameter settings[J]. Neural Networks, 2004, 17(1): 127-141. Fisherkenneth L, StatmanMeir. Investor Sentiment and Stock Returns[J]. Financial Analysts Journal, 2000, 56(2):16-23. Hirshleifer D. Investor Psychology and Asset Pricing[J]. Journal of Finance, 2001, 56(4):1533-1597. Liu J N K, Hu Y . Application of feature-weighted Support Vector regression using grey correlation degree to stock price forecasting[J]. Neural Computing & Applications, 2013, 22(1):143-152. Long Dengju. Gre y theory basis [M]. Wuhan: Huazhong University of Science and Technology Press,2002 Makridakis S, Wheelwright S C, Hyndman R J. Forecasting methods and applications[M]. John wiley & sons, 2008. Merton R C. An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model[J]. Econometrica, 1973, 41(5):867-887. Saunders E M. Stock Prices and Wall Street Weather[J]. American Economic Review, 1993, 83(5):1337-1345. Seo S. A review and comparison of methods for detecting outliers in univariate data sets[D]. University of Pittsburgh, 2006. Shuxin Du , Tiejun Wu . Support vector machine for regression [J]. Journal of System Simulation ,2003, 15(11):1580-1585. Tay F E H, Cao L . Application of support vector machines in financial time series forecasting[J]. Journal of University of Electronic Science & Technology of China, 2007, 29(4):309-317. Tversky A, Kahneman D. Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases.[J]. Science, 1974, 185(4157):1124-1131. Vapnik, Vladimir N. The nature of statistical learning theory[J]. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 2002, 8(6):1564-1564. 18 Xiangze Meng, Xinyong Liu . Stock market modeling and forecasting by using fuzzy neural network based on genetic algorithm [J]. Information and Control, 1997, 26(5):388-392. Xing Chen, Weidong Meng, Taihua Yan. Forecasting Stock Market Quotations via Fuzzy Neural Network Based on T-S Model [J]. System Engineering- Theory& Practice, 2001, 21(2):66-72. Yiwen Yang, Guizhong Liu, Zongping Zhang. Chaotic Data Prediction and Its Applications in Stock Market Based on Embedding Theory and Neural Networks [J]. System Engineering - Theory& Practice, 2001, 21(6):52-58. Zongpu Xin. Research on investor sentiment and its effects on China stock market [D]. Liaoning University,2017. 19 Appendix The calculation of emotional indicators: idiosyncrasy rate (IVR) 32X refers to m arket-independent non- system volatility from Fama-French three-factor model. It is formulated as follows: 1 23()if mf tr r r r HML SMB IVRβ ββ−= − + + + ( A.1) where: Factor HML represents the high market-to-equity ratio of stock portfolio yields minus the low-to-market ratio stock portfolio yields, and factor SMB represents small-cap stocks yields minus large-cap stock returns. AR 33X reflects market popularity. It is b ased on the opening price of the day, by comparing the highest and lowest prices of the day with the market price of the day, to reflect the position of the opening price in the stock price through a certain period of time. It is formulated as follows: max,i , 1 , min,i 1 () () N start i i N start i i PP AR PP = = − = − ∑ ∑ ( A.2) where: max,iP is the highest price for the i-day, min,iP is the lowest price for the i-day, ,start iP is the opening price for the i-day, N= 26. ADTM 34X refers to the difference between the upward fluctuation range of the opening price and the downward fluctuation range to describe the high and low. Its steps are as follows: Step 1: if opening price<=opening price of last day，DTM=0； else maxmax(( ),( )) start start lastDTM P P P P= −− Step 2: if opening price>=opening price of last day，DBM=0； else minmax(( ),( ))start start lastD B M PPPP=−− Step 3: 11 , NN ii ii STM DTM SBM DBM = = = =∑∑ Step 4 : if STM>SBM,ADTM=(STM-SBM)/STM； else if STM<SBM,ADTM=(STM-SBM)/SBM； else ADTM=0 where: lastP is opening price of last day, N=23. 20 OBV 35X refers to the change in the trading volume of the stock market to measure the driving force of the stock market, so as to judge the trend of the stock price. It is formulated as follows: 1 ,i last, ,i last, sgn* 1 sgn 1 ii i start i start i OBV OBV Vol PP PP −= + ≥=−< ( A.3) where: iVol is the number of stock transactions for the i-day, the initial value of OBV is generally replaced by the volume of the first day. 21