Market Impact: A Systematic Study of the High Frequency Options Market (published in Quantitative Finance, Volume 21, 2021 - Issue 1) Emilio Said *,***, Ahmed Bel Hadj Ayed *, Damien Thillou *, Jean-Jacques Rabeyrin *, and Frédéric Abergel **,*** *Quantitative Research, Global Markets, BNP Paribas, Paris, France **Quantitative Research Group, BNP Paribas Asset Management, Paris, France ***Chaire de Finance Quantitative, Laboratoire MICS, CentraleSupélec, Université Paris-Saclay, Gif-Sur-Yvette, France May 17, 2022 Abstract This paper deals with a fundamental subject that has seldom been addressed in recent years, that of market impact in the options market. Our analysis is based on a proprietary database of metaorders - large orders that are split into smaller pieces before being sent to the market - on one of the main Asian markets. In line with our previous work on the equity market [Said et al., 2018], we propose an algorithmic approach to identify metaorders, based on some implied volatility parameters, the at the money forward volatility and at the money forward skew . In both cases, we obtain results similar to the now well understood equity market: Square-Root Law, Fair Pricing Condition and Market Impact Dynamics . Keywords: Market microstructure, market impact, statistical ﬁnance, fair pricing, auto- mated trading, limit orders, options market, implied volatility, high frequency. 1 Introduction In recent years market impact has become a topic of interest for most market participants. The advent of algorithmic trading has signiﬁcantly increased the traded volumes and the number of transactions. The whole point of electronic markets is to directly match participants that are willing to sell an asset with participants that are willing to buy it. This is mainly done via two types of orders: market orders and limit orders. Market orders are sent by participants that are willing to either buy or sell the asset immediately. Limit orders, however, do not share this urgency: these orders show the interest of the participant to buy or sell the asset at a pre-assigned price. Market orders are generally not used by institutional investors because of the lack of control they imply. On the contrary, limit orders, whether they areaggressive - crossing the spread - orpassive, form the vast majority of orders actually sent to the market during the execution of an algorithmic trading strategy, for example a market making strategy or an optimal execution strategy. Most strategies referred to as algorithmic trading fall into the cost-reduction category. The basic idea is to break down a large order – ametaorder – into small orders and send them to the market over time. The reasons for the incremental execution of metaorders are originally due to what we have called theliquidity paradox: The volume of 1 arXiv:1902.05418v4 [q-fin.TR] 14 May 2022 buy or sell limit orders typically available in the order book at a given instant of time is quite small and represents only the order of1% of the traded daily volume, i.e.10−4− 10−5 of the market cap for stocks [Bouchaud et al., 2009]. Hence the fact that the outstanding liquidity is so small has an immediate consequence: trades must be fragmented. Recently, market impact questions related to options market have appeared in option pricing issues. However, the constraints of non-arbitrage often impose some limitations such as linear market impact [Bouchard et al., 2017] [Loeper, 2018]. In these papers the authors examine how linear market impact on the spot market can aﬀect option prices. The point of view adopted here is slightly diﬀerent and seeks to highlight how dealing with options can aﬀect directly volatility and therefore option prices. Many studies have been conducted to understand the inﬂuences of metaorders on the price formationprocess. Mostofthemareconcernedwiththeequitymarkets, seee.g. [Almgren et al., 2005], [Moro et al., 2009], [Toth et al., 2011], [Bershova and Rakhlin, 2013], [Mastromatteo et al., 2014], [Bacry et al., 2015], [Gomes and Waelbroeck, 2015], [Brokmann et al., 2015]and[Said et al., 2018]. All these studies have shown a common behavior during the execution of a metaorder, namely, a concave and temporary impact followed by a convex and decreasing relaxation. More recently, [Donier and Bonart, 2015] have observed similar eﬀects in the bitcoin market, and a short note [Tóth et al., 2016] indicated that theSquare root lawseems to be hold for the options market. This paper is intended as an analysis of market impact in the options market. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst detailed, in-depth academic study of this phenomenon. The paper is organized as follow: Section 2 recalls our algorithmic deﬁnition of anequity metaorder, introduces that of anoptions meatorderand presents some market impact measures. Section 3 introduces the data set of the study and presents our approach foroptions metaorders. Sections 4, 5 and 6 present our ﬁndings and empirical results: They conﬁrm that the market impact law observed in the equity markets also hold true in the options markets. Section 7 is a discussion of our results and their implications. 2 Deﬁnitions, Algorithm and Market Impact measures 2.1 Basic Deﬁnitions Some basic concepts, and the algorithmic deﬁnition of an options metaorder, are introduced here. Deﬁnition 1.A limit order is an order that sets the maximum or minimum price at which an agent is willing to buy or sell a given quantity of a particular stock. Deﬁnition 2.An aggressive limit order is one that instantaneously removes liquidity from the order book by triggering a transaction. An aggressive order crosses the Bid–Ask spread. In other words an aggressive buy order will be placed on the ask, and an aggressive sell order will be placed on the bid. A limit order that is not aggressive is termedpassive. Passive orders sit in the order book until they are executed or cancelled. Loosely speaking, ametaorder is a large trading order that is split into small pieces and executed incrementally. In order to perform rigorous statistical analyses, a more speciﬁc and precise deﬁnition of a metaorder is required, and given in Deﬁnition 3 below: Deﬁnition 3.A metaorderis a series of orders sequentially executed during the same day and having those same attributes: 2 • agent i.e. a participant on the market (an algorithm, a trader...); • product id i.e. a ﬁnancial instrument (a share, an option...); • direction (buy or sell); Clearly, Deﬁnition 3 must be adapted to ﬁt the options market. Optionsareabitmorecomplexthanequities. Tradersbuyandsellvolatilityanddealdirectly with the implied volatility surface, and therefore, with their implicit volatility parameters. As such, an options metaorder can naturally be deﬁned as a sequence of transactions that generate some speciﬁc deformations of the volatility surface. Deﬁnition 4.An options metaorder with respect to an implied volatility parameterθ is a series of orders sequentially executed during the same day and having those same attributes: • agent i.e. a participant on the market (an algorithm, a trader...); • underlying product id i.e. the underlying ﬁnancial instrument; • direction regarding the sign ofSθ := Q× ∂O ∂θ where Q is the algebraic quantity (positive for a buy order and negative for a sell order) andO the price of the option traded; Note that in Deﬁnition 4, theproduct idcondition introduced in Deﬁnition 3 is dropped. As a matter of fact, trading an option with a given strikeK and maturityT also aﬀects those with nearby strikes and maturities, so that trades on options with diﬀerent strikes and maturity can very well belong to the same metaorder. This approach is in line with what is presented in [Said et al., 2018], and leads to a systematic study of options market impact. In what follows we will use the termθ−metaorder to refer to an options metaorder with respect to the implied volatility parameterθ as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 4. 2.2 Market Impact deﬁnitions The framework is similar to that introduced in [Said et al., 2018]. Let Ωθ be the set of θ- metaorders under scrutiny, that is,θ−metaorders that are fully executed during a single market session, and pickω∈ Ωθ executed on (possibly) several options with the same underlying and during a given dayd. Its execution starts at some timet0(ω) and ends the same day at time t0(ω) +T (ω). ThusT (ω) represents the duration of the metaorder. Denote by N(ω) the number of orders that have been executed during the life cycle of the metaorderω: N(ω) is the length of ω. Let t0(ω),t 1(ω),...,t N(ω)−1(ω) be the transaction times of the metaorderω, we deﬁne Vθ(ω) := N(ω)−1∑ i=0 Sθ ti(ω) as the sensitivity of the metaorderω regarding to the parameterθ. Let Vθ := ∑ t∈Tmarket ⏐⏐⏐Sθ t ⏐⏐⏐ be the sensitivity traded the same dayd on all the options of the universe, which means all the options traded by the algorithms summed over all market transactions Tmarket occurred in the dayd. Hence Vθ can be viewed as theabsolute sensitivity traded by the market regarding to the parameterθ. Note that this quantity depends only on the universe the dayd. Therefore all theθ−metaorders executed the same day will share the sameabsolute sensitivity. Hence we deﬁne ⏐⏐Vθ(ω) ⏐⏐ Vθ as theθ−daily participation rate. The sign ofω will be noted ϵ(ω) (i.e. ϵ = 1 for a positive sensitivity options metaorder andϵ =−1 for a sensitive 3 negative one), the sign ofϵ(ω) is also the sign ofSθ t0(ω),Sθ t1(ω),...,Sθ tN (ω)−1(ω) which is invariant during the life ofω. Clearly, most of the quantities introduced in this section depend onω. For the sake of simplicity, we chose to omit this dependence whenever there is no ambiguity and will often writeT, N,Vθ, ϵ instead ofT (ω), N(ω),Vθ(ω), ϵ(ω). The market impact curve of a metaorder ω quantiﬁes the magnitude of the relative θ−variation between the starting time of the metaordert0 and the current timet>t 0, θ being a parameter of the implied volatility model. LetIt(ω) be a proxy for the realizedθ−parameter variation between timet0 and timet0 +t. We use thevariation proxydeﬁned by It =θt−θt0, (1) This estimation relies on the assumption that theexogenous market movesWt will cancel out once averaged, i.e. as a random variable,Wt should have ﬁnite variance and basically satisfy E(ϵ(ω)Wt(ω)) = 0. One can thus write ϵ(ω)It(ω) =ηt(ω) +ϵ(ω)Wt(ω), (2) whereηt(ω) represents the market impact curve andWt(ω), the exogenous variation correspond- ing to the relative move that would have occurred if the metaorder had not been sent to the market. Equity Metaorder Options Metaorder Object of study stock market options market Quantity of interest stock price P implied volatility parametersθ Eﬀective size quantity Q sensitivitySθ Eﬀective variation Pt−Pt0 θt−θt0 Eﬀective Signϵ 1 {Q>0}− 1 {Q<0} 1 {Sθ>0}− 1 {Sθ<0} Market impact proxy ϵ× (Pt−Pt0) ϵ× (θt−θt0) Table 1:Comparison of the quantities of interest between equity and options metaorders 2.3 Implied volatility model In the previous section we have introduced the following proxy ϵ× (θt−θt0) (3) to measure the market impact ofθ which is a parameter of the proprietary implied volatility model used to conduct this study. Although the approach used is model dependent, we think that for the two parameters presented here (at the money forward volatility and skew) the results must be the same for any implied volatility model ﬁtting the market. This is also one of the reasons why we limited ourselves to study the market impact onthe at the money forward volatility and skew in our article as every reasonnable implied volatility model must have at least those two variables. We have respectively sketched on Figures 1 and 2 the expected market impact variations of theat the money forwardvolatility and skew. For sake of clarity let us recall that the terminologyat the money forwardrefers to quantities function of the strike evaluated at the forward. 4 3 Data 3.1 Data description The data set we use for this analysis contains trade orders executed by the BNP Paribas options trading desk for the 2-year period from June 2016 through June 2018 on the KOSPI 200 options. The KOSPI 200 Index is a capitalization-weighted index of 200 Korean stocks which make up 93% of the total market value of the Korea Stock Exchange. In order to perform rigorous statistical analyses we need to be able to calibrate the parameters of the implied volatility model as often as possible. This is necessary to observe the variations of the parameters at a frequency similar to that of the transactions. To make this possible with suﬃcient accuracy, we have only considered executions trading mostly short maturities options. Because of the high frequency in the execution of the orders,we only consider options metaorders with at least 5 completed transactions. This underlines the fact that we want keep only metaorders that reasonably act as liquidity takers and could impact signiﬁcantly the market. Indeed, whilethe equity metaorders studied in [Said et al., 2018] had an average time life of several hours, the options metaorders presented here last a few tenths of seconds. 3.2 Data representation For sake of conﬁdentiality numerical values of market impact, daily participation rates and durations are given in percentage of reference values – related to the market and BNP Paribas options desk – that cannot be disclosed. Nevertheless we will give when it is possible the value of the ratio of these reference values in order to make feasible comparisons between theat the money forwardvolatility and skew metaorders. For instance the reference value of impact is the same in Figures 9, 10 and 11 for the volatility metaorders, so it is possible to make comparisons between these graphs. The same applies for skew metaorders in Figures 12, 13 and 14. In what follows we will use the following convention: All graphs relating to volatility (resp. skew) metaorders will be drawn in blue (resp. green). 3.3 Options Market Impact - The Liquidity Taker Mode (Aggressive Orders) Let us now focus on the market impact generated by a series of aggressive executions on the options market. More speciﬁcally, we consider the two kinds of metaorders: namely theat the money forward volatility and the at the money forward skewmetaorders. We recall that aggressive limit orders are limit orders that cross the spread in order to trigger an immediate transaction. Itisimportanttounderstandthefundamentaldiﬀerencebetweenthesetwotypesofmetaorders. For example, if someone wants to buyat the money forward volatility(Fig. 1), the simplest strat- egy is to buy options with strikes close to the money forward. Whereas if one wants to buy at the money forward skew, a simple way to do so consists in buying out of the money options while at the same time, selling in the money options (Fig. 2). A simple way to check that the previous intuitions presented in Figures 1 and 2 are not totally irrelevant is to study for the two kinds of metaorders the relation of theθ−market impact curve as a function of the (unbiased) standard deviation (weighted by theθ-sensitivity) of the strikes of the child orders pertaining for each metaorder denoted byσK/F (Fig. 3 and 4). Hence for 5 Figure 1: Market impact on the implied volatility surface for a given maturityT under the eﬀect of buying options with strikes near the money forward. One can notice how this could increase the at the money forward volatilityparameter as emphasized by the red arrows. Figure 2: Market impact on the implied volatility surface for a given maturityT under the eﬀect of buying options with strikes at the right of the money forward and sell options with strikes at the left of the money forward at the same time. One can see how this could increase theat the money forward skewparameter as emphasized by the red arrows. 6 eachθ−metaorder ω the expression ofσθ K/F (ω) is given by σθ K/F (ω) = vuuuuu√ N(ω)−1∑ i=0 Sθ ti(ω) ( Ki/Fti(ω)−µθ K/F (ω) )2 Vθ(ω)− 1 , (4) where µθ K/F (ω) = N(ω)−1∑ i=0 Sti(ω)Ki/Fti(ω) Vθ(ω) (5) is the weighted mean withKi the strikes of the corresponding child orders andFti the forward prices at the instantsti. Figures 3 and 4 are obtained by following the methodology presented in [Said et al., 2018] and brieﬂy recalled in Sec. 4.1. Figure 3: Market impact as a function ofσK/F in the case of theat the money forward volatility metaorders (θ≡ ATMF volatility) 7 Figure 4: Market impact as a function ofσK/F in the case of theat the money forward skew metaorders (θ≡ ATMF skew) A careful scrutiny of Figures 3 and 4 shows that in the case of theat the money forward volatility metaorders, the less diversiﬁed the strikes are, the more important the market impact. It is the opposite in the case of theat the money forward skew metaorders: the metaorders with the higher values ofσK/F match those which present the most important market impacts. Besides as expected, one can note that the average values ofσθ K/F are higher for the at the money skew metaorders. Those observations are in line with the intuitive predictions presented in Figures 1 and 2. The ﬁrst points appearing on the Figures 1 and 2 actually correspond to the shortest metaorders in length and duration, so they are just noisy points. 3.3.1 The ATMF volatility metaorders In this section we focus on metaorders impacting theat the money forward volatilityparameter of the implied volatility model. 3.3.1.1 Data • Study period :1st July 2016 – 30th June 2018 • Order types :Aggressive Limit Orders • Parameter :θ≡ at the money forward volatility • Filters :metaorders ω∈ Ωθ • Number of orders :1,026,197 • Number of metaorders :149,441 8 3.3.1.2 Duration distribution Figure 5: Duration distribution of theat the money forward volatilitymetaorders One can observe that, in agreement with the intuition, metaorders with shorter durations are more frequent (Fig. 5). This histogram is quite similar to the one of presented for the equity aggressive metaorders in [Said et al., 2018]. 9 3.3.1.3 Daily participation rate distribution Figure 6: Daily participation rate distribution of theat the money forward volatilitymetaorders One can note in Figure 6 that metaorders with very high participation rates are evenly repre- sented. 3.3.2 The ATMF skew metaorders In this section we focus on metaorders whose at the money forward skew parameter is the parameter of interest in the implied volatility model. 3.3.2.1 Data • Study period :1st July 2016 – 30th June 2018 • Order types :Aggressive Limit Orders • Parameter :θ≡ at the money forward skew • Filters :metaorders ω∈ Ωθ • Number of orders :1,304,714 • Number of metaorders :174,091 10 3.3.2.2 Duration distribution Figure 7: Duration distribution of theat the money forward skewmetaorders The distribution of the durations of theat the money forward skewmetaorders (Fig. 7) is quite similartothedistributionobservedinFigure5forthe at the money forward volatilitymetaorders. One more time we notice that metaorders with shorter durations are more frequent. 11 3.3.2.3 Daily participation rate distribution Figure 8: Daily participation rate distribution of theat the money forward skewmetaorders One can note in Figure 8 that metaorders with very high participation rates are evenly repre- sented. As already observed in Sec. 3.3.1.3 there is a maximum frequency for metaorders around a certain value closed to the maximum observed in Figure 6. 3.3.3 Comparisons of Volatility and Skew metaorders distributions In Figures 5, 6, 7 and 8 durations and daily participation rates are disclosed as a percentage of reference maximum values relative to the market and BNP Paribas options desk. We will denote⟨T⟩ATMF−vol ref and⟨T⟩ATMF−skew ref these reference durations and ⟨|V| V ⟩ATMF−vol ref and ⟨|V| V ⟩ATMF−skew ref these reference daily participation rates. As ⟨T⟩ATMF−vol ref ≈⟨T⟩ATMF−skew ref and ⟨|V| V ⟩ATMF−vol ref ≈ ⟨|V| V ⟩ATMF−skew ref , we can say that the duration and participation distributions are quite similar for the two types of metaorders. Also the two kinds of metaorders present closed number of orders and metaorders during the same period as disclosed in Sec. 3.3.1.1 and in Sec. 3.3.2.1, so we can conclude that at the money forwardvolatility and skew metaorders must behave in the same manner. Hence 12 the diﬀerences in terms of market impact between the two types of metaorders could be only explained by the way the market reacts to each type of metaorder. 3.4 Notations Notation Deﬁnition ω A metaorder O(ω) Option of the metaorder ω d(ω) Execution day of the metaorder ω t0(ω) Start time of the metaorderω T (ω) Duration of the metaorderω N(ω) Length of the metaorderω Vθ(ω) θ−Sensitivity of the metaorderω Vθ(ω) θ−Sensitivity traded the dayd(ω) on all the options of the universe ϵθ(ω) Sign ofVθ(ω) O(ω) Price ofO(ω) Ωθ Set of all theθ−metaorders identiﬁed by the algorithm Ωθ n∗⊂ Ω Subset of theθ−metaorders withN≥n∗ Table 2:Notations and deﬁnitions Remark 1.As we only consider metaorders that have at least 5 executed transactions,Ωθ = Ωθ 5. 4 Market Impact Dynamics 4.1 Market impact curves The main results related to market impact dynamics are now given, namely, themarket impact curves for theat the money forward volatilityand theat the money forward skewmetaorders. In order to plot the market impact dynamics, a similar bucketing method as the one pre- sented in [Said et al., 2018] is used: Letx, y being two arrays of data and consider for ex- ample that one wants to ploty as a function x. First one starts by ordering the couple of values (xi,yi) according to the values of x and then divides the sorted (by x) distribu- tion (x,y )sorted intoNbucket equally-sized buckets. This procedure yieldsNbucket subsets of the distribution (x,y )sorted, (xi,yi)i∈I1, (xi,yi)i∈I2,..., (xi,yi)i∈INbucket , and for each bucketIk the means values (xk,yk) is computed. The last step of this bucketing method is to plot the points (x1,y1), (x2,y2),..., (xNbucket,yNbucket). To study the dynamics of the market impact, one plots(ϵ(ω)It(ω))ω∈Ω,t0(ω)≤t≤t0(ω)+2T (ω). The ﬁrst sub-intervalt0(ω)≤ t≤t0(ω) +T (ω) corresponds to the execution of the metaorder, whereas the second t0(ω) +T (ω)≤ t ≤ t0(ω) + 2T (ω) corresponds to the relaxation. The study of relaxation presents a degree of arbitrariness, since a choice has to be made as to the elapsed time after the metaorder is completed. For the sake of homogeneity, the relaxation is measured over the same duration as the execution. This choice seems to be a good compromise to cope with two antagonistic requirements, one being to minimize this elapsed time because of the diﬀusive nature of prices – which aﬀect also the parameters –, the other being to maximize it so as to make sure that the relaxation is achieved. Inordertoperformanextensivestatisticalanalysisinvolvingmetaordersofvaryinglengthsin physical andθ−sensitivity time, a rescaling in time is necessary, see e.g. [Bacry et al., 2015] and [Said et al., 2018]. With this convention, all orders are executed on the time interval[0, 1] and 13 parameter relaxation occurs in the time interval[1, 2]. For each metaorderω, one considers[0, 1] instead of[t0(ω),t 0(ω)+T (ω)] ( [0, 1] = [t0(ω),t 0(ω) +T (ω)]−t0(ω) T (ω) ) for theexecution partof ω and [1, 2] instead of[t0(ω)+T (ω),t 0(ω)+2T (ω)] for therelaxation partofω, and then averages using thebucketing method previously described on the time-rescaledθ−sensitivity quantities. In fact theθ−sensitivity time here plays the same role as the volume time in [Said et al., 2018]. Indeed, traders in the options markets buy and sell moresensitivities than the products them- selves in order to reduce the expositions of their portfolio i.e. they think and plan not in terms of options (e.g. calls, puts), but rather in terms of sensitivities of their portfolio. The time variablet∈ [0, 1] in the Figures of Sec. 4 is actually theθ−sensitivity time, i.e., the ratio between theθ−sensitivity of the metaorder already executed at the time of the observation and the totalθ−sensitivity of the metaorder - of course, at the end of the execution part this quantity is always equal to 1. The market impacts disclosed in Figures 9, 10 and 11 in Sec. 4.2 (resp. Figures 12, 13 and 14 in Sec. 4.3) are given in percentage of the same reference value making possible comparisons between them. 4.2 The ATMF volatility market impact dynamics The blue points correspond toθ−values during execution,θ being the at the money forward volatility parameter, and the red points correspond to θ−values observed at identical times starting from the end of the metaorder. Figure 9: Market impact dynamics in the case of theat the money forward volatilitymetaorders (θ≡ ATMF volatility, set :Ω, 1,026,197 orders, 149,441 metaorders, temporary impact: 0.34, permanent impact: 0.17) The analysis clearly yields an increasing, concave market impact curve. However, on can observe that the curve has a linear behavior at the beginning and becomes more concave towards 14 the end. This is explained in particular by the fact that the duration of the metaorders is quite short. The decay observed in the last points (int = 1.0 and t = 2.0) of the curve is an artifact, already discussed in [Said et al., 2018], inducing a bias towards the end of the curve. It can be explained by the larger number of metaorders of smaller lengths and with lower impact. Also note that on the three ﬁgures 9, 10 and 11, the larger the metaorders, the higher the impacts: 0.34, 0.60 and then 0.86 for the temporary market impact. Figure 10: Market impact dynamics in the case of theat the money forward volatilitymetaorders (θ≡ ATMF volatility, set :Ω10, 215,274 orders, 17,286 metaorders, temporary impact: 0.60, permanent impact: 0.39) 15 Figure 11: Market impact dynamics in the case of theat the money forward volatilitymetaorders (θ ≡ ATMF volatility, set : Ω15, 54,203 orders, 2,958 metaorders, temporary impact: 0.86, permanent impact: 0.57) Figures 9, 10 and 11 clearly exhibit the concave shape of market impact during the execution part, followed by a convex and decreasing relaxation. Simply by eyeballing Figures 9, 10 and 11, one can safely assume that relaxation is complete and stable at a level around respectively 0.17, 0.39 and 0.57. However, on Figure 11, relaxation does not seem to be quite smooth. This behaviour for those larger metaorders is essentially due to the fact that the setΩ15 contains much less metaorders. A conclusion to this section is that the concave shape of the temporary impact and the convex relaxation curve concerning theat the money forward volatilitymetaorders are in line with the empirical results observed on the equity markets and higlighted in [Bacry et al., 2015], [Bershova and Rakhlin, 2013] and [Said et al., 2018]. Also, and more interestingly, the market impact and relaxation curves conﬁrm the theoretical ﬁndings of [Farmer et al., 2013] that the impact should be concave and increasing, and that the ﬁnal impact after the execution is per- formed should relax to about two-thirds of the peak impact. Indeed while on the Figure 9 the ratio between thepermanent market impactand thetemporary market impactseems to be much closer to1/2, one can observe in Figures 10 and 11 – which correspond to larger metaorders and therefore more signiﬁcant –, how this ratio gets close to2/3. 4.3 The ATMF skew market impact dynamics The main results related to skew market impact dynamics are now given, namely, themarket impact curvesfor theat the money forward skewmetaorders. To this purpose we use the same bucketting methodintroduced in Sec. 4.1. 16 Figure 12: Market impact dynamics in the case of theat the money forward skewmetaorders (θ ≡ ATMF skew, set : Ω, 1,304,714 orders, 174,091 metaorders, temporary impact: 0.26, permanent impact: 0.10) The green points correspond toθ−values during execution,θ being theat the money forward skew parameter, and the red points correspond toθ−values observed at identical times starting from the end of the metaorder. The results show an increasing, concave market impact curve, with a linear behavior at the beginning. The curve becomes more concave towards the end. As mentioned in Sec. 4.2, this is due to the fact that the durations of the metaorders are quite short. The decay observed in the last points (int = 1.0 and t = 2.0) is the same eﬀect observed in theat the money forward volatility metaorders. Also note that on the three ﬁgures 12, 13 and 14, the larger the metaorders, the higher the impacts:0.26, 0.48 and then 0.77 for the temporary market impact. Figures 12, 13 and 14 clearly exhibit the concave shape of market impact during the execution part, followed by a convex and decreasing relaxation. Simply by eyeballing Figures 12, 13 and 14, one can safely assume that relaxation is complete and stable at a level around respectively 0.10, 0.32 and 0.51. However, on Figure 14, relaxation does not seem to be quite smooth. This behaviour for those larger metaorders is essentially due to the fact that the setΩ15 contains much less metaorders. 17 Figure13: Marketimpactdynamicsinthecaseofthe at the money forward skewmetaorders(θ≡ ATMF skew, set :Ω10, 405,918 orders, 30,932 metaorders, temporary impact: 0.48, permanent impact: 0.32) 18 Figure 14: Market impact dynamics in the case of theat the money forward volatilitymetaorders (θ≡ ATMF skew, set :Ω15, 136,410 orders, 7,260 metaorders, temporary impact: 0.77, perma- nent impact: 0.51) A conclusion to this section is that the concave shape of the temporary impact and the convex relaxation curve concerning theat the money forward skewmetaorders are in line with the empirical results observed on theat the money forward volatility metaorders. Also, and more interestingly, the market impact and relaxation curves conﬁrm the theoretical ﬁndings of [Farmer et al., 2013] that the impact should be concave and increasing, and that the ﬁnal impact after the execution is performed should relax to about two-thirds of the peak impact. Indeed while on the Figure 12 the ratio between thepermanent market impactand thetemporary market impact seems to be much closer to0.4, one can observe in Figures 10 and 11 – which correspond to larger metaorders and therefore more signiﬁcant –, how this ratio gets close to2/3. 5 Square-Root Law 5.1 Volatility and Skew metaorders square-root laws Theresultspresentedinthissectionarecertainlythemostimportantofthearticle. Theyconﬁrm theconsistencyofthe Square-Root Lawalreadyobservedintheequitymarket[Almgren et al., 2005], [Bershova and Rakhlin, 2013], [Gomes and Waelbroeck, 2015], [Mastromatteo et al., 2014], [Moro et al., 2009] and [Toth et al., 2011], the bitcoin market [Donier and Bonart, 2015] and more recently in a short note [Tóth et al., 2016] the authors highlighted that theSquare-Root Law alsoholdsforoptionmarketsaccordingtotheirdeﬁnitionofthe implied volatilitymetaorders whichismoreglobal. Themethodpresentedherewhichreliesonthedeﬁnition4tendstobemore local focusing on the local deformations of the implied volatility surface through the variations of the parameters of the model which are in fact the projections of those local deformations. The Square-Root Lawis the fact that the impact curve should not depend on the duration of 19 the metaorder. Indeed, almost all studies now agree on the fact that the impact is more or less close to be proportional to the square root of the volume executed. Considering options market, which plays the role of an executed volume is in fact theθ−sensitivity executed regarding to a θ−metaorder. However, the so-calledSquare-Root Lawstates much more than that. It basically claims that the market impact does not depend on the metaorder duration. In what follows one plots theθ−market impact normalized by a volatility factorϵθ×Iθ σθ as a function of theθ−daily participation rate ⏐⏐Vθ⏐⏐ Vθ for both theat the money forward volatility (Fig. 15) and theat the money forward skew(Fig. 16) metaorders,σθ being the daily standard deviation of the parameterθ andIθ t =θt−θt0 as deﬁned in Equation (1). One observes that a power-law ﬁt gives exponents for theθ−daily participation rate close to0.5 (≈ 0.56 for theat the money forward volatilitymetaorders and≈ 0.53 for theat the money forward skewmetaorders). In both cases, the analysis shows that our options metaorders, present a market impact following a theoretical curve of the formσ √ R withσ a volatility factor andR a participation rate factor. Those ﬁndings support the idea for a universal underlying mechanism in market microstructure. Figure 15: The square-root law in the case of theat the money forward volatilitymetaorders, power law ﬁt:y∝x0.56,R2 = 0.965. 20 Figure 16: The square-root law in the case of theat the money forward skewmetaorders, power law ﬁt:y∝x0.53,R2 = 0.977. 5.2 Comparisons of Volatility and Skew metaorders square-root laws As already done in Sec. 3.3.3 we are going now to make some comparisons between the square- root laws presented in Sec. 5.1. In Figures 15 and 16 normalized market impacts and daily participation rates are disclosed in percentage of reference maximum values. We will denote respectively ⟨ϵ×I σ ⟩ATMF−vol ref , ⟨ϵ×I σ ⟩ATMF−skew ref , ⟨|V| V ⟩ATMF−vol ref and ⟨|V| V ⟩ATMF−skew ref these reference values. The following relations ⟨ϵ×I σ ⟩ATMF−vol ref ≈ 2× ⟨ϵ×I σ ⟩ATMF−skew ref and ⟨|V| V ⟩ATMF−vol ref ≈ 0.7× ⟨|V| V ⟩ATMF−skew ref , show in comparison to skew metaorders, that lower participation rates is needed to obtain larger normalized impacts in volatility metaorders. Hence altough volatility and skew metaorders present similarities as underlined in Sec. 3.3.3 the market reacts much more easily to metaorders of volatility. This can be explained by the fact thattrading volatility is more common than trading skewin options market. 6 Fair Pricing In this section we deal with the fair pricing condition of our options metaorders. First of all let us deﬁne theS-WAP (sensitivity weighted average parameter) of a metaorderω as the quantity 21 deﬁned by θS−WAP (ω) = N(ω)−1∑ i=0 Sθ i (ω)θti(ω)(ω) Vθ(ω) where t0(ω),...,t N(ω)−1(ω) represent the times of the transactions of the metaorder ω and Vθ(ω) = N(ω)−1∑ i=0 Sθ i (ω). Hence we want to compare θS−WAP − θt0 with θt0+2T− θt0 (Fig. 17 and 18). The red line represents the perfect fair pricing condition as it corresponds to θS−WAP−θt0 =θt0+2T−θt0. It appears from Figures 17 and 18 that the fair pricing condition can reasonably be assumed to hold. This is in line with what has already been observed in the equity market and mentioned in [Said et al., 2018]. One observes also that the greater the absoluteθ−variations, the more one moves away from the perfect fair pricing condition. In agreement with the intuition high variations are generally associated to longer and larger metaorders that are therefore more aﬀected by the diﬀusive nature of the prices. One can note that the fair pricing condition is more eﬀective for theat the money forward volatility metaorders. One reason for this is that tradingvolatility is more common than trading skew on the options market as already mentionned previously. Figure 17: Fair pricing of theat the money forward volatilityparameter in the case of theat the money forward volatilitymetaorders 22 Figure 18: Fair pricing of theat the money forward skewparameter in the case of theat the money forward skewmetaorders For now, we have considered the fair pricing condition by studying the variations of the parameters of the metaorders in question. However, it is more relevant to examine the fair pricing condition by considering the portfolio generated during a metaorder. Let us deﬁne the portfolio value of a metaorderω as the quantity deﬁned by P(ω) = N(ω)−1∑ i=0 |Qi(ω)|Oti(ω)(ω) where t0(ω),...,t N(ω)−1(ω) represent the instants,|Q0(ω)|,...,|QN(ω)−1(ω)| the quantity (posi- tive) andO0(ω),...,ON(ω)−1(ω) the prices of the transactions of the metaorderω. Hence we want to compareP−P t0 Pt0 withPt0+2T−Pt0 Pt0 (Fig. 19 and 20) wherePt0 andPt0+2T are respec- tively the prices of the same portfolio att0 andt0 + 2T. The red line represents the perfect fair pricing condition as it corresponds toP−P t0 Pt0 =Pt0+2T−Pt0 Pt0 . To conclude this section, we observe that the fair pricing seems to be also hold on the options market. This conﬁrms the fair pricing hypothesis introduced in [Farmer et al., 2013] as a universal mechanism concerning the metaorders and their interaction with the price formation process. 23 Figure 19: Fair pricing of the portfolio value in the case of theat the money forward volatility metaorders Figure 20: Fair pricing of the portfolio value in the case of theat the money forward skew metaorders 24 7 Conclusion ThisworkisanempiricalstudyofalargesetofmetaordersinoneofthemainAsianindexoptions market. A new algorithmic deﬁnition of anoptions metaorder has been proposed. Our study contains two distinct groups of metaorders using aggressive limit orders: a set ofat the money forward volatility metaorders, and a database ofat the money forward skewmetaorders. The statistical results based on this deﬁnition show a pretty good agreement with some observations already highlighted in the stock markets:Square-Root Law, Fair Pricing and Market Impact Dynamics. In both cases, the analysis shows that the temporary impact is increasing and concave, with a convex decreasing relaxation phase. More precisely, the price reversion after the completion of a trade yields a permanent impact such that its ratio to the maximum impact observed at the last ﬁll is roughly two-third, as predicted in the paper of [Farmer et al., 2013] and already highlighted empirically on equity markets. 25 References [Almgren et al., 2005] Almgren, R., Thum, C., Hauptmann, E., and Li, H. (2005). Direct esti- mation of equity market impact.Risk, 18(7):58–62. [Bacry et al., 2015] Bacry, E., Iuga, A., Lasnier, M., and Lehalle, C.-A. (2015). Market impacts and the life cycle of investors orders.Market Microstructure and Liquidity, 1(02):1550009. [Bershova and Rakhlin, 2013] Bershova, N. and Rakhlin, D. (2013). The non-linear market impact of large trades: Evidence from buy-side order ﬂow.Quantitative Finance, 13(11):1759– 1778. [Bouchard et al., 2017] Bouchard, B., Loeper, G., and Zou, Y. (2017). Hedging of covered options with linear market impact and gamma constraint. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 55(5):3319–3348. [Bouchaud et al., 2009] Bouchaud, J.-P., Farmer, J. D., and Lillo, F. (2009). How markets slowly digest changes in supply and demand. InHandbook of ﬁnancial markets: dynamics and evolution, pages 57–160. Elsevier. [Brokmann et al., 2015] Brokmann, X., Serie, E., Kockelkoren, J., and Bouchaud, J.-P. (2015). Slow decay of impact in equity markets.Market Microstructure and Liquidity, 1(02):1550007. [Donier and Bonart, 2015] Donier, J. and Bonart, J. (2015). A million metaorder analysis of market impact on the bitcoin.Market Microstructure and Liquidity, 1(02):1550008. [Farmer et al., 2013] Farmer, J. D., Gerig, A., Lillo, F., and Waelbroeck, H. (2013). How eﬃ- ciency shapes market impact.Quantitative Finance, 13(11):1743–1758. [Gomes and Waelbroeck, 2015] Gomes, C. and Waelbroeck, H. (2015). Is market impact a mea- sure of the information value of trades? market response to liquidity vs. informed metaorders. Quantitative Finance, 15(5):773–793. [Loeper, 2018] Loeper, G. (2018). Option pricing with linear market impact and nonlinear black–scholes equations.The Annals of Applied Probability, 28(5):2664–2726. [Mastromatteo et al., 2014] Mastromatteo, I., Toth, B., and Bouchaud, J.-P. (2014). Agent- based models for latent liquidity and concave price impact.Physical Review E, 89(4):042805. [Moro et al., 2009] Moro, E., Vicente, J., Moyano, L. G., Gerig, A., Farmer, J. D., Vaglica, G., Lillo, F., and Mantegna, R. N. (2009). Market impact and trading proﬁle of hidden orders in stock markets.Physical Review E, 80(6):066102. [Said et al., 2018] Said, E., Bel Hadj Ayed, A., Husson, A., and Abergel, F. (2018). Mar- ket impact: A systematic study of limit orders. Market Microstrucutre and Liquidity, 3(3&4):1850008. [Tóth et al., 2016] Tóth, B., Eisler, Z., and Bouchaud, J.-P. (2016). The square-root impact law also holds for option markets.Wilmott, 2016(85):70–73. [Toth et al., 2011] Toth, B., Lemperiere, Y., Deremble, C., De Lataillade, J., Kockelkoren, J., and Bouchaud, J.-P. (2011). Anomalous price impact and the critical nature of liquidity in ﬁnancial markets.Physical Review X, 1(2):021006. 26