Quintet Volume Projection Vladimir Markov vmarkov2@bloomberg.net Olga Vilenskaia ovilenskaia@bloomberg.net Vlad Rashkovich vrashkovich1@bloomberg.net Bloomberg, L.P. in New York, NY Abstract We present a set of models relevant for predicting various aspects of intra-day trading volume for equities and showcase them as an ensemble that projects volume in unison. We introduce econometric methods for predicting total and remaining daily volume, intra-day volume proﬁle (u-curve), close auction volume and special day seasonalities and emphasize a need for a uniﬁed approach where all sub-models work consistently with one another. Historical and current inputs are combined using Bayesian methods, which have the advantage of providing adaptive and pa- rameterless estimations of volume for a broad range of equities while automatically taking into account uncertainty of the model input components. The shortcomings of traditional statistical error metrics for calibrating volume prediction are also dis- cussed and we introduce Asymmetrical Logarithmic Error (ALE) to overweight an overestimation risk. 1 Introduction Accurate volume prediction is important for controlling and optimizing trading execution costs. All types of trading algorithms use volume prediction in order to choose the optimal trading rate and volume execution trajectory (Markov, Mazur & Saltz (2011)). Traders must estimate volume to choose a proper execution algorithm and its front-end parameters, such as order duration or aggressiveness. Portfolio managers are aware that incorrect future volume estimation leads to excessive transaction costs and poses serious constraints on capacity of an alpha-model. Eﬃcient implementation of pre-trade TCA relies on volume prediction as well (Rashkovich & Verma (2012)). While most broker volume prediction algorithms are proprietary and not openly available to traders, there is a need for a generic model that can help traders accurately select the front-end parameters of trading algorithms. There are a number of approaches to modeling intra-day volume. Brownlees, Cipollini & Gallo (2011) proposed a dynamic model of intra-day volumes, taking into account one daily and two intra-day components – one periodic and one dynamic. Chen, Chen, 1 arXiv:1904.01412v1 [q-fin.TR] 2 Apr 2019 Ardell & Lin (2011) proposed a two-component hierarchical model combining partial volume observed up to the time of prediction and dynamics of daily volume changes over time. Bialkowski, Mitchell & Tompaidis (2014) built a model of volume dynamics while developing a trading strategy that tracks VWAP using an autoregressive model for the logarithm of normalized volumes, including explanatory variables such as stock- dependent time-of-day shape factor and a stock-independent day-of-week adjustment factor. Calvori, Cipollini & Gallo (2014) proposed a generalized autoregressive score (GAS) model for predicting volume shares, taking into account an intra-day periodicity pattern and residual serial dependence. They assumed that the volume shares through- out the day follow a Dirichlet distribution with time-varying parameters. Satish, Sax- ena & Palmer (2014) introduced a volume-forecast model dynamically weighting three components: rolling historical average for 15-minute bin trading volume; per-symbol, per-bin ARMA (autoregressive moving average) model reﬂecting the serial correlation across daily volumes; and an additional ARMA model over deseasonalized intra-day bin volume data. Trading volume on option expiration dates compared to regular day for diﬀerent markets was considered in Chiang (2009) for the U.S.; Gupta, Metia and Trivedi (2003), and Vipul (2005) for India; Swidler, Schwartz and Kristiansen (1994) for Norway; and Corredor, Lechon & Santamaria (2001) for Spain. Despite their diversity, the above models have several common components. They combine the historical daily volume component with the intra-day component. They may have seasonal and dynamical sub-components. The autoregressive nature of the volume is captured by ARMA or ARIMA models. We limit our model to continuous component of the trading volume. The block- crossing component of volume requires a diﬀerent approach (Glukhov (2007)). 2 Volume Prediction Methodology A practical model in ﬁnance is always a compromise between mathematical rigor, under- lying assumption about the data and practicalities of serving ﬁnal user needs. Instead of building one complex model, we construct ﬁve simple models (quintet) that work together in an ensemble to increase transparency and interpretability of the model. The model combines: a historical total daily volume model (model one) that is based on the combination of the 20-day geometric average of the daily volume, ARMA component, and special days adjustments; an intra-day volume curve (u-curve) model (model two) that is based on the deep history curve (180 days), curve shift based on the overnight gap and expected total daily volume (functional regression); a close auction model (model three) that is based on geometrical average and the seasonal adjustments for options expiration days. If the intra-day u-curve is stable, which is typical of liquid stocks, we use a Bayesian model that has a form of weighted sum of historical daily volume component and intra- day bin volume observations (model four). If the intra-day u-curve is unstable or noisy, which is typical of illiquid stocks, we use a model that has a form of weighted sum of 2 historical daily volume component and intra-day cumulative volume observation (model ﬁve). As an error metric, we use asymmetric logarithmic error (ALE). 3 Bayesian Inference Financial data are inherently noisy, non-stationary and often have only ﬁnite sample leading to predictions characterized by large uncertainties. The Bayesian approach gives a quantitative framework for ﬁnding the best prediction despite that uncertainty, by assigning each possible state of the world a probability, and using the laws of probability to calculate the best prediction. Formally, Bayesian inference is an application of Bayes’ theorem to update the prob- ability for a hypothesis as more evidence or information becomes available. In this framework, volume V is a random variable that takes on a realized value v once ob- served. V is unobserved but described by some probability distribution that we want to derive from the actual data values v. Denote by θ parameters (such as the mean or the variance of a distribution) that characterize the probability model. The goal is to obtain estimates of the unknown parameters θ given the data v. In Bayesian statistical inference, θ is random as well, possessing a probability distri- bution that reﬂects our uncertainty about the true value ofθ. Because both the observed data v and the parameters θ are assumed to be random, we can model the joint proba- bility of the parameters and the data as a function of the conditional distribution of the data given the parameters and the prior distribution of the parameters. p(v,θ ) =p(v|θ)p(θ), p (v,θ ) =p(θ|v)p(v) (1) It leads to the famous Bayes’ theorem p(θ|v) = p(v|θ)p(θ) p(v) ∝p(v|θ)p(θ) (2) where p(θ|v) is referred to as the posterior distribution of the parameters θ given the observed data v, p(v|θ) is likelihood function, and p(θ) is the prior. The normalization factor doesn’t depend on data parameters θ and is given by: p(v) = ∫ θ p(v|θ)p(θ)dθ (3) The posterior probability is a function of a prior probability and a likelihood function that deﬁnes a statistical model for the observed data. Equation (2) states that our uncertainty regarding the parameters of our model, as expressed by the prior distribution p(θ), is weighted by the actual data via likelihood function p(v|θ) – yielding an updated estimate of the model parameters as expressed in the posterior distribution p(θ|v). Although Bayes’ theorem is mathematically simple, its implementation can be com- putationally expensive. The diﬃculties lie in the normalizing constant p(θ), where the 3 product of the prior and likelihood functions must be integrated over the valid domain of the parameters being estimated. One way to get a tractable solution is to derive pairs of likelihood functions and prior distributions with convenient mathematical properties, including tractable analytic solutions to the integral. Namely, if the posterior distribu- tions p(θ|x) are in the same family as the prior probability distribution p(θ), the prior and posterior are then called conjugate distributions, and the prior is called a conjugate prior for the likelihood function. Taking into account the log-normal approximation of the volume distribution, let us use well-known results for conjugate priors and marginal distribution for normal random variables. 3.1 Log-Normal Distribution of Volume To formulate a model for Baysian inference, we need to specify the likelihood function. Our research shows that log-normal distribution is a good ﬁt for the main body of distribution for both intra-day volume bins and daily volume. In Figure 1, we show a typical example for a mid-cap stock. Alternative distributions discussed in literature Figure 1: Fitting Normal Distribution for log(volume) for ticker CAKE (a) Daily data (b) Intra-day data are q-gamma and Weibul distributions. Although tail behavior may vary, the analytic tractability and overall possession of many desirable properties (which we discuss later) 4 strongly favors a log-normal distribution as a base model for likelihood. The observations that deviate from normality can be ﬁltered out by the Grubbs ﬁlter (Grubbs [1950]). Assuming that volume follows a log-normal distribution means that the logarithm of volume log(V )∼N (µ,σ ) follows a normal distribution. The problem is to estimate pos- terior distribution of the mean µ and standard deviation σ of the expected daily volume given the ﬁnite number of intra-day bin volume observations and the prior information about past daily volumes. Suppose that we are given data that is known to be independent and identically distributed and taken from a normal process with known or unknown variance and unknown mean. We wish to infer the mean of this process. There are two ﬂavors of Bayesian inference in our case: the distribution has known variance σ2 but unknown mean µ; and the distribution has unknown variance σ2 and unknown mean µ. 3.2 Bayesian Inference with Unknown Mean and Known Variance Suppose observations D ={xi} has known variance σ2 but unknown mean µ. The posterior distribution of the mean µ is normal P (µ|D) = N(µ|µp,σp), with posterior mean of µp expressed as a weighted average of the sample mean ¯x and the prior mean µ0 where the weights are proportional to precisions: µp = n¯x σ2 + µ0 σ2 0 n σ2 + 1 σ2 0 (4) and posterior variance σ2 p 1 σ2p = n σ2 + 1 σ2 0 (5) here, ¯x = 1 n ∑n i=1xi (see the Mathematical Appendix). Each observation increases the precision of the posterior distribution by the precision λ = 1 σ2 of one observation. The mean of the posterior µp is a convex combination of the prior µ0 and the maximum likelihood estimator of the current daily volume ¯ x for Gaussian random variables xi , with weights proportional to the relative precisions. If we are interested only in inferences about the mean, and if the sample size is not too small, we can get a reasonable approximation of the posterior distribution by treating the standard deviation as known and equal to the sample standard deviation. A more accurate representation of our knowledge should account for the unknown variance. 3.3 Bayesian Inference with Unknown Mean and Unknown Variance The conjugate prior for mean µ and precision λ = 1/σ2 is normal gamma distribution. The marginal distribution of the meanP (µ|D) (given observationsD ={xi}) is given by the Student’s t-distribution and the estimation of the mean is a simple average between prior µ0 and average of n observations ¯x = 1 n ∑n i=1xi. µp = µ0κ0 +n¯x κ0 +n , (6) 5 whereκ0 parameter is the eﬀective size of the prior sample. The natural values of k0 are k0∈ [0.3− 0.8]Nprior, here Nprior is the number of observations of the historical daily volume (in our case Nprior = 20 and the bin size is ten minutes). 4 Volume Prediction Error Metric The volume prediction error metrics have to take into account the asymmetric risk proﬁle of execution and fat tails of volume distribution. For example, overestimation of the daily volume by a factor of two leads to the same increase in participation rate. If there is an obligation to complete the order and the target participation were 20 percent, the actual participation would be 40 percent, leading to excessive market impact. The conservative estimation of future volume gives more freedom to an execution algorithm and leads to impact savings, especially for orders with slow alpha decay. Also, the log- normal distribution of volume possesses fat tails and the error metric has to be robust to handle large-volume days. To calibrate model parameters, we use Weighted Asymmetrical Logarithmic Error (ALE): ALE = n∑ i=1 wi(Xest i −Xtrue i )· ⏐⏐Xest i −Xtrue i ⏐⏐, (7) where wi(x) = { 1, if x≤ 0 2, if x> 0 (8) and Xi = log(Vi). Thus, ALE is, in fact, an asymmetrical generalization of L1 norm in logarithmic space. In ALE, we use double weights for overestimation errors in order to take into account the asymmetric proﬁle of risk of execution. We note that Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) can be inﬂuenced by tail days and is symmetric, and that Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) metric is risk symmetric as well. The R2 metric has limited value outside of the linear regression framework. To illustrate the practicality of our approach, we use representative samples from the S&P 500, S&P Midcap 400 and Russell 2000 indexes. For our test sample, we sort names by index weight and take half of the top 100 names from S&P 500, 100 mid-range names from S&P Midcap 400 and 100 bottom names from Russell 2000 names. The data range is between July, 2015 and December, 2016. 5 Quintet Volume Projection 5.1 Volume Prior Without any intra-day information, the historical daily volume and its averages are often used as a proxy for today’s expected volume. 6 The 20-day moving average is an industry standard for estimating liquidity of a stock. Moving averages have a tendency to overestimate volume due to memory of large- volume days that happen quite frequently. Corporate news, earnings announcements, option expirations and index rebalancing all can lead to large-volume days. Formally, large-volume days lead to the fat right tail of daily volume distributions. There are multiple views on average. Subjectively, it is the number in the middle or a number that is balanced. Another goal when applying the average is to understand a data set by using a single representative number. Mathematically, for many distributions of numbers there is a native average; the calculation of average depends on the distribution. The arithmetic mean of normal random variables is normal, the geometric mean of log- normal random variables is log-normal, while Cauchy random variables are closed under taking harmonic means. Since it’s more risky to overestimate volume than underestimate it, the geometric average gives a better performance in ALE metrics than does the arithmetic mean. Also, the geometric mean of a log-normal random variables is equal to its median, which represents a typical trading volume and is not inﬂuenced by outliers. As a simple prior estimator of logarithm of total daily volume, an average of the most recent N = 20 log-daily volume observations Xi = log(Vi) is taken µ = 1 N ∑N+1 i=1 Xt−i. In physical space, the prior is Vprior = eµ and is given by a geometric mean (GM) of volume: GM[V ] =eµ =e 1 N ∑N i=1Xi = (V1·V2·...·VN)1/N (9) We note that given the log-normal distribution with parameters µ andσ, the arithmetic mean is given by: E[V ] = 1 N (V1 +V2 +... +VN) =GM[V ]·eσ2/2 (10) According to a well-known inequality concerning arithmetic and geometric means for any set of positive numbers, the arithmetical average is always greater or equal to the geometrical average. Ajusting Prior for ARMA Component Autoregressive–moving-average (ARMA) models provide a description of a stationary stochastic process in terms of two polyno- mials, one for the autoregression and the second for the moving average. The notation ARMA(1,1) refers to the model with one autoregressive term and one moving-average term: yt =ϕyt−1 +εt +θεt−1 (11) Here, yt =Xt−µt, Xt = log(Vt) – logarithm of total daily trading volume of day t, µt is N = 20-day moving average: µt = 1 N ∑N i=1Xt−i. In this section, subindex t refers to the index of an historical day.To make a volume series (quasi) stationary we substract from log-volume observations Xt the running average µt: yt =Xt−µt. The coeﬃcients ϕ and θ were estimated per stock by minimizing ALE metrics between realized and estimated volume. The ﬁtted parameters are almost universal for the S&P 500 names 7 and only slightly vary by stock, with typical value given byϕ≈ 0.7 andθ≈− 0.3. More complex models of ARIMA(n,p,q ) class do not give signiﬁcant risk metric improvement over ARMA(1, 1). The model contains the AR(1) and MA(1) models; it is instructive to look at MA(1) and AR(1) processes separately to better understand the dynamics that they describe. For an AR(1) process xt =ϕxt−1 +εt with|ϕ|< 1, the eﬀects of ϕ on x are: ε: 0 1 0 0 ... x : 0 1 ϕ ϕ 2 ... (12) The AR(1) model describes autoregressive behavior in which next period’s value should be predicted to be ϕ times as far away from the mean as the previous period’s value. For an MA(1) process, xt =εt +θεt−1, the eﬀects of θ on x are: ε : 0 1 0 0 0 x : 0 1 θ 0 0 (13) The lagged values of the forecast errors are called moving-average (MA) terms. After a big volume day where error of prediction yt > 0 is positive, the MA component dumps the prior for the next day due to a negative sign of θ. In essence, the MA part models the response of the market to external shocks such as earning announcements or signiﬁcant corporate news; endogenous trends of volume are modeled by the AR component. An example of ARMA prediction versus 20-day arithmetical average and 20-day geometrical average predictions is shown in Figure 2. Adjusting Prior for Special Days Special days – such as earnings announcements, options expirations, index rebalancing, high overnight price gaps, etc.– may be infor- mative and often lead to higher trading volume. To take this into account, a linear regression with ALE error metrics can be performed: yt = m∑ k=1 βkxk,t +εt, ε t∼N (0,σ 2 ε) (14) Here, yt =Xt−µt, Xt = log(Vt), µt is N = 20-day moving-averageµt = 1 N ∑N+1 i=1 Xt−i, and m is the number of independent variables. The choice of dependent variable yt = Xt−µt allows easy interpretation of the regression coeﬃcientβ as a multiplier for the prior. If the only independent variable x1,t in the regression is the overnight price gap gt, then the gap multiplier ηgap = exp(βgt) for today’s volume is given by: Vt = exp(µt)×ηgap (15) Figure 3 shows a cross-sectional regression (14) of excess logarithmic volume on overnight price gap to volatility for representative sample of S&P 500 index. 8 Figure 2: Arithmetical average, geometrical average and ARMA predictions for IBM US Equity Mar 13 2016Apr 03 2016Apr 24 2016May 15 2016Jun 05 2016Jun 26 2016Jul 17 2016 Date 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4Volume, shares 1e7 actual volume arithm avg prediction geom avg prediction ARMA prediction Figure 3: Cross-sectional regression (14) of excess logarithmic volume on overnight price gap to volatility ratio for S&P 500 index sample 9 5.2 Intra-day Volume Proﬁle: U-curve The separate modeling of the total daily volume level from its intra-day shape (u-curve) increases stability and interpretability of the model. Moreover, the u-curve has its own value as it is used by VWAP-type algorithms. We deﬁne intra-day proﬁle u(t) (u-curve) as the fraction of the day’s volume that has been traded during i-th bin at time t. The cumulative sum of u-curve c(t)(c-curve) is the fraction of the day’s volume that has been traded from market open until time t: c(t) = V (t) V (T ), u (t) =c(t)−c(t− 1) (16) Here, V (T ) is the total daily trading volume and V (t) is the total volume traded up to time t. In this section, subindex t refers to the index of an intraday-bin. The volume curvesc(t) and u(t) are known only after the close, so the estimated ˆc(t) and ˆu(t) have to be used to make predictions. The intra-day volume proﬁle tends to be stable and on average does not change signiﬁcantly over time. A plain approach to obtain an u-curve estimator is to take an average u-curve estimated over a prolonged historic period, e.g. the last 180 days. F unctional Regression for U-curve. Functional Data Analysis (FDA) deals with the analysis and theory of data that are in the form of functions. In functional regres- sion, responses or covariates are functional or vector data. In this section, we model dependence of cumulative u-curve c(t) on overnight price gap and quantile level of daily volume: ci(t) =β0(t) + m∑ k=1 βk(t)xk,i +εi(t), ε i(t)∼N (0,σ 2 ε) (17) here i = 1,...,n - i-th day from n historical days available; t = t0,...,T - t-th bin of current day; m is the number of independent variables; xk,i – k-th independent scalar predictor on day i; βk(t) - partial eﬀect of predictor xk on the response at time t. For visualization purposes, we perform two separate functional regressions: for overnight price gap and for the total daily trading volume percentile. In the ﬁrst regression, we use the overnight price gap as an independent external parameter xk. The gap is deﬁned as the relative diﬀerence between the current day open price and the previous day closing price over the 20-day price volatility. According to the regression (17) for the vast majority of securities, the intra-day volume proﬁle has higher values in the beginning of the day for days with higher ratios of overnight price gap to price volatility. It means that for high-overnight-price-gap days, the intra-day volume proﬁle changes from U-shape closer to inverted J-shape. Figure 4 shows average cumulative intra-day volume proﬁles for diﬀerent values of overnight price gap to price volatility for the S&P 500, S&P Mid-cap 400 and Russell 2000 indexes representative samples. 10 Figure 4: Cumulative volume proﬁles by overnight price gap to volatility for the S&P 500, S&P Midcap 400, and Russell 2000 indexes samples 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 number of 10-min bins since market open 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0cumulative u-curve value gap/vlt=0 gap/vlt=1 gap/vlt=2 gap/vlt=3 gap/vlt=4 (a) S&P 500 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 number of 10-min bins since market open 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2cumulative u-curve value gap/vlt=0 gap/vlt=1 gap/vlt=2 gap/vlt=3 gap/vlt=4 (b) S&P Midcap 400 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 number of 10-min bins since market open 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0cumulative u-curve value gap/vlt=0 gap/vlt=1 gap/vlt=2 gap/vlt=3 gap/vlt=4 (c) Russell 2000 In Figure 5, there are average coeﬃcients of the functional regression (17) for S&P 500 index representative sample on a single independent variable - overnight price gap: ci(t) =β0(t) +β1(t)gi +εi(t), ε i(t)∼N (0,σ 2 ε), (18) here gi is the overnight price gap to volatility on day i. Higher value of β1 in the beginning of the trading day means that a higher overnight price gap results in a higher volume rise for the ﬁrst bins of the trading day than for the last ones. Figure 5: Average coeﬃcients of functional regression for S&P 500 index 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 number of 10-minute bins since market open 0.000 0.005 0.010 0.015 0.020 0.025 0.030 0.035b1 b1 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 b0 b0 Similar to the regression on overnight price gap, the regression on total daily trading volume percentile (the percentage of historical days for which total daily trading volume is lower than for the current day) indicates that for high-volume days the intra-day volume proﬁle changes from U-shape closer to an inverted J-shape. Figure 6 oﬀers average cumulative intra-day volume proﬁles for diﬀerent values of total daily trading volume percentiles for S&P 500, S&P Midcap 400 and Russell 2000 indexes representative samples. 11 Figure 6: Cumulative volume proﬁles by total daily trading volume percentile for the S&P 500, S&P Mid-cap 400, and Russell 2000 indexes 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 number of 10-min bins since market open 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2cumulative u-curve value 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% (a) S&P 500 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 number of 10-min bins since market open 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2cumulative u-curve value 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% (b) S&P Midcap 400 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 number of 10-min bins since market open 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2cumulative u-curve value 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% (c) Russell 2000 The dependence of the shape of the u-curve on total daily volume can be used to update the shape of u-curve intra-day based on total daily volume predictions. Although we plot the aggregated results only, the regression (17) coeﬃcients are often stock-dependent. 5.3 Volume Model for Liquid Securities: Intra-day Bin Model For liquid securities, the intra-day prediction for the daily volume x(j) based on obser- vation of volume traded in bin j v(j) is given by: x(j) = log (v(j) ˆu(j) ) (19) Note that we use the estimated u-curve ˆu, not the true one which becomes known only after the day closes. It shows the value of modeling u-curve discussed in the previous section. In the beginning of the day, the variance of intra-day observations is unknown and the log-daily volume after n bins is estimated using formula (6): µ(n) = µ0κ0 +n¯x κ0 +n , (20) where κ0 parameter is the eﬀective size of the prior sample. The optimal value of k0 is bin size-, market cap- and country-dependent. The natural values of k0 are within range k0∈ [0.3− 0.8]Nprior. For example, for liquid names in the U.S. and 10-minutes bins, we use k0 = 0.5. After there are enough observations to estimate the variance Σ 2 of intra-day observations x, formula (4) is used and the estimated log-daily volume is given by: µ(n) = n¯x Σ2 + µ0 σ2 0 n Σ2 + 1 σ2 0 (21) Here µ0 and σ2 0 are mean and variance of the logarithmic prior, and ¯ x and Σ 2 are mean and variance of n current-day estimates x(n) deﬁned by the Formula (19). 12 5.4 Volume Model for Illiquid Securities: Historical Cumulative Model There may be cases when calculating total daily volume estimators based on each par- ticular bin is not optimal (e.g., when the data is sparse, not very stable, etc.) Illiquid stocks often have bars with zero volume, making u-curve erratic. In such case, use of the cumulative curve for forming intra-day observations looks more promising. Let’s deﬁne as z(i) the log of daily volume based on the estimated cumulative u-curve ˆc(i) and cumulative intraday volume up to time i V(i) z(i) = log (V (i) ˆc(i) ) (22) The estimate of the log-daily volume in the historical cumulative model after n bins is given by: µ(n) = µ0 σ2 0 + z(n) ¯Ω2(n) 1 σ2 0 + 1 ¯Ω2(n) (23) Here Ω2(n) is a dispersion of daily prediction on time n usingz(n) over the lastM days: Ω2(n) = 1 M M∑ I=1 (z(I)(n)−X(I)− (z(I)(n)−X(I)))2 (24) here X(I) is the total daily volume of day I. 5.5 Auction Volume Prediction The volume transacted at the closing auction represents an important and signiﬁcant fraction of the daily volume. Both absolute auction volume and the volume at the close measured as a proportion of the total volume of the day are highly volatile and hard to predict. The close auction price is deﬁned by the price that maximizes the number of crossed shares. Given that the order size submitted by a trader is small relative to the typical auction volume (that minimizes the risk to aﬀecting the closing price) and the rest of the order ﬂow is random, there is a high probability that the auction price will be near to the close price of the continuous session. A number of traders use close price as a benchmark and any deviation from it represents a risk for them. The close auction allocation has to be decided in advance and thus the simplest (and most robust) strategy is to submit a ﬁxed percentage of the predicted volume. Stone, G., T. Kingsley, G. Kan [2015] recommend following a particular ”rule of thumb” to minimize the price impact during the close auction: take the lesser of 12 percent of the predicted closing auction volume and 12 percent of your order and allocate that share amount to the closing auction. ALE metrics provides a trade-oﬀ between a reasonable prediction quality and risk of overestimation that matches the objectives of the ﬁxed percentage strategy. 13 As a base prediction of the close auction volume, we take 20-day geometric average. In some cases the ALE error can be slightly (within 5 percent) improved by an ARMA model. Unfortunately, the ARMA signal is weak and doesn’t justify the increase in complexity of the model. In general, the close-auction volume increases around major option and future expi- rations and rolls and index rebalancing. In the U.S., the most noticeable spike of auction volume is seen during triple witching days. Triple witching day is the third Friday of every March, June, September, and December. On those days, the market experiences the simultaneous expirations of stock market index futures,stock market index options and stock options. Figure 7 gives a typical example of closing auction volumes. Figure 7: Closing Auction Volume for IBM US Equity To take the seasonality into account, we perform a linear regression: yt =βdt +εt, ε t∼N (0,σ 2 ε) (25) Here yt = Xt−µt is the excess log-auction volume over the average; Xt = log(Va t ) - log-auction volume; µt - average log-auction volume over the previous 20 days; and dt - dummy variable for the quarterly option expiration days. It allows us to calculate the option expiration dates multiplier ηa = exp(βdt) for today’s auction volume: Va t = exp(µa t )×ηa (26) For regular days, the behavior of the close auction volume is erratic and almost uncorrelated with trading activity until 30 minutes before close. For the special days speciﬁed above, there is a dependence between total daily volume of the continuous session and the close auction volume. In Figure 8 we plot the regression of the ratio of the close auction volume to its geometric average on ratio of the daily volume to its geometric average for the S&P 500 representative sample for special days: 14 Figure 8: Close Auction Volume vs. Daily Volume for S& P 500 Subsample for Special Days Better accuracy for the auction volume can be achieved using real-time auction im- balance information. This information becomes available only a few minutes before the close and can be combined with geometric average prior using the Bayesian technique described above. 6 Forming the Final Prediction The remaining daily volume VD rem is the diﬀerence of estimated daily volume VD and volume traded so far V (t): VD rem(t) =VD−V (t). It is of main interest and is given by: VD rem(t) =eµ(t)[1− ˆc(t)] (27) The estimated volume that is expected to be traded between time t1 and t2 is: V (t1,t 2) = (VD rem(t) +V (t))[ˆc(t2)− ˆc(t1)] (28) A human trader needs to know some practical numbers to set parameters of an execution algorithm, such as the expected urgency or the end time for her order. Knowing the expected volume between t1 andt2 V (t1,t 2) can help a trader to select the expected participation rate in Participation of Volume algorithm: <ρ> t1,t2= S V (t1,t 2) (29) here S is the order size. Alternatively, the predictor allows us to estimate the end time t2 of the execution given a participation rate ρ: t2 = inf{t :S =ρV (t1,t )} (30) 15 Similar analytics can be provided to VWAP traders who are interested in u-curve analytics (how strictly the VWAP schedule should be followed) and urgency recommen- dations. The dispersion information about the u-curve can be shown as well to oﬀer reliability when using VWAP for a given stock. 7 Conclusion We present a set of models relevant for predicting intra-day trading volume for equities. Instead of building a single complex model, we presented an approach where multiple simple models for historical daily volume and intra-day u-curve are calibrated separately and merged together by Bayesian formulae that automatically take into account the uncertainty of the model input components. The models are calibrated using asymmetric error metrics (ALE) that give greater weight to overestimation error. Acknowledgments We thank Andrei Iogansen for guarding the scientiﬁc rigor of our research and Arun Verma for his insightful feedback throughout this project. Our gratitude goes to Arthur Umanski and Russell Langton for agile implementation and continuous support. Mathematical Appendix Our main assumption is that the daily volume and intra-day bins follow a log-normal distribution. A random positive variable V is log-normally distributed if the logarithm of V is normally distributed: X = log(V )∼ N(µ,σ ). For a normal variable X with parameter θ = (µ,σ ) the likelihood of a sample of size n is given by: p(x|θ) = n∏ i=1 fθ(xi) = (2π)−n/2σ−n exp ( − 1 2σ2 n∑ i=1 (xi−µ)2 ) (31) Let’s denote Σ and ¯x - empirical variance and mean of the sample. Then taking into account the identity: n∑ i=1 (xi−µ)2 =nΣ2 +n(¯x−µ)2 (32) The log-likelihood is given by: ln(µ,σ ) =−n 2 log(2π)− n 2 log(σ2)− nΣ2 2σ2− n(¯x−µ)2 2σ2 (33) There are two ﬂavors of Bayesian inference in our case: the distribution has known variance σ2 but unknown mean µ and the distribution has unknown variance σ2 and unknown mean µ (Murphy (2007)). 16 Bayesian Inference with Unknown Mean and Known Variance Suppose the distribution has known variance σ2 but unknown mean µ. Then likelihood as a function of µ is given by: Ln(µ) =p(x|µ)∼ exp ( −n(¯x−µ)2 2σ2 ) (34) The conjugate prior is a Gaussian distribution with mean µ0 and variance σ0. The probability density function of unnormalized prior pprior p(µ)∼ exp ( −(µ−µ0)2 2σ2 0 ) (35) Equating the product of Ln(µ)p(µ) to a probability density function (pdf) of a normal distribution N(µp,σp) gives the mean µp and variance σ2 p of the posterior destribution Pposterior = N(µp,σp). The posterior mean of µp is expressed as a weighted average of the sample mean and the prior mean where the weights are proportional to precisions: µp = n¯x σ2 + µ0 σ2 0 n σ2 + 1 σ2 0 (36) and variance σ2 1 σ2p = n σ2 + 1 σ2 0 (37) here, ¯x = 1 n ∑n i=1xi. Each observation increases the precision of the posterior distribution by the precision λ = 1 σ2 of one observation. If we are interested only in inferences about the mean and the sample size is not too small, we can get a reasonable approximation to the posterior distribution by treating the standard deviation σ as known and equal to the sample standard deviation Σn: σ2≈ Σ2 n = 1 n n∑ i=1 (xi− ¯x)2 (38) A more accurate representation of our knowledge should account for the unknown vari- ance (or precision). Bayesian Inference with Unknown Mean and Unknown Variance The conjugate prior for mean µ and precisionλ = 1/σ2 is a normal gamma distribution: pprior(µ,λ ) =N(µ|µ0, (κ0λ0)−1)Gamma(λ|α0,β 0) = = 1 ZNG λα0−1 exp(−β0λ)×λ1/2 exp ( −1 2κ0λ(µ−µ0)2 ) (39) 17 ZNG = Γ(α0) βα0 0 (2π κ0 ) 1 2 (40) hereα0,β 0,µ 0,κ 0 are hyper-parameters. The likelihood of n-observations with mean xn and variance Σn L(x|µ,λ ) = 1 (2π) n 2 λn/2 exp ( −λ 2 [ n(µ− ¯x)2 + n∑ i=1 (xi− ¯x)2 ]) (41) The posterior is given by normal gamma distribution with parameters p(µ,λ ) =NG(µλ|µn,κn,αn,βn) αn =α0 + n 2, βn =β0 + 1 2 n∑ i=1 (xi− ¯x)2 + κ0n(¯xn−γ0)2 2(κ0 +n) (42) µn = µ0κ0 +n¯x κ0 +n , κn =κ0 +n (43) The marginal distribution of mean P (µ|D) is given by t-distribution P (µ|D) =T2αn ( µ|µn, βn αnκn ) ∝ [ 1 + (k0 +n)(µ−µn)2 αnβn ]−n+α0+1 2 (44) The estimation of posterior meanµp is a simple average between priorµ0 and average of n observations ¯x = 1 n ∑n i=1xi. µp = µ0κ0 +n¯x κ0 +n , (45) here, κ0 parameter is the eﬀective size of the prior sample. 18 References [1] Brownlees, C.T., F. Cipollini, G.M. Gallo. ”Intra-Day Volume Modeling and Pre- diction for Algorithmic Trading.” Journal of Financial Econometrics , 9 (2011), pp. 489-518. [2] Calvori, F., F. Cipollini, G.M. Gallo. ”Go with the Flow: A GAS model for Predict- ing Intra-daily Volume Shares.” http://local.disia.unifi.it/wp_disia/2014/ wp_disia_2014_01.pdf [3] Chiang, C.-H. ”Trading Volume and Option Expiration Date.” (2009) https://editorialexpress.com/cgi-bin/conference/download.cgi?db_ name=FEMES09&paper_id=634 [4] Chen, S., R. Chen, G. Ardell, B. Lin. ”End-of-Day Stock Trading Volume Prediction with a Two-Component Hierarchical Model.” The Journal of Trading , (Summer 2011), pp. 61-68. [5] Corredor, P., P. Lechon, R. Santamaria. ”Option-Expiration Eﬀects in Small Mar- kets: The Spanish Stock Exchange.” Journal of Futures Markets , Vol. 21, Issue 10 (October 2001), pp. 905-928. [6] Engle, R.F. ”New Frontiers for ARCH Models.” Journal of Applied Econometrics , 17 (2002), pp. 425-446. [7] Glukhov, V. S. ”Optimal trading in the presence of non-displayed liquidity” The Journal of Trading , Vol. 2007, No. 2 (Fall 2007), pp. 30-37 [8] Grubbs, Frank E. ”Sample criteria for testing outlying observations.” Annals of Mathematical Statistics, Vol. 21, No. 1, (1950), pp. 27-58. [9] Gupta, A., S. Metia, P. Trivedi ”The Eﬀects of Option Expiration on NSE volumne and prices.” (2003) https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id= 619701 [10] Markov, V., S. Mazur, D. Saltz. ”Design and Implementation of Schedule-Based Trading Strategies Based on Uncertainty Bands” The Journal of Trading , Vol. 6, No. 4 (Fall 2011), pp. 45-52 [11] Murphy, K., ”Conjugate Bayesian analysis of the Gaussian distribution” https: //www.cs.ubc.ca/~murphyk/Papers/bayesGauss.pdf [12] Rashkovich, V., A. Verma. ”Trade Cost: Handicapping on PAR” Journal of Trad- ing, Vol. 7, No. 4 (Fall 2012) [13] Satish, V., A. Saxena, M. Palmer. ”Predicting Intraday Trading Volume and Volume Percentages.” The Journal of Trading , Vol. 9, No. 3, (Summer 2014), pp. 15-25. 19 [14] Stone, G., T. Kingsley, G. Kan. ”The 12% Rule For Asia’s Closing Auctions.” http://fixglobal.com/home/the-12-rule-for-asias-closing-auctions/ [15] Swidler, S., L. Schwartz, R. Kristiansen. ”Option Expiration Day Eﬀects in Small Markets: Evidence from the Oslo Stock Exchange.” The Journal of Financial En- gineering, Vol. 3, No. 2, (June 1994) [16] Vipul. ”Futures and options expiration-day eﬀects: The Indian evidence.” Journal of Futures Markets , Vol. 25, Issue 11 (November 2005), pp. 1045-1065 20