Towards Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Limit Order Book Dynamics Jacobo Roa-Vicens 1 2 Cyrine Chtourou 1 Angelos Filos 3 Francisco Rul·lan 2 Yarin Gal 3 Ricardo Silva 2 Abstract Multi-agent learning is a promising method to simulate aggregate competitive behaviour in ﬁ- nance. Learning expert agents’ reward functions through their external demonstrations is hence particularly relevant for subsequent design of real- istic agent-based simulations. Inverse Reinforce- ment Learning (IRL) aims at acquiring such re- ward functions through inference, allowing to generalize the resulting policy to states not ob- served in the past. This paper investigates whether IRL can infer such rewards from agents within real ﬁnancial stochastic environments: limit or- der books (LOB). We introduce a simple one- level LOB, where the interactions of a number of stochastic agents and an expert trading agent are modelled as a Markov decision process. We con- sider two cases for the expert’s reward: either a simple linear function of state features; or a com- plex, more realistic non-linear function. Given the expert agent’s demonstrations, we attempt to discover their strategy by modelling their latent reward function using linear and Gaussian process (GP) regressors from previous literature, and our own approach through Bayesian neural networks (BNN). While the three methods can learn the linear case, only the GP-based and our proposed BNN methods are able to discover the non-linear reward case. Our BNN IRL algorithm outper- forms the other two approaches as the number of samples increases. These results illustrate that complex behaviours, induced by non-linear re- ward functions amid agent-based stochastic sce- narios, can be deduced through inference, encour- aging the use of inverse reinforcement learning for opponent-modelling in multi-agent systems. 1JPMorgan Chase & Co., London, United Kingdom 2Department of Statistical Science, University College London, United Kingdom 3Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Jacobo Roa-Vicens <jacobo.roavicens@jpmorgan.com>. Published as a workshop paper on AI in Finance: Applications and Infrastructure for Multi-Agent Learning at the 36 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright 2019 by the author(s). 1. Introduction Limit order books play a central role in the formation of prices for ﬁnancial securities in exchanges globally. These systems centralize limit orders of price and volume to buy or sell certain securities from large numbers of dealers and investors, matching bids and offers in a transparent process. The dynamics that emerge from this aggregate process (Preis et al., 2006; Cont et al., 2010) of competitive behaviour fall naturally within the scope of multi-agent learning, and understanding them is of paramount importance to liquidity providers (known as market makers) in order to achieve optimal execution of their operations. We focus on the problem of learning the latent reward function of an expert agent from a set of observations of their external actions in the LOB. Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) is a formal framework to study sequential decision-making, particularly relevant for modelling the behaviour of ﬁnan- cial agents in environments like the LOB. In particular, RL allows to model their decision-making process as agents interacting with a dynamic environment through policies that seek to maximize their respective cumulative rewards. Inverse reinforcement learning (Russell, 1998) is therefore a powerful framework to analyze and model the actions of such agents, aiming at discovering their latent reward func- tions: the most "succinct, robust and transferable deﬁnition of a task" (Ng et al., 2000). Once learned, such reward func- tions can be generalized to unobserved regions of the state space, an important advantage over other learning methods. Overview. The paper starts at Section 2 by introducing the foundations of IRL, relevant aspects of the maximum causal entropy model used, and useful properties of Gaus- sian processes and Bayesian neural networks applied to IRL. A formal description of the limit order book model follows. In Section 3, we formulate the one-level LOB as a ﬁnite Markov decision process (MDP) and express its dynamics in terms of a Poisson binomial distribution. Finally, we in- vestigate the performance of two well-known IRL methods (maximum entropy IRL and GP-based IRL), and propose and test an additional IRL approach based on Bayesian neu- Opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors, and do not necessarily reﬂect the view of JP Morgan. arXiv:1906.04813v1 [cs.LG] 11 Jun 2019 Towards Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Limit Order Book Dynamics ral networks. Each IRL method is tested on two versions of the LOB environment, where the reward function of the expert agent may be either a simple linear function of state features, or a more complex and realistic non-linear reward function. Related Work. Agent-based models of ﬁnancial market microstructure are extensively used (Preis et al., 2006; Navarro & Larralde, 2017; Wang & Wellman, 2017). In most setups, mean-ﬁeld assumptions (Lasry & Lions, 2007) are made to obtain closed form expressions for the dynamics of the complex, multi-agent environment of the exchanges. We make similar assumptions to obtain a tractable ﬁnite MDP model for the one-level limit order book. Previous attempts have been made to model the evolution of the behaviour of large populations over discrete state spaces, combining MDPs with elements of game theory (Yang et al., 2017), using maximum causal entropy inverse reinforce- ment learning. Their focus had been around social media data. Recently, Hendricks et al. (2017) used IRL in ﬁnancial market microstructure for modelling the behaviour of the different classes of agents involved in market exchanges (e.g. high-frequency algorithmic market makers, machine traders, human traders and other investors). We draw in- spiration from them, and distinguish two types of agents: automatic agents that induce our environment’s dynamics, and active expert agents that trade in such environment. We focus on inferring the expert agents’ objectives from the point of view of an external observer. Our simpliﬁed MDP model could be seen as a variant of the multi-agent Blotto environment (Borel, 1921; Tukey, 1949; Roberson, 2006; Balduzzi et al., 2019). Blotto is a resource distribution game consisting of two opponent armies having each a limited number of soldiers that need to be distributed across multiple areas or battleﬁelds. Each area is won by the army that has the highest number of soldiers. The winner army is the one that has majority over the highest number of battleﬁelds. This environment is often used to model electoral competition problems where parties have a limited budget and need to reach a maximum number of voters. In our environment, only two areas are used (best bid and ask), but the decisions are conditional to a state, hence the MDP could be seen as a contextual 2-area Blotto variant. Contributions. We propose a multi-agent LOB model which provides the possibility of obtaining transition prob- abilities in closed form, enabling the use of model-based IRL, without giving up reasonable proximity to real world LOB settings. The reward functions we propose have a clear ﬁnancial interpretation, and allow ﬂexible and comparable testing of different IRL methods in a setup that can be scaled to higher dimension versions of the environment. We then provide results for the three IRL methods discussed: max- imum entropy IRL, Gaussian process-based IRL, and our IRL approach based on Bayesian neural networks. Results show that BNNs are able to recover the target rewards, out- performing comparable methods both in IRL performance and in terms of computational efﬁciency. 2. Background 2.1. Inverse Reinforcement Learning We base our IRL experiments on a Markov decision process consisting of a tuple⟨S,A,T,r,γ,P 0⟩.S represents the state space;A the set of eligible actions;T represents the model’s transition dynamics, whereT (s′,a,s ) = p(s′|s,a ) is the transition probability to states′ from states through actiona;r(s,a ) is the unknown reward function we intend to recover; the discount factorγ takes values in [0, 1]; and P0 represents the initial state distribution. Reinforcement learning aims under its general forward for- mulation at ﬁnding an optimal policyπ∗ that maximizes the expected cumulative reward E [∑T t=0γtr(st)|π∗] , where the state-action pairs induced by policy π∗ and transi- tion dynamicsT are denoted in a sequence or trajectory x ={(st,at)}T t=0. On the other hand, inverse reinforcement learning aims at recovering through inference (see Figure 1) an unknown reward functionr(s,a ), where we assumeπ∗(a|s) to be an optimal policy from where a collection of expert demonstra- tionsD ={xn}N n=1 is drawn. However, one of the main difﬁculties of the IRL problem is its ill-posed nature, as there could be more than one optimal policy that explains a given set of demonstrations D (Ng et al., 1999). This ambiguity is handled by the maximum entropy framework (Ziebart et al., 2008). D ={{(sn t,an t )}T t=0}N n=1 MDP\r =⟨S,A,T,γ,P 0⟩ Solve MDP Q(s,a ; ˆrθ),V(s; ˆrθ) IRL RL Optimize w.r .t.θ Evaluate MaxEnt Objective:p(D|ˆrθ) ˆrθ Figure 1. Flow diagram of maximum entropy-based IRL. Maximum Causal Entropy Model. The principle of maximum causal entropy (Ziebart, 2010) assumes that the Towards Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Limit Order Book Dynamics distribution of trajectories generated by the optimal policy followsπ∗(a|s)∝ exp{Q′ (st,at)} (Ziebart et al., 2008; Haarnoja et al., 2017), where Q′ is a is a soft Q-function that incorporates the treatment of sequentially-revealed in- formation, regularizing the objective of forward reinforce- ment learning with respect to differential entropyH(·) as described in Fu et al. (2017): Q′ (st,at) = rt(s,a ) + E(st+1,...)∼π [∑T t′=tγt′ (r (st′,at′) +H (π (·|st′))) ] . The inference problem for an unknown reward function r(s,a ) thus boils down to maximizing the likelihood P (D|r) as in Levine et al. (2011): exp ∑ i ∑ t [ Q ′r si,t,ai,t−log ∑ a′ exp(Q ′r si,t,a′i,t ) ] 2.2. IRL methods considered The three inverse reinforcement learning methods that we will test on our LOB model for both linear and exponen- tial expert rewards are: maximum entropy IRL (MaxEnt), Gaussian processes-based IRL (GPIRL), and our implemen- tation through Bayesian neural networks (BNN IRL). These methods are deﬁned as follows: Maximum Entropy IRL. Proposed by Ziebart (2010), this method builds on the maximum causal entropy objec- tive function described above, combined with a linearity assumption on the structure of the reward as a function of the state features: r(s) = wTφ(s), whereφ(s) :S↦→ Rm is them-dimensional mapping from the state to the feature vector. The IRL problem then boils down to the inference of such w. Gaussian Process-based IRL. Maximum causal entropy provides a method to infer values of the reward function on speciﬁc points of the state space. This is enough for cases where the MDP is ﬁnite and where the observed demonstra- tions cover all the state space, which are not very common. In this context, it is important to learn a structure of re- wards that mirrors as closely as possible the behaviour of the expert agent. While many prior IRL methods assume linearity of the re- ward function, GP-based IRL (Levine et al., 2011), expands the function space of possible inferred rewards to non-linear reward structures. Under this model, the reward function r is modeled by a zero-mean GP prior with a kernel or co- variance functionkθ. If Xf∈ Rn,m is the feature matrix deﬁning a ﬁnite number n ofm-dimensional states, andf is the reward function evaluated at Xf : f = r(Xf ), then f|X,θ∼N (0,Kf,f ) where [Kf,f ]i,j =kθ(xi,xj). The GPIRL objective (Levine et al., 2011) is then maxi- mized with respect to the ﬁnite rewardsf andθ: p(f,θ,D|Xf ) = [∫ r p(D|r)p(r|f,θ,X f )dr ] p(f,θ|Xf ) Inside the above integral, we can recognize the IRL objec- tivep(D|r), the GP posterior p(r|f,θ,X f ) and the prior off andθ. To mitigate the intractability of this integral, Levine et al. (2011) use the Deterministic Training Condi- tional (DTC) approximation, which reduces the GP posterior to its mean function. Bayesian Neural Networks applied to IRL. A neural network (NN) is a superposition of multiple layers con- sisting of linear transformations and non-linear functions. Inﬁnitely wide NNs whose weights are random variables have been proven to converge to a GP (Neal, 1995; Williams & Jacobs, 1997) and hence represent a universal function approximator (Cybenko, 1989). However, this convergence property is not applicable to ﬁnite NNs, which are the net- works used in practice. Bayesian neural networks are equiv- alent networks in the ﬁnite case. BNNs have been the fo- cus of multiple studies (Neal, 1995; MacKay, 1992; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016) and are known for their useful regular- ization properties. Since exact inference is computationally challenging, variational inference has instead been used to approximate these models (Hinton & Van Camp, 1993; Peterson, 1987; Graves, 2011; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016). Given a datasetZ ={(xn,yn)}N n=1, we wish to learn the mapping{(xn→ yn)}N n=1 in a robust way. A BNN can be characterized through a prior distribution p(w) placed on its weights, and the likelihoodp(Z|w). An approximate posterior distributionq(w) can be ﬁt through Bayesian vari- ational inference, maximizing the evidence lower bound (ELBO): Lq = Eq[logp(Z|w)]− KL[q(w)‖p(w)] We parametrizeq(w) withθ and use the mean-ﬁeld vari- ational inference approximation (Peterson, 1987), which assumes that the weights of each layer factorize to indepen- dent distributions. We choose a diagonal Gaussian prior distributionp(w) and solve the optimization problem: max θ Lqθ In the context of the IRL problem, we leverage the beneﬁts of BNNs to generalize point estimates provided by maxi- mum causal entropy to a reward function in a robust and efﬁcient way. Unlike in GPIRL, where the full objective is maximized at each iteration, BNN IRL consists of two separate steps: Towards Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Limit Order Book Dynamics • Inference step: we ﬁrst optimize the IRL objective p(D|ˆr), obtaining a ﬁnite number of point estimates of the reward{ˆr(sn) = ˆrn}N n=1 over a ﬁnite number of states{sn∈S} N n=1 • Learning step: secondly, we use these point estimates to train a BNN that learns the mapping between state features s∈S and their respective inferred reward values ˆr(s)∈ R. The number of point estimates used is the number of states existing in the expert’s demonstrations. This means that we do not use each state in the state space once, but as many times as it exists in the demonstrationsD. This is equivalent to tailoring the learning rate of the Bayesian neural network to match the state visitation counts. 2.3. Limit Order Book Our experimental setup builds on limit order books (LOBs): here we introduce some basic deﬁnitions following the con- ventions of Gould et al. (2013) and Zhang et al. (2019). Two types of orders exist in an LOB: bids (buy orders) and asks (sell orders). A bid order for an asset is a quote to buy the underlying asset at or below a speciﬁed price Pb(t). Conversely, the ask order is a quote to sell the asset at or above a certain price Pa(t). For a certain price, the bid and ask orders have respective sizes (volumes) Vb(t) and Va(t). Each level ( l) of the LOB is represented by one pair (p(l) b (t),v (l) b (t)) or (p(l) a (t),v (l) a (t)), generally ranked in decreasing order of competitiveness. 3. Experiments Experimental Setup. Our environment setup is a one- level LOB, resulting from the interaction ofN (Markovian) trading agents (TA) and an expert agent (EA trader). With- out loss of generality, the EA is regulated to have up to Imax inventory (amount of securities in their portfolio). The EA is unaware of the strategies of each of the other trading agents, but adapts to them through trial and error, as in re- inforcement learning frameworks (Sutton & Barto, 2018). The EA solves the following MDP⟨S,A,T,r,γ,P 0⟩: • State SpaceS. The environment state at time-stept, st, is a 3-dimensional vector: st = [ v(1) b (t) v(1) a (t) i(EA)(t) ]T ∈S (1) where v(1) b (t), v(1) a (t) ∈ R+ are the volumes available in the one-level LOB through the best bid and ask levels, respectively, and i(EA)(t) ∈ {−Imax,..., 0,..., +Imax} is the inventory held by the expert agent at time-stept. • Action SpaceA. The expert agent chooses to take an action at at time-stept, by selecting volumesv(EA) b (t) andv(EA) a (t) to match the trading objectives deﬁned by their reward with those available in the LOB through the other traders, at the best bid and ask, respectively: at = [ v(EA) b (t) v(EA) a (t) ]T ∈A (2) wherev(EA) b (t) +v(EA) a (t)≤ N (see Transition Dy- namics below). The EA is here an active market partic- ipant, which actively sells at the best ask and buys at the best bid, while the trading agents on the other side of the LOB only place passive orders. • Transition DynamicsT . At each time-stept, then-th trader,n∈{ 1,..,N}, places a single order, o(n) t at either side of the LOB (best bid, or best ask). The traders follow stochastic policies: π(n)(·|st;τ (n)) = Ber   e v(1) b (t−1) τ (n) e v(1) b (t−1) τ (n) +e v(1) a (t−1) τ (n)   (3) o(n) t ∼π(n)(·|st;τ (n)) (4) whereo(n) t = 1 corresponds to a trader placing an or- der at the best bid, and o(n) t = 0 at the best ask. By construction, each of the trading agents has to place exactly one order, a bid or an ask, at each time-step. Ber(·) denotes the Bernoulli distribution. The tempera- ture parametersτ = (τ1,...,τ n) are independent and unknown to the expert agent. Hence, the aggregate intermediate bid orders that were generated by the N trading agents, v(TA ) b (t) are the sum ofN independent Bernoulli variables, whose pa- rameter is conditioned on the environment state st and the idiosyncratic temperature parametersτ. Therefore, the number of intermediate bids is dis- tributed according to a Poisson binomial distribution (Shepp & Olkin, 1981), whose probability mass func- tion can be expressed in closed form. Since each of the trading agents (but not the EA) should place exactly one order, the aggregate intermediate ask orders are v(TA ) a (t) = N−v(TA ) b (t). The aggregate bids and asks of the trading agents form an intermediate state called the belief state bt = (v(TA ) b (t),v (TA ) a (t)). Although the EA can only see the last available LOB snapshot contained in st, their orders (at) are executed against the intermediate state bt. This could be com- pared in real world LOBs to a slippage effect. Based on the number of bids and asks ﬁnally matched by the Towards Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Limit Order Book Dynamics EA in the LOB, their inventory is updated as a net long or short position. Considering the above dynamics of the LOB, the transition matrix T , can be calculated exactly. This allows for an exact solution of the MDP. An illustration of the dynamics is provided in Figure 2. • Reward Functionr. The selection of the reward func- tion is crucial, since it induces the behaviour of the agent (Berger, 2013). The reward function can be ei- ther a function of state st and action at; or equivalently, following the dynamicsT , of the next state st+1, (Sut- ton & Barto, 2018). We follow the latter convention, and use the following two reward functions for the expert agent to test each IRL method considered: 1. Linear reward, equal to the EA’s hit count: r(s) = N−v(1) b −v(1) a (5) This reward is equivalent to the hit count of the EA because there are always exactly N orders in the intermediate state bt, and therefore the next state st resulting from the execution of the EA’s active orders at against the TA orders bt, can be effectively seen as the remaining orders, i.e. the number of orders out of a maximum of N that the EA was not able to match. This reward function does not incentivize directly to sell inventory. However, since the episode is terminated when maximum inventory Imax is exceeded, the market maker is implicitly motivated not to violate this constraint, since the simulation will then be terminated and the cumulative reward will be reduced. 2. Exponential reward is a model widely used in economic theory to characterize levels of risk aver- sion (Pratt, 1964). We may use it to deﬁne a non- linear reward function that depends on both the inventory of the EA and their hit count: r(s) = 1−e−α∗(N−v(1) b −v(1) a −β∗|i(EA)|) (6) whereα,β ∈ R≥0 are chosen based on the level of risk aversion of the agent. Both reward structures are illustrated in Figures 3- 4. Results and Discussion. Our experiments are performed on synthetic data, where N = 3 is the number of trading agents with temperaturesτ = (0.1, 0.5, 1.0), andImax = 5. We also consider an episodic setup, where the simulation is terminated either when the maximum inventory is violated, or T = 5 time-steps are completed. The initial state is uniformly sampled from the non-terminal states inS. ρ0 s0 r0 τ b1 a1 s1 r1 b2 a2 s2 r2 a3 ··· ··· ··· Figure 2. Model of our Markov decision process for a one-level LOB environment. The expert agent takes actions at (diamond yellow nodes), conditioned on the observed statesst (shaded circle nodes), receiving reward rt (polygon red nodes). The trading agents, given the deterministic temperature parameters τ (black square node), place orders which comprise the latent belief state bt. The next state st+1 is a function of the expert agent’s action and the latent belief states, which the expert agent should learn to infer in order to optimize cumulative returns. 0 20 40 60 80 100 Discrete State, s 0 2Reward, r Linear Reward 0 20 40 60 80 100 Discrete State, s 100 0 Reward, r Exponential Reward Figure 3. Reward functions (i.e. linear and exponential) with re- spect to the discrete (enumerated) states, e.g. s = 0 corresponds to an inventory of −Imax = −5 and to bid and ask volumes of 0; while s = 1 corresponds to an inventory of -5, a bid volume of 0 and and ask volume of 1, etc. • Performance metric. Following previous IRL litera- ture (Jin et al., 2017; Wulfmeier et al., 2015) we eval- uate the performance of each method through their respective Expected Value Differences (EVD). EVD quantiﬁes the difference between: 1. the expected cumulative reward earned by fol- lowing the optimal policyπ∗ implied by the true rewards; Towards Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Limit Order Book Dynamics 0 1 2 3 Best bid volume, v(1) b 0123 Best ask volume, v(1) a Linear Reward for i(EA) = 0 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0 1 2 3 Best bid volume, v(1) b 0123 Best ask volume, v(1) a Exponential Reward for i(EA) = 0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Figure 4. Reward functions (linear and exponential) with respect to the state features: volume of best bid and ask and expert agent’s inventory. 2. the expected cumulative reward earned by follow- ing the policy ˆπ implied by the rewards inferred through IRL. EVD = E [ T∑ t=0 γtr(st)|π∗] − E [ T∑ t=0 γtr(st)|ˆπ ] (7) Since the expert’s observed behaviour could have been generated by different reward functions, we compare the EVD yielded by inferred rewards per method, rather than directly comparing each inferred reward against the ground truth reward. MaxEnt GPIRL BNNIRL 210 212 214 Number of Demonstrations 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 EVD Linear Reward 210 212 214 Number of Demonstrations 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 EVD Exponential Reward Figure 5. EVD for both the linear and the exponential reward func- tions as inferred through MaxEnt, GP and BNN IRL algorithms for increasing numbers of demonstrations. EVDs are all evaluated on 100,000 trajectories each. The standard errors are plotted for 10 independent evaluations. We run two versions of our experiments, where the expert agent has either a linear or an exponential reward function. Each IRL method is run for 512, 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192 and 16384 demonstrations. The results obtained are pre- sented in Figure 5: as expected, all three IRL methods tested (MaxEnt IRL, GPIRL, BNN-IRL), learn fairly well linear reward functions. However, for an agent with an exponen- tial reward, GPIRL and BNN-IRL are able to discover the latent function signiﬁcantly better, with BNN outperforming as the number of demonstrations increases. In addition to improved EVD, our BNN-IRL experiments provide a sig- niﬁcant improvement in computational time as compared to GPIRL, hence enabling potentially more efﬁcient scalability of IRL on LOBs to state spaces of higher dimensions. 4. Conclusions In this paper we attempt an application of IRL to a stochastic, non-stationary ﬁnancial environment (the LOB) whose com- peting agents may follow complex reward functions. While as expected all the methods considered are able to recover linear latent reward functions, only GP-based IRL (Levine et al., 2011) and our implementation through BNNs are able to recover more realistic non-linear expert rewards, thus mitigating most of the challenges imposed by this stochastic multi-agent environment. Moreover, our BNN method out- performs GPIRL for larger numbers of demonstrations, and is less computationally intensive. This may enable future work to study LOBs of higher dimensions, and on increas- ingly realistic number and complexity of agents involved. References Balduzzi, D., Garnelo, M., Bachrach, Y ., Czarnecki, W. M., Perolat, J., Jaderberg, M., and Graepel, T. Open-ended learning in symmetric zero-sum games. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.08106, 2019. Berger, J. O. Statistical decision theory and Bayesian anal- ysis. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013. Borel, E. La théorie du jeu et les équations intégrales à noyau symétrique. Comptes rendus de l’Académie des Sciences, 173(1304-1308):58, 1921. Cont, R., Stoikov, S., and Talreja, R. A stochastic model for order book dynamics. Operations Research, 58(3): 549–563, 2010. Cybenko, G. Approximation by superpositions of a sig- moidal function. Mathematics of control, signals and systems, 2(4):303–314, 1989. Fu, J., Luo, K., and Levine, S. Learning robust rewards with adversarial inverse reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.11248, 2017. Gal, Y . and Ghahramani, Z. Dropout as a bayesian approxi- mation: Representing model uncertainty in deep learning. In Proceedings of The 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 48 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1050–1059. PMLR, 20–22 Jun 2016. Gould, M. D., Porter, M. A., Williams, S., McDonald, M., Fenn, D. J., and Howison, S. D. Limit order books. Quan- titative Finance, 13(11):1709–1742, 2013. Towards Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Limit Order Book Dynamics Graves, A. Practical variational inference for neural net- works. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 2348–2356, 2011. Haarnoja, T., Tang, H., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Rein- forcement learning with deep energy-based policies. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Ma- chine Learning-V olume 70, pp. 1352–1361. JMLR. org, 2017. Hendricks, D., Cobb, A., Everett, R., Downing, J., and Roberts, S. J. Inferring agent objectives at different scales of a complex adaptive system. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01137, 2017. Hinton, G. and Van Camp, D. Keeping neural networks sim- ple by minimizing the description length of the weights. In in Proc. of the 6th Ann. ACM Conf. on Computational Learning Theory. Citeseer, 1993. Jin, M., Damianou, A. C., Abbeel, P., and Spanos, C. J. Inverse reinforcement learning via deep gaussian process. In UAI. AUAI Press, 2017. Lasry, J.-M. and Lions, P.-L. Mean ﬁeld games. Japanese journal of mathematics, 2(1):229–260, 2007. Levine, S., Popovic, Z., and Koltun, V . Nonlinear inverse reinforcement learning with gaussian processes. In Ad- vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 19–27, 2011. MacKay, D. J. A practical bayesian framework for backprop- agation networks. Neural computation, 4(3):448–472, 1992. Navarro, R. M. and Larralde, H. A detailed heterogeneous agent model for a single asset ﬁnancial market with trad- ing via an order book. PloS one, 12(2):e0170766, 2017. Neal, R. M. Bayesian learning for neural networks , volume 118. Springer Science & Business Media, 1995. Ng, A. Y ., Harada, D., and Russell, S. J. Policy invariance under reward transformations: Theory and application to reward shaping. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth Interna- tional Conference on Machine Learning , ICML ’99, pp. 278–287, 1999. ISBN 1-55860-612-2. Ng, A. Y ., Russell, S. J., et al. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In ICML, pp. 663–670, 2000. Peterson, C. A mean ﬁeld theory learning algorithm for neural networks. Complex systems, 1:995–1019, 1987. Pratt, J. W. Risk aversion in the small and in the large. Econometrica, 32(1/2):122–136, 1964. ISSN 00129682, 14680262. Preis, T., Golke, S., Paul, W., and Schneider, J. J. Multi- agent-based order book model of ﬁnancial markets. Eu- rophysics Letters (EPL), 75(3):510–516, aug 2006. doi: 10.1209/epl/i2006-10139-0. Roberson, B. The colonel blotto game. Economic Theory, 29(1):1–24, 2006. Russell, S. Learning agents for uncertain environments (extended abstract). In Proceedings of the Eleventh An- nual Conference on Computational Learning Theory , pp. 101–103. ACM Press, 1998. Shepp, L. A. and Olkin, I. Entropy of the sum of indepen- dent bernoulli random variables and of the multinomial distribution. In Contributions to probability, pp. 201–206. Elsevier, 1981. Sutton, R. S. and Barto, A. G. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018. Tukey, J. W. A problem of strategy. Econometrica, 17(1): 73, 1949. Wang, X. and Wellman, M. P. Spooﬁng the limit order book: An agent-based model. In Proceedings of the 16th Con- ference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems , pp. 651–659. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2017. Williams, L. R. and Jacobs, D. W. Stochastic completion ﬁelds: A neural model of illusory contour shape and salience. Neural computation, 9(4):837–858, 1997. Wulfmeier, M., Ondruska, P., and Posner, I. Maximum en- tropy deep inverse reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.04888, 2015. Yang, J., Ye, X., Trivedi, R., Xu, H., and Zha, H. Deep mean ﬁeld games for learning optimal behavior policy of large populations. CoRR, abs/1711.03156, 2017. Zhang, Z., Zohren, S., and Roberts, S. Deeplob: Deep con- volutional neural networks for limit order books. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 2019. Ziebart, B. D. Modeling Purposeful Adaptive Behavior with the Principle of Maximum Causal Entropy . PhD thesis, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 2010. AAI3438449. Ziebart, B. D., Maas, A. L., Bagnell, J. A., and Dey, A. K. Maximum entropy inverse reinforcement learning. In AAAI, volume 8, pp. 1433–1438. Chicago, IL, USA, 2008. Disclaimer Opinions and estimates constitute our judgement as of the date of this Material, are for informational purposes only and are subject to change without notice. This Material Towards Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Limit Order Book Dynamics is not the product of J.P. Morgan’s Research Department and therefore, has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements to promote the independence of research, including but not limited to, the prohibition on the dealing ahead of the dissemination of investment research. This Material is not intended as research, a recommendation, advice, offer or solicitation for the purchase or sale of any ﬁnancial product or service, or to be used in any way for evaluating the merits of participating in any transaction. It is not a research report and is not intended as such. Past performance is not indicative of future results. Please con- sult your own advisors regarding legal, tax, accounting or any other aspects including suitability implications for your particular circumstances. J.P. Morgan disclaims any respon- sibility or liability whatsoever for the quality, accuracy or completeness of the information herein, and for any reliance on, or use of this material in any way. Important disclosures at: www.jpmorgan.com/disclosures