Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning for Liquidation Strategy Analysis Wenhang Bao 1 Xiao-Yang Liu2 , Abstract Liquidation is the process of selling a large num- ber of shares of one stock sequentially within a given time frame, taking into consideration the costs arising from market impact and a trader’s risk aversion. The main challenge in optimiz- ing liquidation is to ﬁnd an appropriate modeling system that can incorporate the complexities of the stock market and generate practical trading strategies. In this paper, we propose to use multi- agent deep reinforcement learning model, which better captures high-level complexities compar- ing to various machine learning methods, such that agents can learn how to make best selling decisions. First, we theoretically analyze the Alm- gren and Chriss model and extend its fundamental mechanism so it can be used as the multi-agent trading environment. Our work builds the foun- dation for future multi-agent environment trading analysis. Secondly, we analyze the cooperative and competitive behaviors between agents by ad- justing the reward functions for each agent, which overcomes the limitation of single-agent reinforce- ment learning algorithms. Finally, we simulate trading and develop optimal trading strategy with practical constraints by using reinforcement learn- ing method, which shows the capabilities of rein- forcement learning methods in solving realistic liquidation problems. 1. Introduction Liquidation, as one kind of stock trading, is one of the main functions of ﬁnancial institutes, and the ability to minimize selling cost and manage risk level would be a key indicator of their ﬁnancial performance. Therefore, effective trading strategy is of great importance. Financial institutes are up- dating their strategies recently, by making use of advanced 1Department of Statistics, Columbia University , New York, US 2Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, US. Correspondence to: Wenhang Bao <wb2304@columbia.edu>, Xiao-Yang Liu <xl2427@columbia.edu>. Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright 2019 by the author(s). Figure 1. Liquidation: multiple agents sell stocks in the market, and their selling decisions would affect each others’ selling cost research results or cutting-edge technologies. However, there are several challenges. First, liquidation of a large number of stock shares would have huge impact on the mar- ket, making the environment difﬁcult to predict. Secondly, current methods for static environment ignore the dynamic and interactive nature of the stock market. Thirdly, the trad- ing cost of liquidation depends on the stock market, and researchers are usually not able to collect enough historical events data to obtain practical trading insights. Financial modeling and machine learning are two popular approaches in developing trading strategies, but both of them have limitations. For the past years, ﬁnancial insti- tutes rely on experienced traders to minimize trading cost and manage liquidation risk. Also, researchers build math- ematical and ﬁnancial models to help develop liquidation strategies (Gomber et al., 2011; Brogaard et al., 2010). How- ever, mathematical and ﬁnancial modelling methods rely on their assumptions, which usually over-simplify the problem. Most recently, researchers started to adopt machine learning methods as well. Reinforcement learning (RL), one type of machine learning methods, consists of agents interacting with the environment to learn an optimal policy by trail and error for sequential decision-making problems (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Van Has- selt et al., 2016). While most of the successes of RL have been in the single agent domain, where modelling or pre- dicting the behavior of other actors in the environment is not considered, the obtained trading strategy (Xiong et al., 2018) arXiv:1906.11046v1 [q-fin.TR] 24 Jun 2019 Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning for Liquidation Strategy Analysis ignores the stochastic and interactive nature of the trading market. A more general scenario would be that multiple organizations or customers want to liquidate their assets under certain market conditions at the same time. Therefore, the trading market would have multiple players or institutes with similar objectives (Bansal et al., 2017; Tampuu et al., 2017), and the behavior of one agent would affect other agents’ behaviors (Yang et al., 2018b), as shown in Fig 1. Another scenario would be even if there is only one com- pany working on the liquidation of one stock, but still there could be multiple traders and each of them be responsible for a certain percentage of shares to sell. This calls for the demand of applying multi-agent reinforce- ment learning methods to the ﬁnancial industry, which has not been well-studied as much as single-agent reinforce- ment learning. There are attractive successes of multi-agent deep reinforcement learning in the ﬁelds of gaming playing (Silver et al., 2016; Mnih et al., 2015), robotics and ﬁnan- cial trading system (Yu et al., 2019; Buehler et al., 2019). The main beneﬁt of using reinforcement learning for liqui- dation is that mathematical models or hard-coded trading strategies can be avoided. Reinforcement learning agent would learn the trading strategy on its own. In addition, a simulated environment would allow agents to adapt to different market conditions and trade stocks, and obtain far more experience than human traders could obtain in real ﬁnancial market (Schaul et al., 2015; Foerster et al., 2017). Last but not the least, multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithms can take into account high-level environment complexities (Hendricks & Wilcox, 2014) and derive more practical liquidation strategies accordingly. The main contribution of this paper is the analysis of the multi-agent trading environment, the impact analysis of co- ordinated relationship between agents, and the derivation of liquidation strategies. Ideally, if the multi-agent environ- ment is complex enough to incorporate all potential players’ behaviors, there would be no noise in the stock market, as all orders are generated by players, and all players’ behaviors are modelled systematically by the multi-agent system. We build a simpliﬁed version of the multi-agent environment, which is the foundation of more complicated environments. First, we extend the model proposed by Almgren and Chriss (Almgren & Chriss, 2001) to the multi-agent environment and provide mathematical proofs. We make use of reinforce- ment learning to verify our theorems and conclude with the necessity to use multi-agent reinforcement learning instead of conventional single-agent reinforcement learning algo- rithms to analyze the liquidation problem. Secondly, we demonstrate how agents learn to cooperate or compete with each other by deﬁning proper reward functions, analyze how these agents inﬂuence each other as well as the environment as a whole, which cannot be analyzed by a single-agent environment, but of great importance to ﬁnancial institutes. Thirdly, we derive trading strategies for each agent in a simulated multi-agent environment. This demonstrates the capabilities of reinforcement learning algorithms in learning and developing practical liquidation strategies. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the liquidation problem and reviews the Alm- gren and Chriss model that is used to simulate the market environment. Section 3 introduces the detailed settings of multi-agent reinforcement learning. Section 4 is about the extension of the multi-agent market environment. Section 5 presents the experimental results where we demonstrate how agents would behave in cooperative or competitive re- lationships and how to derive liquidation strategy. Section 6 concludes this paper and points out some future direction. Code is available at: https://github.com/WenhangBao/Multi- Agent-RL-for-Liquidation 2. Problem Description In this section, we ﬁrst describe the liquidation problem and explain why it is feasible to use reinforcement learning algorithms to address it. Then we describe the Almgren and Chriss model or the trading environment. 2.1. Optimal Liquidation Problem We consider a liquidation trader who aims to sellX shares of one stock within a time frameT . Liquidator’s personal characteristics, such as risk aversion levelλ, would remain unchanged throughout the process. The trader can either sell or not sell stocks, but cannot buy any stock during the time frameT . On the last day of the time frame, the liquidation process ends and the number of shares should be 0. Since the trading volume is tremendous, the market priceP will drop during selling, temporarily or permanently, potentially resulting in enormous trading costs. The trader or the representative ﬁnancial institute seeks to ﬁnd an optimal selling strategy, minimizing the expected trading costE(X), or called implementation shortfall, sub- ject to certain optimization criterion. The trader would know all the environment information includes price, historical price and number of trading days remaining. If there are J traders, they would not know other traders’ information. For instance, they would not know other traders’ remaining shares or risk aversion levels. Based on the assumption that the trading would have market impacts as well as that agents and environment are inter- active, it is feasible to train agents in the environment and derive liquidation strategies with reinforcement learning algorithms (Yang et al., 2018a). Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning for Liquidation Strategy Analysis 2.2. Environment Model for the Simulation The problem of an optimal liquidation strategy is investi- gated by using the Almgren-Chriss market impact model (Almgren & Chriss, 2001) on the background that the agents liquidate assets completely in a given time frame. The im- pact of the stock market is divided into three components: unaffected price process, permanent impact, and temporary impact. The stochastic component of the price process ex- ists, but is eliminated from the mean-variance. The price process permits linear functions of permanent and temporary price. Therefore, the model serves as the trading environ- ment such that when agents make selling decisions, the environment would return price information. The price process of the Almgren and Chriss model (Alm- gren & Chriss, 2001) is as follows: • Price under temporary and permanent impact Pk =Pk−1 +στ 1/2ξk−τg (nk τ ),k = 1,...,N whereσ represents the volatility of the stock, ξk are random variables with zero mean and unit variance, g(v) is a function of the average rate of the trading, v = nk/τ during time interval tk−1 totk, nk is the number of shares to sell during time interval tk−1 to tk,N is the total number of trades andτ =T/N . • Inventory process: xtk = X−∑k j=1nj, where xtk is the number of shares remaining at time tk, with xT = 0. • Linear permanent impact functiong(v) = γv, where v = nk τ . • Temporary impact functionh(nk τ ) = ϵ sgn(nk) +η τnk, where a reasonable estimate of ϵ is the ﬁxed costs of selling, andη depends on internal and transient aspects of the market micro-structure. • Parametersσ,γ,η,ϵ , time frameT , number of trades N are set att = 0. 3. Deep Reinforcement Learning Approach We model the liquidation process as a Markov decision process (MDP), and then formulate the multi-agent setting we used to resolve the problem. The training diagram is also covered, which explains how multiple agents interact and learn from environment in details. We use implementation shortfall as the metric of selling cost, and the properties of MDP process allows us to deﬁne the goal as minimizing the expected implementation shortfall. 3.1. Liquidation as a MDP Problem Consider the stochastic and interactive nature of the trading market, we model the stock trading process as a Markov decision process, which is speciﬁed as follows: • States = [r,m,l ]: a set that includes the information of the log-return r ∈ RD +, where D is the number of days of log-return, and the remaining number of tradesm normalized by the total number of trades, the remaining number of sharesl, normalized by the total number of shares. The log-returns capture information about stock prices before timetk, wherek is the current step. It is important to note that in real world trading scenarios, this state vector may hold more variables. • Actiona: we interpret the action ak as a selling frac- tion. In this case, the actions will take continuous values in between 0 and 1. • RewardR(s,a ): to deﬁne the reward function, we use the difference between two consecutive utility func- tions. The utility function is given by: U (x) = E(x) +λV (x), (1) E(x) = N∑ k=1 τxkg(nk τ ) + N∑ k=1 nkh(nk τ ), (2) V (x) = σ2 N∑ k=1 τx 2 k, (3) whereλ is the risk aversion level, and x is the trading trajectory or the vector of shares remaining at each time stepk, 0≤tk≤T . After each time step, we compute the utility using the equations forE(x) andV (x) from the Almgren and Chriss model for the remaining time and inventory while holding parameterλ constant. De- notes the optimal trading trajectory computed at timet by x∗ t , we deﬁne the reward as: Rt =Ut(x∗ t )−Ut+1(x∗ t+1). (4) • Policyπ(s): The liquidation strategy of stocks at state s. It is essentially the distribution of selling percentage a at states. • Action-value functionQπ(s,a ): the expected reward achieved by actiona at states, following policyπ. 3.2. Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning Setting The advantages of multi-agent over single-agent reinforce- ment learning is the ability to incorporate high-level com- plexities in the system. The single-agent environment is a special case where the number of agentsJ = 1. It simpliﬁes Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning for Liquidation Strategy Analysis the problem and would automatically inherit all properties from the multi-agent environment. Following the MDP con- ﬁguration in the last section, we specify our multi-agent reinforcement learning setting as follows: • States s = [ r,m, l] : in a multi-agent environment, the state vector should have information about the re- maining stocks of each agent. Therefore, in a J agents environment, the state vector at timetk would be: [rk−D,...,r k−1,rk,mk,l 1,k,...,l J,k], where – rk = log( Pk Pk−1 ) is the log-return at timetk. – mk = Nk N is the number of trades remaining at timetk normalized by the total number of trades. – lj,k = xj,k Xj is the remaining number of shares for agentj at timetk normalized by the total number of shares. • Actiona: using the interpretation in Section 3.1, we can determine the number of shares to sell for each at each time step using: nj,k =aj,k×xj,k, wherexj,k is the number of remaining shares at time tk for agentj. • RewardR(s,a ): denotes the optimal trading trajectory computed at timet for agentj byx∗ j,t, we deﬁne the reward as: Rj,t =Uj,t(x∗ j,t)−Uj,t+1(x∗ j,t+1). (5) • ObservationO: Each agent only observes limited state information (Omidshaﬁei et al., 2017). In other words, in addition to the environment information, each agent only knows its own remaining shares, but not other agents’ remaining shares. The observation vector at timetk for agentj is: Oj,k = [rk−D,...,r k−1,rk,mk,lj,k]. 3.3. Deep Reinforcement Learning Algorithm We adopt the Actor-Critic (Mnih et al., 2016; Lowe et al., 2017) method that uses neural networks to approximate both the Q-value and the action. The critic learns the Q-value function and uses it to update actor’s policy parameters. The critic network estimates the expected return of a state-action pair. The actor brings the advantage of computing continu- ous actions without the need of a Q-value function, while the critic supplies the actor with knowledge of the perfor- mance. The actor network has state s as input and returns actiona directly. Actor-critic methods usually have good convergence properties, in contrast to critic-only methods. Algorithm 1 DDPG-Based Multi-agent Training Input: number of episodes M, time frame T , minibatch sizeN, learning rateλ, and number of agentsJ 1: forj = 1,J % initialize each agent separately do 2: Randomly initialize critic networkQj(Oj,a|θQ j ) and actor networkµj(Oj|θµ j ) with random weightθQ j and θµ j for agentj; 3: Initialize target network Q′ j and µ′ j with weights θQ′ j ←θQ j ,θµ′ j ←θµ j for each agentj; 4: Initialize replay bufferBj for each agentj; 5: end for 6: for episode = 1,M do 7: Initialize a random processN for action exploration; 8: Receive initial observation states0; 9: fort = 1,T do 10: forj = 1,J %train each agent separately do 11: Select actionaj,t =µj(Oj,t|θµ j )+Nt according to the current policy and exploration noise; 12: end for 13: Each agent executes actionaj,t; 14: Market state changes tost+1; 15: Each agent observes rewardrj,t and observation Oj,t+1; 16: forj = 1,J do 17: Store transition (Oj,t,aj,t,rj,t,Oj,t+1) inBj; 18: Sample a random minibatch of N transitions (Oj,i ,aj,i ,rj,i ,Oj,i+1) fromBj; 19: Set yj,i =rj,i +γQ′ j(st+1,µ′ j(Oj,i+1|θµ′ j |θQ′ j )) fori = 1,...,N ; 20: Update the critic by minimizing the loss: L = 1 N ∑ i(yj,i−Qj(Oj,i,aj,i|θQ j ))2; 21: Update the actor policy by using the sampled policy gradient: ∇θµπ≈ 1 N ∑ i ∇aQj(O,a|θQ j )|O=Oj,i,a=µj (Oj,i) ×∇θµµj(Oj|θµ)|si ; 22: Update the target networks: θQ′ j ←τθQ j + (1−τ )θQ′ j , θµ′ j ←τθµ j + (1−τ )θµ′ j . 23: end for 24: end for 25: end for The Deep Deterministic Policy Gradients (DDPG) algo- rithm (Lillicrap et al., 2016) is one example of an actor- critic method. We will use DDPG to generate the optimal Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning for Liquidation Strategy Analysis execution strategy of liquidation. DDPG uses three skills to make sure it gets converged experimental results: ex- perience replay buffer, learning rate and exploration noise. Experienced replay method (Wang et al., 2016) enables the stochastic gradient decent method and removes correlations between consecutive transitions. Learning rate controls the updating speed of the neural network. Exploration noise addresses the exploration and exploitation trade-off. With these training skills, the agent would learn from trail and error and ﬁnd the optimal trading trajectory that minimizes the trading cost. In other words, we will use the DDPG al- gorithm or Alg. 1 to solve the optimal liquidation problem. 4. Performance Analysis Here we extend the classical environment model to multi- agent scenario for liquidation problem analysis. 4.1. Optimal Multi-agent Liquidation Shortfall Theorem 4.1. In a multi-agent environment withJ agents where each agent hasXj shares to sell within a given time frameT , the total expected shortfall is larger than or equal to the sum of expected shortfall that these agents would obtain if they are in single-agent environment, such that: J∑ j=1 E(Xj)≤E( J∑ j=1 Xj), (6) whereE(X) is the expected implementation shortfall of liquidatingX shares of a stock. Proof. According to the Almgren and Chriss model, (namely, equation (20) in (Almgren & Chriss, 2001)), the optimal expected shortfall is: E(X) = 1 2γX 2 +ϵX + ˜ηφX 2, (7) whereX is the initial stock size andφ is a parameter related with environment setting but unrelated with the stock size X. Therefore, E( J∑ j=1 Xj) = 1 2γ( J∑ j=1 Xj)2 +ϵ J∑ j=1 Xj + ˜η( J∑ j=1 Xj)2φ ≥ 1 2γ J∑ j=1 X 2 j +ϵ J∑ j=1 Xj + ˜η J∑ j=1 X 2 jφ = J∑ j=1 E(Xj). 4.2. Multi-agent Interaction Theorem 4.2. In a two-agent environment where agent 1 has risk aversion level λ1 and agent 2 has risk aversion levelλ2, whereλ1⁄= λ2, and each of them has the same number of stocks to liquidate, the biased trajectoriesx(λ1) andx(λ2) would satisfy that x∗(λ1)⁄= x(λ1), x∗(λ2)⁄= x(λ2), where x∗(λ1) and x∗(λ2) are the optimal trading trajecto- ries when they are the only player in the market. Remark. In a multi-agent environment where each agent has risk aversion level λj, the actual trading trajectory x(λj) would be biased against the optimal trading trajec- tory. Proof. According to (4) of the Almgren and Chriss model (Almgren & Chriss, 2001), V (x) = σ2 N∑ k=1 τx 2 k is irrelevant to either temporary or permanent price changes, wherexk is the remaining shares remaining at timetk. The optimal trading trajectory is of the form: xk = sinh(κ(λ)(T−tj) sinh(κ(λ)T ) X, whereκ(λ) = λσ2 η(1−γτ 2η ). LetX be the total stock size and agent 1 and 2 each has 1 2X shares, the utility function U (x) = E(x) +λ∗V (x) is a quadratic function of the parameters x1,...,x N−1, where λ∗ is the synthesized risk aversion level, x is the trading trajectory, and it could also be written as: U (x) = E(x) +λ1V (x1) +λ2V (x2), where x1, x2 is the trading trajectory for agent 1, 2, respec- tively. Then: ∂U ∂xk = 2τ { (λ1 +λ2 2 )σ2xk− ˜ηxk−1− 2xk +xk+1 τ 2 } , and ∂U ∂xk = 0 is equivalent to 1 τ 2 (xk−1− 2xk +xk+1) = (˜κ∗)2xk (8) with ˜κ∗ = (λ1+λ2) 2 σ2 η(1− γτ 2η ), Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning for Liquidation Strategy Analysis where the tilde denotes an O(τ ) correction; asτ→ 0, we have ˜κ→κ. Then, we know that the solution to (8) is: xk = sinh(κ∗(T−tk)) sinh(κT ) X ⁄= sinh(κ(λ1)(T−tk)) sinh(κ(λ1)T ) 1 2X + sinh(κ(λ2)(T−tk)) sinh(κ(λ2)T ) 1 2X, where the right-hand side is the total number of remaining shares at timet if both agents follow their original trading trajectories, and that is not equal to the total remaining shares at timet under optimal trading trajectory, which is the left-hand side of the function. In other words, their new trading trajectories would be biased. 5. Performance Evaluation We ﬁrst describe the simulation environment in details, and then verify the Theorem 4.1 and Theorem 4.2 by exper- iments. We then use reinforcement learning methods to demonstrate how agents learn to cooperate or compete with each other by deﬁning proper reward functions, and analyze how the relationship would inﬂuence each individual player as well as the environment. Finally, we derive practical trading strategies in a multi-agent environment. We implement a typical reinforcement learning workﬂow to train the actor and critic. We change the single-agent Alm- gren and Chriss model (Almgren & Chriss, 2001) settings to build the multi-agent environment. We adjust reward func- tions to manipulate agents’ relationships. We use Alg. 1 to ﬁnd a policy that can generate the optimal trading trajectory with minimum implementation shortfall. We feed the states observed from our simulator to each agent. These agents ﬁrst predict actions using the actor model and perform these actions in the environment. Then, environment returns their rewards and new states. This process continues for a given number of episodes. 5.1. Simulation Environment This environment simulates stock prices that follow a dis- crete arithmetic random walk, and that the permanent and temporary market impact functions are linear functions of the rate of trading, as in the Almgren and Chriss model (Almgren & Chriss, 2001). We set the total number of shares to 1 million and the initial stock price to beP0 = 50, which gives an initial portfolio value of $50 million dollars. The stock price has12% annual volatility, a bid-ask spread of 1/8, the difference between ask price and bid price, and an average daily trading volume of 5 million shares. Assuming that there are 250 trading days in a year, this gives a daily volatility in stock price of 0.12/ √ 250≈ 0.8% . We use a liquidation time frame of T = 60 days and we set the number of tradesN = 60. This leads toτ = T N = 1 , which means that we will be making one trade per day. These settings are changeable and can be adjusted to same day liquidation as well. For the temporary cost function, we set the ﬁxed cost of selling to be 1/2 of the bid-ask spread, soϵ = 1/16. We set η such that for each one percent of the daily volume we trade, the price impact equals to the bid-ask spread. For example, trading at a rate of 5% of the daily trading volume incurs a one-time cost on each trade of 5/8. Under this assumption we haveη = (1/8)/(0.01× 5× 106) = 2.5× 106. For the permanent costs, a common rule of thumb is that price effects become signiﬁcant when we sell 10% of the daily volume. Here, by ”signiﬁcant” we mean that the price depression is one bid-ask spread, and that the effect is linear for both smaller and larger trading rates, then we haveγ = (1/8)/(0.1× 5× 106) = 2.5× 107. In all our experiments, we run the program for 10000 episodes, unless it is speciﬁed. Also, we use the follow- ing reward deﬁnition: ˜Rj,t = Uj,t(x∗ j,t)−Uj,t+1(x∗ j,t+1) Uj,t(x∗ j,t) , (9) which normalizes the reward. 5.2. Theorem Veriﬁcation 5.2.1. O PTIMAL LIQUIDATION SHORTFALL We ﬁrst train one agent A who would need to liquidate 1 million shares of a stock. Then we train two agents B1 andB2 who have the same targets and X1,X 2 = 0.3, 0.7 million shares, respectively. AgentsA,B1 andB2 have the same risk aversion levelλA =λB1 =λB2 = 1e− 6. As we can see from Fig. 2, the expected implementation shortfall E(A) is larger than the sum ofE(B1) andE(B2). This result justiﬁes Theorem 4.1. The intuition behind The- orem 4.1 and Equation 7 is that the total expected shortfall increases faster than the total number of stock shares. 5.2.2. M ULTI-AGENT INTERACTION Here we would like to analyze the trading trajectory of two agents, or Theorem 4.2 as an illustration. We ﬁrst train agentA1 with risk aversion levelλA1 = 1e− 4 and agent A2 with risk aversion level λA2 = 1e− 9. Both A1 and A2 are trained separately in a single-agent environment. Then we train agent B1 and B2 with risk aversion level λB1 = 1e− 4,λB2 = 1e− 9, respectively, in a two-agent environment. All these agents have the same goal as deﬁned in Section 3. The trading trajectories ofA1,A 2,B 1,B 2 are shown in Fig. 3. Comparing to the single-agent environment, we can see that the trading trajectory ofB1 andB2 are biased. Unlike the Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning for Liquidation Strategy Analysis Figure 2. Comparison of expected implementation shortfalls: there are three agents A, B1 and B2. The expected shortfall of agent A is higher than the sum of two expected shortfalls B1 and B2. Figure 3. Trading trajectory: comparing to their original trading trajectories, their current trading trajectories are closer to each other when they are trained in a multi-agent environment. single-agent scenario, where they can sell their shares inde- pendently, now they have to take into consideration of other players in the market. The selling patterns of other agents would affect their liquidation strategy. The results not only justify Remark 4.2 and Theorem 4.2, it also demonstrates the necessity of using multi-agents reinforcement learning algorithm to derive trading strategy. All traders are inﬂuenc- ing each other when they are executing their own strategy. Therefore, training one agent in a single-agent environment over-simpliﬁes the stochastic and dynamic nature of the stock market, as we have explained in Section 1. 5.3. Multi-agent Coordinated Relationship To analyze the emergence of a variety of coordinated be- haviors, we adjust the rewarding schemes to change the relationship between agents. There are only two agents in this environment for illustration purpose. Each agent would be responsible for selling 0.5 million shares of a stock. They share the same risk aversion level λ = 1e− 6. The only difference between the next two experiments is the deﬁni- tion of the reward functions. Then we compare the sum of expected shortfalls with the expected shortfall trained independently, to evaluate how the relationship would affect the total as well as individual implementation shortfalls. Figure 4. Cooperative and competitive relationships: if two agents are in cooperative relationship, the total expected shortfall is not better than training with independent reward functions. If two agents are in a competitive relationship, they would ﬁrst learn to minimize expected shortfall, and then malignant competition leads to signiﬁcant implementation shortfall increment. 5.3.1. M ULTI-AGENTS COOPERATION In this setting we want to analyze how agents would behave when they are in a cooperative relationship. Therefore, we adjust the reward function as follows: ˜R∗ 1,t = ˜R∗ 2,t = ˜R1,t + ˜R2,t 2 , (10) where ˜R∗ j,t are the new reward functions. Both agents would be rewarded by the sum of their individ- ual rewards. So the two agents would be fully cooperative to minimize implementation shortfall. The result is shown in Fig. 4. First, we notice that the sum of expected shortfall does not change much comparing to training two agents with reward function ˜Rj,t. Secondly, new individual implemen- tation shortfallE∗(x∗ j ) does not change much comparing to the original implementation shortfallE(x∗ j ), where x∗ j is the optimal trading trajectory. 5.3.2. M ULTI-AGENTS COMPETITION In this setting we want to analyze how agents would behave when they are in a competitive relationship. Therefore, we adjust the reward function as follows: if ˜R1,t > ˜R2,t then ˜R∗ 1,t = ˜R1,t, ˜R∗ 2,t = ˜R2,t− ˜R1,t, else ˜R∗ 2,t = ˜R2,t, ˜R∗ 1,t = ˜R1,t− ˜R2,t, end if where ˜R∗ j,t are the new reward functions. In this case, the agent that gets higher reward would keep it, but the agent with lower reward would be penalized. It would receive reward value equal to its original reward mi- Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning for Liquidation Strategy Analysis Figure 5. Trading trajectory: comparing to independent training, introducing a competitor makes the host agent learn to adapt to new environment and sell all shares of stock in the ﬁrst two days. nus the higher reward, which is a negative value. As we can see from Fig. 4 that the sum of expected shortfalls ends up with about twice as they are independent or in cooperative re- lationship. By looking at the snapshot of trading trajectory at 1500 episode and 10000 episode, we notice that at the 1500 episode, these two agents learn to maximize utility func- tion deﬁned in Section 3.1. Both agents perform well and roughly have the same expected shortfall. However, as they are in a competitive relationship, after another 500 episodes of training, one agent learns to ourperform the other, which leads to the signiﬁcant increment of the sum of expected shortfall, or∑2 j=1E∗(x∗ j ) > ∑2 j=1E(x∗ j ). The trading trajectory of the last episode shows that one agent learns to sell all its shares on Day 1. In addition, the expected shortfall for both agents increase, orE∗(x∗ j )>E (x∗ j ). We conclude that not only their overall performance is di- minished, their individual performance is worse as well. None of them is winning from their mutual competition. 5.4. Liquidation Strategy Development We use reinforcement learning algorithm to develop trading strategies, given the trading trajectories of the competitors. Here we introduce an agent who has 0.5 million shares of stocks to sell and has risk aversion level λ = 1e− 9. We have already seen in Fig. 3 that the optimal trading trajectory for such agent would be a straight line, which means it sells a ﬁxed amount of stocks everyday. We train an agent who has another 0.5 million shares of stocks to sell with risk aversion levelλ = 1e− 6. For com- parison purpose, we also draw the optimal trading trajectory when the agent is trained independently in a single-agent environment. As we can see in Fig. 5, if there is no com- petitor, the optimal trajectory shows that the agent would complete the liquidation process in about 20 days. After we introduced the competitor, the trading trajectory completely changed. Now the agent sells all its shares within the ﬁrst 2 days. The agent learns to avoid taking unnecessary risk by selling all shares in a quite short time, and let the competitor agent to bear the execution cost of price drop. 6. Conclusion and Future Work 6.1. Contributions We have shown the single-agent environment over-simpliﬁes the dynamic as well as the interactive nature of the stock market. All orders are generated by individual traders, and these traders act as game players, especially for a systematic trading problem like liquidation. In the present work, we extended the scope of Almgren and Chriss model (Almgren & Chriss, 2001) and used re- inforcement learning method to verify it, which setups the foundation of the multi-agent trading environment. We illus- trate the demand to use multi-agent environments to develop trading strategies. We analyze how fully cooperative and competitive relationship would affect the total and individ- ual implementation shortfalls, respectively. We conclude that cooperative relationship is not better than independent one, and competitive relationship would hurt the overall and individual performance. Finally, we demonstrate the capa- bility of reinforcement learning agent and derived optimal liquidation strategy for the host agent against its competitor. 6.2. Limitations As the goal of this paper is to analyze the environment and agents interaction, we keep simple setting as long as it is reasonable. Therefore, we did not build more complex neu- ral network architectures, and our best expected shortfall after 10000 episodes of training is roughly 20% higher than the optimal expected shortfall derived by the Almgren and Chriss model (Almgren & Chriss, 2001). We can add more dynamic factors in the state vector. Also, advanced back- ground models other than Amlgren and Chriss model could also be considered. While all these methods could poten- tially improve this work, we believe that at this moment they are not necessary for describing the nature of multi-agent trading environments and analyzing agents’ behaviors, for this preliminary analysis of liquidation problem. 6.3. Future Work Development of more realistic trading environment, includ- ing more dynamic factors such as news, general strategy and legal complaints, would make great contributions to ﬁnancial analysis. A potential extension is the study of stock liquidation by considering the optimistic bull or pes- simistic bear (Li et al., 2019b) or the anomaly events (Li et al., 2019a). A potential application would be using pre- dicted agents’ behaviors to predict stock price movements, say LSTM (Li et al., 2019a). Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning for Liquidation Strategy Analysis References Almgren, R. and Chriss, N. Optimal execution of portfolio transactions. Journal of Risk, 3:5–40, 2001. Bansal, T., Pachocki, J., Sidor, S., Sutskever, I., and Mor- datch, I. Emergent complexity via multi-agent competi- tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.03748, 2017. Brogaard, J. A., Brennan, T., Korajczyk, R., Mcdonald, R., and Vissing-jorgensen, A. High frequency trading and its impact on market quality, 2010. Buehler, H., Gonon, L., Teichmann, J., and Wood, B. Deep hedging. Quantitative Finance, pp. 1–21, 2019. Foerster, J., Nardelli, N., Farquhar, G., Afouras, T., Torr, P. H., Kohli, P., and Whiteson, S. Stabilising experience replay for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Ma- chine Learning-Volume 70, pp. 1146–1155. JMLR. org, 2017. Gomber, P., Arndt, B., Lutat, M., and Elko Uhle, T. High- frequency trading. SSRN Electronic Journal, 01 2011. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.1858626. Hendricks, D. and Wilcox, D. A reinforcement learning ex- tension to the almgren-chriss framework for optimal trade execution. In IEEE Conference on Computational Intelli- gence for Financial Engineering & Economics (CIFEr), pp. 457–464. IEEE, 2014. Li, X., Li, Y ., , Liu, X.-Y ., and Wang, C. Risk management via anomaly circumvent: Mnemonic deep learning for midterm stock prediction. In KDD Workshop on Anomaly Detection in Finance, 2019a. Li, X., Li, Y ., Zhan, Y ., and Liu, X.-Y . Optimistic bull or pessimistic bear: adaptive deep reinforcement learning for stock portfolio allocation. In ICML Workshop on Applications and Infrastructure for Multi-Agent Learning, 2019b. Lillicrap, T. P., Hunt, J. J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez, T., Tassa, Y ., Silver, D., and Wierstra, D. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. ICLR, 2016. Lowe, R., Wu, Y ., Tamar, A., Harb, J., Abbeel, O. P., and Mordatch, I. Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 6379–6390, 2017. Mnih, V ., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, et al. Human- level control through deep reinforcement learning.Nature, 518(7540):529, 2015. Mnih, V ., Badia, A. P., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lillicrap, T., Harley, T., Silver, D., and Kavukcuoglu, K. Asyn- chronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1928– 1937, 2016. Omidshaﬁei, S., Pazis, J., Amato, C., How, J. P., and Vian, J. Deep decentralized multi-task multi-agent reinforcement learning under partial observability. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning- Volume 70, pp. 2681–2690. JMLR. org, 2017. Schaul, T., Quan, J., Antonoglou, I., and Silver, D. Priori- tized experience replay.arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05952, 2015. Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C. J., Guez, A., et al. Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484, 2016. Sutton, R. S. and Barto, A. G. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018. Tampuu, A., Matiisen, T., Kodelja, D., Kuzovkin, I., Korjus, K., Aru, J., Aru, J., and Vicente, R. Multiagent cooper- ation and competition with deep reinforcement learning. PloS One, 12(4):e0172395, 2017. Van Hasselt, H., Guez, A., and Silver, D. Deep reinforce- ment learning with double q-learning. In Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2016. Wang, Z., Bapst, V ., Heess, N., Mnih, V ., Munos, R., Kavukcuoglu, K., and de Freitas, N. Sample efﬁ- cient actor-critic with experience replay. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01224, 2016. Xiong, Z., Liu, X.-Y ., Zhong, S., Walid, A., et al. Practical deep reinforcement learning approach for stock trading. NeurlIPS Workshop on Challenges and Opportunities for AI in Financial Services, 2018. Yang, H., Liu, X.-Y ., and Wu, Q. A practical machine learning approach for dynamic stock recommendation. In IEEE International Conference On Trust, Security And Privacy (TrustCom), pp. 1693–1697. IEEE, 2018a. Yang, Y ., Luo, R., Li, M., Zhou, M., Zhang, W., and Wang, J. Mean ﬁeld multi-agent reinforcement learning. In 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, volume 80, pp. 5571–5580. PMLR, 2018b. Yu, P., Lee, J. S., Kulyatin, I., Shi, Z., and Dasgupta, S. Model-based deep reinforcement learning for dynamic portfolio optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.08740, 2019.