Stock market microstructure inference via multi-agent reinforcement learning Johann Lussange Laboratoire des Neurosciences Cognitives, INSERM U960, D´ epartement des ´Etudes Cognitives, ´Ecole Normale Sup´ erieure, 29 rue d’Ulm, 75005, Paris, France. Ivan Lazarevich Laboratoire des Neurosciences Cognitives, INSERM U960, D´ epartement des ´Etudes Cognitives, ´Ecole Normale Sup´ erieure, 29 rue d’Ulm, 75005, Paris, France. Lobachevsky State University of Nizhny Novgorod, 23 Gagarina av., 603950, Niznhy Novgorod, Russia. Sacha Bourgeois-Gironde Institut Jean-Nicod, UMR 8129, D´ epartement des ´Etudes Cognitives, ´Ecole Normale Sup´ erieure, 29 rue d’Ulm, 75005, Paris, France. Laboratoire d’ ´Economie Math´ ematique et de Micro´ economie Appliqu´ ee, EA 4442, Universit´ e Paris II Panth´ eon-Assas, 4 rue Blaise Desgoﬀe, 75006, Paris, France. Stefano Palminteri Laboratoire des Neurosciences Cognitives, INSERM U960, D´ epartement des ´Etudes Cognitives, ´Ecole Normale Sup´ erieure, 29 rue d’Ulm, 75005, Paris, France. Boris Gutkin Laboratoire des Neurosciences Cognitives, INSERM U960, D´ epartement des ´Etudes Cognitives, ´Ecole Normale Sup´ erieure, 29 rue d’Ulm, 75005, Paris, France. Center for Cognition and Decision Making, Department of Psychology, NU University Higher School of Economics, 8 Myasnitskaya st., 101000, Moscow, Russia. (Dated: October 18, 2019) Quantitative ﬁnance has had a long tradition of a bottom-up approach to complex systems infer- ence via multi-agent systems (MAS). These statistical tools are based on modelling agents trading via a centralised order book, in order to emulate complex and diverse market phenomena. These past ﬁnancial models have all relied on so-called zero-intelligence agents, so that the crucial issues of agent information and learning, central to price formation and hence to all market activity, could not be properly assessed. In order to address this, we designed a next-generation MAS stock market simulator, in which each agent learns to trade autonomously via model-free reinforcement learning. We calibrate the model to real market data from the London Stock Exchange over the years 2007 to 2018, and show that it can faithfully reproduce key market microstructure metrics, such as var- ious price autocorrelation scalars over multiple time intervals. Agent learning thus enables model emulation of the microstructure with greater realism. I. BACKGROUND Past research: The ﬁeld of research in ﬁnance and eco- nomics has historically explored various types of quanti- tative models for its statistical inference of stock market data. Among these, we can brieﬂy mention two general classes of models. The ﬁrst and most encountered ones are autoregressive time-series models aimed at prediction of future values from past history [1]. The second one, MAS [2] (agent-based models and related methods such as order book models [3–5], and dynamic stochastic gen- eral equilibrium models [6]), rather pertain to the causal sources of ﬁnancial markets activity. The latter may be applied to both high and low-frequency trading [7, 8] and to the study of supply and demand [9] in the form of game theory [10] and the so-called minority game [11]. From a regulatory point of view, it has an ever-increasing role to play [12], in particular wrt. macroeconomics [13]. New trends : But recent trends have potentially given MAS research in ﬁnance a whole new range of realism, which to our knowledge is yet unexplored. These trends emerge from the association of two present-day major scientiﬁc breakthroughs: i- the steady advances of cog- nitive neuroscience and neuroeconomics [14, 15], and ii- the progress of reinforcement learning due to a general re- newed attention on machine learning methods and espe- cially multi-agent learning [16, 17]. This has been accom- panied on both ends with the emergence of reinforcement learning algorithms incorporating decision-theoretic fea- tures from neuroeconomics [18, 19], and neuroscience models approached from the angle of reinforcement learn- ing [20, 21]. These developments oﬀer a way to go be- yond the former generation of MAS with zero-intelligence agents [22], and their potential ﬁnancial applications [23– 25] have very recently started to be extended to the class of order book models, coupled with reinforcement learn- ing [26]. Our contribution: In order to address this, we have de- veloped a next generation stock market simulator based on a MAS architecture, where each agent represents an arXiv:1909.07748v5 [q-fin.TR] 17 Oct 2019 economic investor trading via a centralised order book. In such a model, the simulated agents have three novel features: i- each agent learns to both forecast and trade by independent reinforcement learning algorithms in a fully autonomous way; ii- each agent learns a pricing strategy for this forecasting and trading that is more or less chartist (i.e relying on market price) or fundamental (i.e relying on intrinsic economical value); iii- each agent can be endowed with certain traits of behaviour, cogni- tion, and learning pertaining to behavioural economics, thanks to the reinforcement learning framework and its direct correspondance with decision theory. These fea- tures provide a whole new level of realism in simulated data and its emulation of real stock markets data. II. STYLISED FACTS Over time, quantitative research has discovered cer- tain patterns in ﬁnancial data, which seem to constrain the domain of the eﬃcient market hypothesis and indi- rectly posit some sort of market memory. These were called stylised facts and gradually discovered over the nineties: Kim-Markowitz [27], Levy-Levy-Solomon [28– 34], Cont-Bouchaud [35], Solomon-Weisbuch [36], Lux- Marchesi [37, 38], Donangelo-Sneppen [39–42], Solomon- Levy-Huang [43]. Their emulation in MAS ﬁnancial research has since then been an active topic of re- search [44–46]. What is remarkable is that these stylised facts can generalise to cross-asset markets, and show re- markable time invariance. Understanding such universal market features also pertains to the exogenous or en- dogenous causes to price formation [47, 48]. Implicit consequences of these stylised facts have fed numerous discussions pertaining to the validity of market mem- ory [49, 50] and the extension of the eﬃcient market hy- pothesis [51, 52]. Their deﬁnite characteristics has varied ever so slightly over the years and across literature, but the most widespread and unanimously accepted stylised facts can in fact be grouped in three broad, mutually overlapping categories that we here sum up: i- Non-gaussian returns : the returns distribution is non-gaussian and hence asset prices should not be mod- elled as brownian random walks [53, 54], despite what is taught in most text books, and often applied in sell- side ﬁnance. In particular the real distributions of re- turns are dissimilar to normal distributions in that they are: i- having fatter tails and hence more extreme events, with the tails of the cumulative distribution being well approximated [50, 53] by a power law of exponent be- longing to the interval [2, 4] (albeit this is the subject of a discussion [55, 56] famously started by Mandelbrot [57] and his Levy stable model for ﬁnancial returns), ii- neg- atively skewed and asymmetric in many observed mar- kets [58], with more large negative returns than large positive returns, iii- platykurtic and as a consequence having less mean-centered events [59], iv- with multifrac- tal k-moments, so that their exponent is not linear with k, as seen in [60–63]. ii- Clustered volatilities: market volatility tends to ag- gregate or form clusters [64]. Therefore compared to av- erage, the probability to have a large volatility in the near-future is greater if it was large also in the near- past [44, 65, 66]. Regardless of whether the next re- turn is positive or negative, one can thus say that large (resp. small) return jumps are likely followed by the same [57], and thus display some sort of long memory be- haviour [49]. Because volatilities and trading volumes are often correlated, we also observe a related volume clus- tering. Indirectly, this has long-range implications on the dynamics of meta-orders, and comprises the square-root impact law [46] (growth in square-root of orders impact with traded volumes). iii- Decaying auto-correlations : the auto-correlation function of the price returns of ﬁnancial time series are basically zero for any value of the auto-correlation lag, except for very short lags (e.g. half-hour lags for in- traday data) because of a mean-reverting microstruc- ture mechanism for which there is a negative auto- correlation [49, 58]. This is sometimes feeding the general argument of the well-known Eﬃcient Market Hypothe- sis [51, 52] that markets have no memory and hence that one cannot predict future prices based on past prices or information [65, 66]. According to this view, there is hence no opportunity for arbitrage within a ﬁnancial market [50]. It has been observed however that certain non-linear functions of returns such as squared returns or absolute returns display certain steady auto-correlations over longer lags [49]. III. REINFORCEMENT LEARNING A. Basic concepts Three variables : We here outline a brief overview of reinforcement learning theory. Unlike supervised or un- supervised learning, reinforcement learning is another paradigm of machine learning based on the deﬁnition of reward or reinforcement. For a thorough study of the subject, we refer the reader to [67–69]. Three main vari- ables must ﬁrst and foremost be speciﬁed for any rein- forcement learning agent: the possible states s∈S of the environment in which the agent evolves and over which it has no control, the possible actions a∈A that the agent can eﬀectively control and perform in its environment, and the reward or reinforcement r∈ R proper to that agent. Note that like most other machine learning ap- proaches, reinforcement learning assumes Markov state signals, a state signal that succeeds in retaining all rel- evant information being said to be Markov, or to have the Markov property if and only if ∀s′,r′ and histories st,at,rt,st−1,at−1,rt−1,··· ,s 1,a 1,r 1,s 0,a 0, we have: Pr{st+1 =s′,rt+1 =r′|st,at} = Pr{st+1 =s′,rt+1 =r′|st,at,rt,··· ,r 1,s 0,a 0}. Three functions: Maximising its total reward over time is the ultimate goal of the agent. In order to do so, it needs to learn an optimal behaviour in that environment, i.e. what are the best actions a to perform for each given state s. For this, a function called the policy: π(s,a ) =Pr (a|s) (1) is initialised with equiprobable actions in the beginning, but updated via exploration by the agent to ﬁnd an opti- mal policy, denoted π∗(s,a ). Hence at time t, the agent tries a new action at in a state st and then observes its associated reward, so as to update the probabilities of π(s,a ) accordingly. In order to gauge and assess the amplitude of this reward, the agent may work with the so-called state-value function : V (s) = E[ ∞∑ k=0 γkrt+k+1|st =s] (2) which is linked with two functions called the transition probabilityPa ss′ =Pr{st+1 =s′|st =s,at =a} and the expected valueRa ss′ = E[rt+1|st = s,at = a,st+1 = s′], where 0 < γ <1 is a discount parameter related to the concept of delayed reward. Or the agent may alterna- tively work with the so-called action-value function : Q(s,a ) = E[ ∞∑ k=0 γkrt+k+1|st =s,at =a]. (3) Three families : The way to learn the optimal policy π∗(s,a ) practically in reinforcement learning is usually separated in several families of algorithms. In the so- called model-based methods (such as Dynamic Program- ming), the agent may after each performed actiona keep record of its associated transition probability P and ex- pected valueR, then compute its state-value functionV , in order to update its policy π. In model-free methods (such as Monte Carlo and Temporal Diﬀerence, which can be both united via eligibility traces in the form of TD(λ)), the agent may simply after each performed ac- tiona keep record of its action-value function Q in order to update its policy π. Thus model-based simply means that the agent keeps a record of the rewards associated with a model it updates of its environnement, while in model-free reinforcement learning, the agent doesn’t keep such a model. Finally, direct policy search methods are sometimes used when the agent bypasses the record of state or action-value functions, and updates the proba- bilities of state-action pairs of the policy after receiving the associated reward directly. Searching the policy space can be done via gradient-based and gradient-free meth- ods. Three features : Like many other machine learning methods, reinforcement learning draws its inspiration from biology: optimal behaviour is thus not learned di- rectly as such but rather a reward (or reinforcement) is predeﬁned and the behaviour is indirectly learned through trial and error, formally deﬁned as an explo- ration vs. exploitation process. For the agent faces a dilemma, namely whether it should exploit a given action it knows yields a good reward, or explore more its envi- ronment and action set so as to ﬁnd even better rewards. Certain methods have been proposed to answer this ex- ploration versus exploitation dilemma, among which the ϵ-greedy method (a small probability ϵ is chosen to ex- plore a random action at each time step while exploiting the best action otherwise; when ϵ = 0 this algorithm is simply called the greedy method), softmax method (the action to explore is not purely random but graded from known best to worse according to a temperature param- eter), or pursuit method (continually pursuing the action that is greedy) are most often encountered. Furthermore a series of actions is sometimes necessary over prolonged periods of time before reaching the reward, and reinforce- ment learning thus deals with the concept of delayed re- ward or temporal credit assignment, formally deﬁned as the sum of discounted rewards over time ∑∞ k=0γkrt+k+1, which we already saw in the previous state-value V (s) and action-value Q(s,a ) functions. Finally, a last cen- tral feature proper to reinforcement learning is the so- called curse of dimensionality , namely that the number of state-action pairs that the agent must explore becomes quickly computationally intractable in practical applica- tions. These aspects of exploration versus exploitation, delayed reward, and dimensionality are central features of reinforcement learning, and active domains of research. B. Fields of research As we just saw, most reinforcement learning research has clustered around these three features of reinforcement learning mentioned above, often with some overlap: i- Exploration vs. exploitation : This dilemma has been addressed by diﬀerent policy learning methods, such as policy gradient methods [70, 71] seeking to optimize the control policy with respect to the return by gradient de- scent, or actor-critic methods [72], where an actor con- trols the behavior of the agent (policy-based reinforce- ment learning) and a critic evaluates the action taken by the agent (value-based reinforcement learning). An- other more recent approach is meta-reinforcement learn- ing [73], which deals with “learning how to learn” in order to improve a faster generalization, especially at diﬀerent time-scales [74] (see also zero-shot or few-shots reinforce- ment learning ).Together with this approach, we should mention transfer reinforcement learning [68], which is to transfer the experience gathered on one task to another, and imitation or apprenticeship reinforcement learning, which is to learn a task from observation of another agent. We can also mention the increasing role played by multi-agent learning and self-play reinforcement learn- ing [75], which deals with learning a policy by playing against another agent that also learns. Multitask rein- forcement learning seeks to learn many tasks and exploit their similarities in order to improve single-task perfor- mance. It is related to the now famous asynchronous reinforcement learning [76], which executes in parallel many instances of an agent while using a shared model in order to obtain data diversiﬁcation, and modular rein- forcement learning [77], which learns the policy of a task by dividing it into smaller subtasks and reconstructing their individual policies. Another well-known approach is Monte Carlo Tree Search reinforcement learning [78], which determines the best action via a tree search relying on random sampling of the search space. We can also mention the important ﬁelds of lifelong reinforcement learning [79], which deals with learning a large amount of sequential tasks, and hierarchical reinforcement learn- ing [80] which regroups the agent actions in more general tasks. Finally, we can name hybrid reinforcement learn- ing [81] (or human-in-the-loop reinforcement learning ), which deals with human interference in the algorithmic learning process in order to improve it (c.f. intelligent driving). ii- Temporal credit assignment : This is an issue that deals with the general speciﬁcation and deﬁnition of the agent’s reward and return. Apart from the aforemen- tioned hierarchical reinforcement learning approach, on- going research to address this diﬃculty includes shaping rewards [82], which deals with incorporating background knowledge on sub-rewards in order to improve conver- gence rates, inverse reinforcement learning [83], which seeks to extract the reward function out of the observa- tion of the (optimal) behavior of another agent. We can also mention homeostatic reinforcement learning [84, 85], which deﬁnes the reward via a manifold of many sub- rewards, and a state-dependent approach to the deﬁni- tion of the agent’s reward [86]. iii- Curse of dimensionality : This issue arises when dealing with the issue of large-scale MDPs, so that the exploration and hence convergence to an optimal policy π∗(s,a ) becomes quickly intractable. In particular, the so-called Q-learning algorithm [87], as part of the more general model-free temporal diﬀerence or TD-learning was a breakthrough for reinforcement learning, because it reduced drastically the number of states to explore: only the pairs (s,a ) need be explored. This curse of dimen- sionality points to the more general problem of function approximation, which recently led to the interface of rein- forcement learning with artiﬁcial neural networks in the form of the now famous end-to-end or deep reinforcement learning [78]. Related to this is the ongoing work on par- tially observable MDP models [88, 89], and adversarial reinforcement learning [90], which deals with modeling the noise and uncertainties in state representation via an adversarial agent applying certain speciﬁc perturbations to the system. IV. MODEL A. General architecture The main simulation parameters are the number of agents I, the number of traded stocks J, the number of simulation time stepsT (we consider a time step to corre- spond to a trading day, a year to correspond to Ty = 252 trading days, a month to Tm = 21 trading days, and a week to Tw = 5 trading days). Usually, we consider statistical features emerging from a number S of simu- lations. We also model the friction costs via broker fees applied to each transaction set at b = 0.01%, an annual risk-free rate of R = 1%, and an annual stock dividend yield of D = 2% according to [91]. The simulation then follows at each time stept the four general steps described below: i- Initialisation of agents parameters : The simulation initialisesI agents and all their individual parameters at t = 0. Each agent represents an individual or corporate investor or trader managing its own portfolio over time t via interaction with the market. This portfolio is made of speciﬁc stock holdings (equity) and risk free assets (bonds). These agent parameters are described in further detail in section B below. ii- Initialisation of fundamentals : As in other mod- els [92, 93], the simulation initialises all market prices at Pj(t = 0) = $100, and generates J time seriesTj(t) as jump processes, which correspond to the prices asso- ciated with the fundamental values of the stocks. We model the topology of these fundamental values out of a metric that is often seen in corporate ﬁnance and com- pany quarterly reports, called theenterprise value (which represents the approximative value at which the com- pany would be bought in mergers and acquisitions for instance), and which we divide by the total number of stock outstanding [94]. These are not fully known by the I agents. Instead, each agent i approximates the val- uesTj(t) of stock j according to a proprietary rule [95] of cointegration κi,j[Tj(t)] = Bi,j(t). The time series Bi,j(t) are hence the fundamental values of stock j over timet according to agenti. Together with such modelled fundamental valuesTj(t), we show on Fig. 1 examples of such enterprise values divided by the number of stock outstanding, for various companies traded on the Lon- don Stock Exchanges, over the years 2006 − 2016. On Fig. 2, we plotted a sample of such modelled funda- mental valuesTj(t), together with their approximation Bi,j(t) by some agents. The average annual number of jumps of Tj(t) is 12 .70± 1.85, the average amplitude (Tj(t)−T j(t− 1))/Tj(t) of these jumps is 5.90± 1.84%, and the average diﬀerence between biased and true values (Tj(t)−B i,j(t))/Tj(t) is 2.37± 1.36% (where ± terms refer to standard deviations). Each agent thus relies on these two sources of information for its stock pricing strategy: one that is chartist, and one that is fundamen- tal. FIG. 1: Examples of fundamental values modelled by T j(t) (black dashed curve) and some agent’s approximation thereof asBi,j(t) (continuous blue, red, and green curves) over a sim- ulated time of one year. FIG. 2: Examples of fundamental values in the London Stock Exchange (cf. symbols as legend) over the years 2006 to 2016 represented by enterprise value divided by the number of stock outstanding (continuous curves), and those generated as J = 4 unscaled time seriesT j(t) (dashed curves) by the simulator at time t = 0. iii- Agents forecasting and trading : Each agent au- tonomously uses two distinct reinforcement learning algo- rithms to interact with the market, each algorithm being described in further detail in section C below. A ﬁrst algorithmFi learns the optimal econometric prediction function for the agent’s investment horizon, depending on speciﬁc local characteristics of the market microstruc- ture and the agent’s fundamental valuation Bi,j(t). It thus outputs this price forecast, which will in turn enter as input the second reinforcement learning algorithmTi. This second algorithm is in charge of sending an optimal limit trading order to a double auction order book [96] at this same time step, based on this prediction and a few other market microstructure and agent portfolio in- dicators. Notably, the transaction order output by Ti is ﬁltered by a function Gi, which ensures that the agent waits and sends a transaction order at the optimal time step. iv- Order book is ﬁlled and cleared : A number J of order books are ﬁlled with all the agents’ trading limit orders for stock j at time step t. All buy orders are sorted by descending bid prices, all sell orders are sorted by ascending ask prices, each with their own associated number of stocks to trade. Then the order book is cleared at this same time step t by matching each order at mid- price between buyers and sellers, starting from the top of the order book to the lowest level where the bid price still exceeds the ask price. Importantly, we then deﬁne the market pricePj(t+1) of stockj at the next time step t as that last and lowest level mid-price cleared by the order book. We also deﬁne the trading volume Vj(t + 1) as the number of stocks j traded during that same time t. Finally, we deﬁne the spreadSj(t+1) of stockj at this time stept as the absolute diﬀerence between the average of all bids and asks. Notice it is this spread Sj(t) that is used as input to each agent’s stock pricing process, and not the traditional bid-ask spread, which is deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the highest bid and the lowest ask. B. Agents parameters LetU(),U{},N (),N{} respectively denote the contin- uous and discrete uniform distributions, and the contin- uous and discrete normal distributions. Each agent i is initialised at step 1 with the following parameters : – Risk-free assets of value Ai bonds(t = 0)∼N (0, 104). This can be seen as bonds or a bank account out of which the agent may long equity, and that will increase when the agent shorts its stocks. – A number of stocks Qi,j(t = 0), drawn from a dis- crete positive half-normal distributionN +{0, 100}, amounting to a value of its stock holdings Ai equity(t = 0) = ∑J j=0Qi,j(t = 0)Pj(t = 0), which the agent may short on the market. – A drawdown limit li∼U (50%, 60%). If the peak- to-bottom percentage decrease since the beginning of the year in the agent’s portfolio net asset value exceeds this drawdown limit li at any time step t, then the agent is listed as bankrupt and unable to interact with the market anymore. – A reﬂexivity amplitude parameterρi∼U (0, 100%), which gauges how fundamental or chartist the agent is in its price valuation, via a weighted aver- age of the agent’s technical forecast of the market price ˆPi,j(t) and its fundamental pricing Bi,j(t). The value of ρi modulates the amplitude of the action aF 2 of the ﬁrst reinforcement learning algo- rithmF (see below). – An investment horizon τi ∼ U{Tw, 6Tm}, corre- sponding to the number of time steps after which the agent liquidates its position. Notice the bounds of this interval correspond to one week and six months in trading days. – A trading window wi∼U{ Tw,τ i}, which will en- ter as parameter to the function Gi computing the optimal trading time for longing a certain quantity of stocks j. – A memory interval hi∼U{ Tw,T −τi− 2Tw}, and corresponding to the ﬁxed size of the rolling interval memorised by the agent for its learning process. – A transaction gesture gi∼U (0.2, 0.8), and related to how far above or below the value of its own stock pricing the agent is willing to trade and deal a transaction. – A reinforcement learning rate, which in our case is modelled by a parameterβ∼U (0.05, 0.20) for both reinforcement algorithmsFi andTi. C. Agent reinforcement learning We now describe further step 3 and its two reinforce- ment learning algorithmsFi (which learns eﬃcient price forecasting) andTi (which learns eﬃcient trading based on this forecast). Each algorithm is individually ran by each agent i following a direct policy search, for each stockj, and at each time step t. By direct policy search, we mean each agent selects and updates the probability associated with each action directly from the policy, and not via any action-value function (cf. GPI theorem [67]). Each algorithm has 729 and 972 potential action-state pairs, respectively. We deﬁne the sets of statesS, actions A, and returns R of these two algorithms according to the following. 1. First algorithm F i Via this ﬁrst algorithm, the agent continuously mon- itors the longer-term volatility of the stock prices ( sF 0 ), their shorter-term volatility (sF 1 ), and the gap between its own present fundamental valuation and the present mar- ket price (sF 2 ). Out of this state, it learns to optimize its price prediction at its investment horizonτi by exploring and exploiting three possible actions via a direct policy search: choosing a simple forecasting econometric tool based on mean-reverting, averaging, or trend-following market prices ( aF 0 ), choosing the size of the past time interval for this forecast ( aF 1 ), and choosing the weight of its own fundamental stock pricing in an overall future price estimation, that is both fundamentalist and chartist (aF 2 ). StatesSF: The ﬁrst reinforcement learning algorithm Fi is deﬁned with a state sF in a state set SF = {sF 0,sF 1,sF 2}, of dimension 27, where eachsF 0,sF 1,sF 2 indi- vidually may take the values 0, 1, or 2. First, each agent computes the variances σL and σS of the prices Pj(t), over the intervals [t− 3τi,t ] and [t−τi,t ], respectively. Then: – The value σL is computed and recorded at each time step in a time series that is continually sorted in ascending order and truncated to keep a size corresponding to agent memory interval hi. The percentile of its present value at time step t sets sF 0 = 0 if it is below 25%, sF 0 = 2 if it is above 75%, and sF 0 = 1 otherwise. The state parameter sF 0 thus gives the agent an idea of the longer-term volatility of the prices Pj(t) of stock j, not in the sense of absolute static thresholds of this longer- term volatility, but of dynamic values depending on the agent’s past history. – The value σS is computed and recorded at each time step in a time series that is likewise continually sorted in ascending order and truncated to keep a size corresponding to agent memory interval hi. The percentile of its present value at time step t setssF 1 = 0 if it is below 25%, sF 1 = 2 if it is above 75%, and sF 1 = 1 otherwise. The state parameter sF 1 thus gives the agent an idea of the shorter-term volatility of the prices Pj(t) of stock j, not in the sense of absolute static thresholds of this shorter- term volatility, but of dynamic values depending on the agent’s past history. Together, with the longer- term volatility, this shorter-term gives the agent a ﬁner perception of the market price microstructure for its forecasting. The state parameter sF 2 thus gives the agent a sense of distance between present market price and its own fundamental valuation. – The average of |Pj(t)−Bi,j(t)|/Pj(t) is computed over the interval [t− 3τi,t ], and sets sF 2 = 0 if it is below 10%, sF 2 = 2 if it is above 30%, and sF 2 = 1 otherwise. ActionsAF: Then, the reinforcement learning algo- rithm Fi is deﬁned with an action aF in an action set AF = {aF 0,aF 1,aF 2}, of dimension 27, where each aF 0,aF 1,aF 2 individually may take the values 0, 1, or 2. These actions are chosen according to a direct policy search (see below). First, each agent computes two dif- ferent averages⟨Pj [t−2T,t−T ](t)⟩ and⟨Pj [t−T,t](t)⟩ of past stock prices, with T = (1 +aF 1 )τi/2, and then the econo- metric tool computes: ˆPi,j(t) = Pj(t) +⟨Pj [t−2T,t−T ](t)⟩−⟨ Pj [t−T,t](t)⟩ ˆPi,j(t) = 1 2⟨Pj [t−2T,t−T ](t)⟩ + 1 2⟨Pj [t−T,t](t)⟩ ˆPi,j(t) = Pj(t)−⟨Pj [t−2T,t−T ](t)⟩ +⟨Pj [t−T,t](t)⟩ if aF 0 = 0, 1, 2, respectively, and hence corresponding to mean-reverting, moving-average, and trend-following projections. Hence, both aF 0 andaF 1 pertain to technical analysis: action aF 0 determines the nature of the econo- metric forecasting tool that will be used (mean-reverting, moving-average, and trend-following), and action aF 1 de- termines the size of the past intervals over which these forecasts are computed. Then, the third action aF 2 enters as a parameter of the weighted average of this latter cho- sen technical forecast ˆPi,j(t) and the agent’s fundamen- tal valuation of the stock Bi,j(t), to produce the agent’s forecast: Hi,j(t) =α ˆPi,j(t) + (1−α)Bi,j(t) (4) for α∈ R, which is speciﬁed such that if the agent’s re- ﬂexivityρi≤ 50%, we haveα = 0,ρi, 2ρi foraF 2 = 0, 1, 2, respectively, and if the agent’s reﬂexivity ρi > 50%, we haveα = 2ρi−1,ρi, 1 foraF 2 = 0, 1, 2, respectively. Hence aF 2 = 2 allows the agent to learn and gauge the weight it gives to its own chartist vs. fundamentalist pricing. ReturnsRF: Then, the reinforcement learning algo- rithm Fi computes the percentage diﬀerence between the agent’s former stock price prediction Hi,j(t− τi) performed τi time steps ago, and its present realization Pj(t): |Hi,j(t−τi)−Pj(t)| Pj(t) (5) recording it at each time step in a time series that is continually sorted in ascending order and truncated to keep a size corresponding to agent memory interval hi. The associated percentile corresponding to this value at time step t sets a discrete value of returns rF in the set RF ={4, 2, 1,−1,−2,−4} if it respectively be- longs to the intervals [0% , 5%(, [5%, 25%(, [25%, 50%(, [50%, 75%(, [75%, 95%(, [95%, 100%]. Policy πF: Finally, the reinforcement learning algo- rithm updates its policy πF t (sF t−τ i,aF t−τ i), at each time step t. This is done according to the agent’s own learn- ing rate β, with the equations below being iterated a number|rF| of times, in order to favour any action that is deemed optimalaF⋆ in statesF, by increasing the pol- icy probability associated with this action, compared to the other actions,∀aF⁄=aF⋆ : πF t+1(sF,aF⋆) = πF t (sF,aF⋆) +β[1−πF t (sF,aF⋆)] πF t+1(sF,aF) = πF t (sF,aF) +β[0−πF t (sF,aF)] Added to this, the algorithm uses an oﬀ-policy method every τi/Tm + 2 time steps, which computes the opti- mal action thatFi should have performed τi time steps ago now that the price is realised and the forecast ac- curacy known, and which accordingly updates the policy πF with the agent’s own learning rateβ, iterated|rF| = 4 times (for the associated action is deemed optimal). 2. Second algorithm T i Via this second algorithm, the agent continuously mon- itors whether the stock prices are increasing or decreasing according to former algorithm (sT 0 ), their volatility (sT 1 ), its risk-free assets ( sT 2 ), its quantity of stock holdings (sT 3 ), and the traded volumes ( sT 4 ). Out of this state, it learns to optimize its investments by exploring and ex- ploiting two possible actions via a direct policy search: sending a transaction order to the order book as holding, buying, or selling a position in a given amount (aT 0 ), and at what price wrt. the law of supply and demand ( aT 1 ). StatesST : The second reinforcement learning algo- rithmTi is deﬁned with a state sT in a state set ST = {sT 0,sT 1,sT 2,sT 3,sT 4}, of dimension 108, with sT 0 = sT 1 = sT 4 ={0, 1, 2} and sT 2 =sT 3 ={0, 1}. – Each agent computes the value µ = ( Hi,j(t)− Pj(t))/Pj(t) and records it at each time step in two distinct time series µ− and µ+, depending on whether it is negative or positive, respectively. These two time series are continually sorted in as- cending order and truncated to keep a size corre- sponding to agent memory interval hi. The per- centile of its present value µ− at time step t in µ− sets sT 0 = 0 if it is below 95%, and sT 0 = 1 oth- erwise. The percentile of its present value µ+ at time stept in µ+ setssT 0 = 1 if it is below 5%, and sT 0 = 2 otherwise. Therefore, sT 0 = 0, 1, 2 if the econometric forecast µ derived from the previous algorithmFi is respectively indicating a decrease, approximate stability, or increase in the price of stock j in τi future time steps. – Each agent records the previously computed vari- ance σL of the prices Pj(t) over the interval [ t− 3τi,t ] at each time step, in a time series that is con- tinually sorted in ascending order and truncated to keep a size corresponding to agent memory interval hi. The percentile of its present value at time step t sets sT 1 = 0 if it is below 33%, sT 1 = 2 if it is above 67%, and sT 1 = 1 otherwise. sT 1 thus gives a measure of the longer-term volatility in stock prices to the agent. – Each agent sets sT 2 = 0 if the value of its risk-free assets Ai bonds(t) at time step t is below 60% of its start value Ai bonds(t = 0), and sT 2 = 1 otherwise. Hence each agent likewise continually monitors the size of its risk-free assets in order to adopt the ap- propriate long or short strategy. – Each agent sets sT 3 = 0 if the value of its stock holdings Ai equity(t) at time step t is below 60% of its start valueAi equity(t = 0), andsT 3 = 1 otherwise. Hence each agent continually monitors the size of its stock holdings in order to adopt the appropriate long or short strategy. – Each agent records the trading volume Vj(t) at each time step in a time series that is continually sorted in ascending order and truncated to keep a size corresponding to agent memory interval hi. The percentile of its present value at time step t setssT 4 = 0 if Vj(t) = 0, sT 4 = 1 if it is below 33%, sT 4 = 2 otherwise. This gives the agent a sense of market activity that is useful for determining the appropriate bid or ask price to send to the order book. ActionsAT : Then, the reinforcement learning algo- rithmTi is deﬁned with an action aT in an action set AT ={aT 0,aT 1}, of dimension 9. Here aT 0 and aT 1 both can take the discrete values {0, 1, 2}, chosen according to a direct policy search (see below). The ﬁrst action aT 0 corresponds both to the quantity of stocks and the nature of the transaction order (sell, hold, or buy) that the agent chooses to send to the order book. The second actionaT 1 corresponds to the ﬂexibility of the agent with regards to the price at which it is willing to trade. As said, these two actions depend on the evaluation of the price of stockj that was performed by the agent through the ﬁrst algorithmFi. First, the agent bid price Pi,j bid(t) is set at: Pi,j bid(t) = min[ Hi,j(t),P j(t)] +giSj(t− 1) Pi,j bid(t) = min[ Hi,j(t),P j(t)] Pi,j bid(t) = min[ Hi,j(t),P j(t)]−giSj(t− 1) if aT 1 = 0, 1, 2 respectively. Here we recall that gi is the agent’s transaction gesture and Sj(t− 1) our mar- ket spread of stock j at former time step. The term ±giSj(t− 1) hence speciﬁes the agent’s softer or harder stance on the transaction deal, depending on general market conditions of supply and demand, like Sj(t− 1) and the traded volumes speciﬁed by sT 4 . The agent ask price Pi,j ask(t) is set at: Pi,j ask(t) = max[ Hi,j(t),P j(t)]−giSj(t− 1) Pi,j ask(t) = max[ Hi,j(t),P j(t)] Pi,j ask(t) = max[ Hi,j(t),P j(t)] +giSj(t− 1) ifaT 1 = 0, 1, 2 respectively. Then for Qi,j(t) the quantity of stocks j held by agent i at time t, action aT 0 = 0 corresponds to a sell order of a quantity Qi,j(t) of stocks j for an ask price ofPi,j ask(t), actionaT 0 = 1 corresponds to no order being sent to the order book (the agent simply holds its position), and aT 0 = 2 corresponds to a buy order of a ﬂoored quantity Ai bonds(t)/[Pi,j ask(t)J] of stocks j for a bid price ofPi,j bid(t). Notice the parameter J is here part of the denominator of this stock quantity to buy, so as to ensure a proper multivariate portfolio management. FilterGi: As mentioned earlier, the quantity and price of stockj that agenti sends to the order book at this time step t is conditional on the output of function Gi, that ensures the agent waits and sends a transaction order at the optimal time step and not before. In order to do this, Gi records in a time series at each time step the value of the action-value function arg maxaQt(s,a ) maximized by actiona. It then sorts this time series in ascending order, and compares its associated percentile pQ(t) with the ra- tio of the elapsed time since previous transaction ki,j(t) over the agent’s individual trading window wi. The ﬁl- ter function Gi lets the trading order chosen by Ti be sent to the order book only if pQ(t)<k i,j(t)/wi. Notice this functionGi thus ﬁlters entry but not exit strategies: the latter are always enacted at the agent’s investment horizon τi. ReturnsRT : Considering the present realization of stock price Pj(t), the algorithm Ti then computes the cashﬂow diﬀerence between the present agent’s portfolio net asset value, and its present value if the former actions takenτi time steps ago had not been taken: Qi,j OB(t−τi)[Pj(t)−Pi,j OB(t−τi)] (6) where Qi,j OB(t−τi) and Pi,j OB(t−τi) are respectively the quantity and transaction price of stockj that was cleared by the order book process at timet−τi for agenti and its transaction partner. Notice these may not be those actu- ally sent by agenti at that time, because the quantity of stocks to long or short may not have been entirely cleared at this time (recall the agents send limit orders only), and because the transaction price is set by the order book at mid-price with the transaction partner’s order price. These values are then recorded at each time step in a time series that is continually sorted in ascending order and truncated to keep a size corresponding to agent memory interval hi. The associated percentile corresponding to this value at time step t sets a discrete value of returns rT in the setRT ={4, 2, 1,−1,−2,−4} if it respectively belongs to the intervals [0%, 5%(, [5%, 25%(, [25%, 50%(, [50%, 75%(, [75%, 95%(, [95%, 100%]. Policy πT : Finally, the reinforcement learning algo- rithm updates its policy πT t (sT t−τ i,aT t−τ i), every τi time steps following each transaction dealt by the agent. This is done according to the agent’s own learning rate β, with the equations below being iterated a number |rT| of times, in order to favour any action that is deemed optimal aT⋆ in state sT , by increasing the policy proba- bility associated with this action, compared to the other actions,∀aT ⁄=aT⋆ : πT t+1(sT,aT⋆) = πT t (sT,aT⋆) +β[1−πT t (sT,aT⋆)] πT t+1(sT,aT ) = πT t (sT,aT ) +β[0−πT t (sT,aT )] Added to this, the algorithm uses an oﬀ-policy method every τi/Tm + 2 time steps, which computes the opti- mal action thatTi should have performed τi time steps ago now that the price is realised and the forecast ac- curacy known, and which accordingly updates the policy πT with the agent’s own learning rateβ, iterated|rT| = 4 times (for the associated action is deemed optimal). As one can see, the action-state spaces of these two al- gorithmsF andT are highly discretised and handcrafted. A main reason for this is that a central challenge of ﬁnan- cial MAS research has historically been the large compu- tational power required by such models. Furthermore, the general intuition behind our deﬁnition of such state and action spaces has been the Fundamental Theorem of Asset Pricing [97], and these are not that dissimilar from other recent models such as [26] (cf. section 4.3). V. CALIBRATION Model hypotheses: The main hypotheses for this model are that: i- the simulated agents faithfully emulate real- world investors, and ii- the simulated transaction limit orders processed by the order book correspond to the dy- namics and properties of real stock market orders. Con- cerning the former, the strength of our approach is the simpliﬁcation that any agent, regardless of its behaviour and strategy, is structurally bound to interact with the market in three possible ways only, namely by longing, shorting or holding stocks. Concerning the latter, we recall that the dynamics of order books are extensively documented in literature [3], and hence that their design can be rigorously conducted. Model limitations : With these two major hypothe- ses, we shall also mention the following model limita- tions and consistency issues, which are proper to all ﬁ- nancial MAS: i- reliance on virtual fundamental genera- tionTj(t), ii- absence of portfolio diversiﬁcation (equity, cross-asset), iii- absence of various trading strategies (e.g. short-selling, leveraging, derivatives, metaorders, market orders, etc.), iv- absence of intraday and seasonal mar- ket eﬀects, v- absence of legal and regulatory constraints. Although some of these limitations may seem challeng- ing, their eﬀects and importance virtually impact any other econometric or modelling approach in quantitative ﬁnance. Added to this, modelling market activity via a market microstructure emerging from a centralised or- der book that processes transaction orders sent by many trading agents, has a direct empirical correspondance with real stock markets, and is thus fully epistemolog- ically pertinent. Training and testing sets : We calibrated the MAS stock market simulator to real stock market data [102]. In order to do so, we used high quality, industry-grade, daily close prices and volumes of 4 , 313 stocks from the London Stock Exchange (LSE), between January 15th of 2007 and January 19th of 2018. In order to work on the market microstructure, we have ﬁltered the data as such: i- stock-splits eﬀects have been suppressed, ii- only stocks that have been continuously traded over this time period have been considered. As a consequence of this data curation, our former stock universe has been lowered to 640 stocks. The calibration of the MAS hyperparame- ters has been conducted on a random sampling of half of these stocks as training set, whose statistical features are virtually identical to the other half. We posit this statis- tical stability, proper to stock market data, arises from the lack of market arbitrage and relates to the aforemen- tioned stylized facts. Hyperparameter optimisation : The calibrated hyper- parameters are the number of agents I, the agent trans- action gesture factor ζi ∈ N (which scales the gesture parametergi initialised for each agent at timet = 0), the fundamental values generation parameterν (which is the amplitude of the fundamental time seriesTj(t)), and the drawdown threshold (which is added to the drawdown limit li initialised at time t = 0 for each agent). All hy- perparameter combinations were ran on the training set, and are listed on Tab. I. Hyperparameter Low High Step Agent number I 500 5000 500 Gesture scalar ζ i 1.0 3.0 0.5 Fundamental amplitudeν 0.1 1.5 0.2 Drawdown tresholdL −50 30 10 TABLE I: Model hyperparameters, with their intervals for training : lower bound (Low), higher bound (High), and step of incrementation (Step). Model comparison : There is a huge literature wrt. to [22] on the substitution of markets to individual ratio- nality, namely whether markets eliminate irrational indi- viduals, or whether individuals learn market rules. We here provide on Fig. 3 agent learning curves. These can be used for model comparison, notably with recent order book models coupled with reinforcement learning [26], and the former generation of MAS with zero-intelligence agents [22] as baselines. VI. PERFORMANCE A. Statistical features We show on Fig. 4 to 15, diﬀerent key market mi- crostructure indicators pertaining to the calibration of the MAS simulator. As one can see, the ﬁts are satis- factory in topology compared to real stock market data, and constitute a real leap forward in terms of realism for MAS stock market simulators. This also shows the rel- evance of reinforcement learning as a framework for the description of agent learning and trading process in stock markets. – On Fig. 4, we show a rather great ﬁt of logarithmic price returns to real stock market data. – On Fig. 5, we plotted the price volatilities of both simulated and real data, over several inter- vals, namely 2Tw, 3Tm,Ty. We found that the real volatilities at larger time scales are harder to em- ulate, and this is most probably because our real data sample covers a rather unique and unusual FIG. 3: After 90% of total simulation time, we want to com- pare the best 10% agents of our MAS stock market simulator (blue curves) with the best 10% agents of a market simulated with noise agents trading randomly (red curves). For this, we check on their performance over the remainder 10% of our total simulation, with averaged equity curves as their year- to-date returns over S = 20 simulations (left), and averaged sorted annual returns of each S simulations (right). These simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, J = 1, T = 2875. market regime over the years 2008− 2010, namely the ﬁnancial crisis. – On Fig. 6, we show the autocorrelations of the price logarithmic returns for both real and simulated data, over several intervals of length 2Tw, 3Tm,Ty. Despite the great ﬁts, one could wonder as to why real data shows such a disruptive shape at zero- autocorrelations: this could be due to intraday market activity, or to the absence of trading vol- umes over long periods of time for stocks of small capitalisation companies. – In a similar way, we see the simulated data emu- lating the real data in the asymmetric shapes of its distributions of autocorrelation in volatility (Fig. 7) and volumes (Fig. 8), and of blended autocorre- lation in price logarithmic returns (Fig. 9). – On Fig. 10 and 11, we see the ﬁts of simulated to real data, in the decrease of blended autocor- relations when parameter ∂ varies, for intervals of lengths Tw and 2Tw, respectively. This is very im- portant wrt. the fact that our MAS produces a price microstructure that shows cancellation of ar- bitrage opportunities and market memory. – On Fig. 12, we show the distribution of the num- ber of consecutive days of increasing prices (pos- itive values) and decreasing prices (negative val- ues) at each time step t, for both simulated and real data. The number of consecutive days of in- creasing or decreasing prices is a useful indicator of market regime, or whether the market is bear- ish or bullish. We ﬁnd that apart from a few ex- treme bullish events, the MAS simulates general stock market price dynamics in a way correspond- ing to real data. In conclusion, we shall highlight the accurate emula- tion of the simulator with regards to the distribution of logarithmic price returns in Fig. 4, their autocorrela- tions at diﬀerent timescales in Fig. 6, 9, 10, 11. These latter autocorrelation metrics are extremely important in the calibration process, because they pertain to the absence of arbitrage and market memory, which are cen- tral features of ﬁnancial markets. Or in other words, the simulated data like the real data should not display price patterns that are too easily identiﬁable and ready to be exploited by trading. We can also underline a rather re- markable emulation in market regimes, as shown in Fig. 12. We also highlight some improvement left for: – The extremity of the tail distribution of long-term price volatilities in Fig. 5: these are indeed the hardest microstructure eﬀects to capture, as they relate to jump diﬀusion processes proper to volatile events in the life of a company, industry sector, or full market (here we should mention this LSE data encompasses the ﬁnancial crisis of 2008 − 2009). – The peak in zero autocorrelations for real price re- turns and volatility in Fig. 6-7: we posit this to be due to the fact that unlike real data, the simulator does not capture intraday market activity, or to the presence of scarcely traded small cap companies. – Fatter tails in distributions of autocorrelation of trading volumes in Fig. 8: we posit this to be due to seasonal and calendar eﬀects proper to real stock markets. FIG. 4: Distribution of logarithmic returns of prices log[P (t)/P (t− 1)] of real (dashed black curve) and simulated (continuous red curve) data. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, J = 1, T = 2875, and S = 20. FIG. 5: Distribution of volatilities (deﬁned as standard de- viations of price normalised to price itself σ/P (t)) computed over lags of two weeks (black), three months (red), and one year (blue) intervals for both real (dashed curves) and simu- lated (continuous curves) data. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, J = 1, T = 2875, and S = 20. FIG. 6: Distribution of autocorrelations of the logarithmic returns of prices at each time step t between intervals [t− ∆, t] and [t− 2∆, t− ∆], over lags ∆ of two weeks (black), three months (red), and one year (blue) intervals for both real (dashed curves) and simulated (continuous curves) data. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, J = 1, T = 2875, and S = 20. FIG. 7: Distribution of autocorrelations of two weeks- interval volatilities at each time step t between intervals [t−∆, t] and [t−2∆, t−∆] for ∆ = 2Tw, for both real (dashed black curve) and simulated (continuous red curve) data. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, J = 1, T = 2875, and S = 20. FIG. 8: Distribution of autocorrelations of the trading vol- umes at each time step t between intervals [t− ∆, t] and [t− 2∆, t− ∆], over lags ∆ of two weeks (black), three months (red), and one year (blue) intervals for both real (dashed curves) and simulated (continuous curves) data. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, J = 1, T = 2875, and S = 20. FIG. 9: Distribution of autocorrelations of the logarithmic returns of prices at each time step t between intervals [t− Tw, t] and [t−Tw−δ, t−δ], for shiftsδ of one day (black), two days (red), three days (blue), four days (green), and ﬁve days (yellow). This is for both real (dashed curves) and simulated (continuous curves) data. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, J = 1, T = 2875, and S = 20. B. Classiﬁcation features Random forest classiﬁcation: In order to evaluate how well the model-generated log-return signals match the real market stock dynamics, we aimed to build a binary classiﬁcation model which could take a ﬁxed-size time se- ries sample, and predict whether the sample comes from simulated or real stock market data. The whole dataset was split into non-overlapping training and validation subsets. Then, the time series samples of ﬁxed size (the number of timestamps ranging from 5 to 50, but ﬁxed for each experiment) were generated by applying a sliding window to full price logarithmic-return time series from both simulated and real data. Both training and valida- tion datasets were balanced by construction in terms of class distribution. Before training a classiﬁer on the col- FIG. 10: Means of autocorrelations of the logarithmic re- turns of prices at each time stept between intervals [t−Tw, t] and [t−Tw−∂, t−∂], for shifts ∂ = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. This is for both real (blue) and simulated (red) data. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, J = 1, T = 2875, and S = 20. FIG. 11: Means of autocorrelations of the logarithmic re- turns of prices at each time stept between intervals [t−2Tw, t] and [t−2Tw−∂, t−∂], for shifts∂ = [2, 4, 6, 8, 10]. This is for both real (blue) and simulated (red) data. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, J = 1, T = 2875, and S = 20. FIG. 12: Distribution of the number of consecutive days of increasing prices (positive values) and decreasing prices (neg- ative values). This is for both real (dashed black curve) and simulated (continuous red curve) data. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, J = 1, T = 2875, and S = 20. lected data, a preprocessing step was taken to map the time series samples to a vector feature space by comput- ing a set of 787 predeﬁned signal properties for each sam- ple [103]. A standard scaling procedure was then applied to the dataset with mean and variance parameters esti- mated from the training subset. This normalised feature- vector representation of the dataset was then used to train random forest classiﬁcation models [104]. Accu- racy scores were measured for multiple runs of model training (with diﬀerent random seed values) and for the diﬀerent number of timestamps initially taken for each sample. The obtained accuracy score value distributions are shown in Fig. 13. 5 9 14 19 23 28 33 38 42 475 9 14 19 23 28 33 38 42 47 Sample size - # of timepoints 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.80Accuracy score Accuracy scores on the test set for the RF models trained on time-series features all time-series features value distribution features FIG. 13: Accuracy as a function of sample size. The value distribution features include only features that do not depend on the order of values in the time-series (e.g. mean, median, variance, skew, etc.), whereas all time-series features corre- spond to the total set of time-series features including those that depend on the temporal structure of the series (e.g. en- tropy, DFT coeﬃcients, etc.). The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, J = 1, T = 2875, and S = 20. Dimensionality reduction: Another useful metric that was extracted from the trained random forest classiﬁers is the measure of feature importance that was averaged over multiple training runs. This procedure allowed us to determine a subset of features which turn out as the most discriminative for the deﬁned classiﬁcation task. The fea- tures which were found in the top-20 importance score list could be grouped into several categories: i. value distribution properties (e.g. median value of the sam- ple, 60th, 70th, 80th percentiles of the value distribution within the sample), ii. fast Fourier transform spectrum statistics (centroid, skew and kurtosis of the fast Fourier transform coeﬃcient distributions), iii. features related to the temporal structure of the series, e.g. autocorre- lation and coeﬃcients of a ﬁtted autoregressive AR(k) process. In order to visualise the distribution of classes across time series samples in the feature-vector space, we applied several dimensionality reduction algorithms to the dataset, results of which are shown in Fig. 14 and 15. The ﬁrst algorithm is generic principal com- ponent analysis, which was applied to the reduced set of top-10 features, ranked by feature importance scores, as seen on Fig. 14. One can notice that the produced linear mapping to the 2-dimensional space does not guar- antee high separability of point clouds corresponding to diﬀerent classes (simulated vs. real data). This means that a linear combination of basic time-series features is not suﬃcient to eﬀectively discriminate simulated data from the real signals. However, once we applied a su- pervised nonlinear mapping, namely Uniform Manifold APproximation (UMAP) [98], class separability between point clouds increased signiﬁcantly. Hence, a classiﬁer learning nonlinear features from given time-series data (e.g. a deep convolutional neural network) can, in prin- ciple, achieve high classiﬁcation quality metric values in this task. These considerations open further directions for model tuning/calibration, for instance by imposing a loss term which would depend on classiﬁcation accuracy achieved by a deep neural network (e.g. as in Generative Adversarial Networks [99]) in order to minimise it. PCA 1st component PCA 2nd component LSE simulation FIG. 14: Principal component analysis scatter plot on top 10 statistical features of real (red) and simulation (blue). The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, J = 1, T = 2875, and S = 20. sUMAP 1st component sUMAP 2nd component LSE simulation FIG. 15: Supervised UMAP trained on 2000 samples for top 10 statistical features of real (red) and simulation (blue), and applied to another 2000 samples. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, J = 1, T = 2875, and S = 20. VII. CONCLUSION We thus modelled a stock market via an intelligent MAS, where the agents autonomously perform portfo- lio management via long-only equity strategies, based on autonomous reinforcement learning algorithms perform- ing price forecasting and stock trading. In such a model, each agent also learns to gauge how fundamentalist or chartist it will be in its approach to price estimation. We have calibrated this MAS simulator to real stock mar- ket data from the London Stock Exchange between the years 2008 and 2018, an achieved state-of-the-art perfor- mance in price microstructure emulation. We posit this model could be a powerful tool for both ﬁnancial indus- try and academic research, to further explore stock mar- ket microstructure and price formation by a bottom-up approach. Also, we posit that the reinforcement learning framework of the agents could be used to implement psy- chological traits of decision theory and behavioural eco- nomics, and hence to study the inﬂuence of agent learn- ing and cognition on ﬁnancial markets at the macroscale. Finally, we also see the following immediate and natural extensions of our model: i- using the multivariate feature of the agents trading coupled with portfolio risk manage- ment in order to study and simulate covariance structure across several stocks, and ii- extension of the agent rein- forcement learning framework to the continuous domain (cf. policy gradients, DQN, etc.). VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We graciously acknowledge this work was supported by the RFFI grant nr. 16-51-150007 and CNRS PRC nr. 151199. I. L.’s work was supported by the Russian Science Foundation, grant nr. 18-11-00294. [1] W. H. Greene, Econometric Analysis (Pearson, 8th Edi- tion, 2017). [2] M. P. Wellman and E. Way, The Russell Sage Founda- tion Journal of the Social Sciences 3(1), 104 (2017). [3] W. Huang, C.-A. Lehalle, and M. Rosenbaum, Journal of the American Statistical Association 110, 509 (2015). [4] A. E. Biondo, Journal of Economic Interaction and Co- ordination 14(3) (2019). [5] J. Sirignano and R. Cont, Quantitative Finance 19(9) (2019). [6] A. M. Sbordone, A. Tambalotti, K. Rao, and K. J. Walsh, Economic policy review 16(2) (2010). [7] E. Wah and M. P. Wellman, Proceedings of the four- teenth ACM conference on Electronic commerce pp. 855–872 (2013). [8] M. Aloud, Proceedings in Finance and Risk Perspectives ‘14 (2014). [9] M. Benzaquen and J.-P. Bouchaud, The European Physical Journal B 91(23) (2018). [10] I. Erev and A. E.Roth, PNAS 111, 10818 (2014). [11] A. D. Martino and M. Marsili, Journal of Physics A 39, 465 (2006). [12] R. Boero, M. Morini, M. Sonnessa, and P. Terna, Agent- based models of the economy, from theories to applica- tions (Palgrave Macmillan, 2015). [13] S. Gualdi, M. Tarzia, F. Zamponi, and J.-P. Bouchaud, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 50, 29 (2015). [14] S. B. Eickhoﬀ, B. T. T. Yeo, and S. Genon, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 19, 672 (2018). [15] A. Konovalov and I. Krajbich, Nature communications 7, 12438 (2016). [16] D. Silver, T. Hubert, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, M. Lai, A. Guez, M. Lanctot, L. Sifre, D. Kumaran, T. Graepel, et al., Science 362, 1140 (2018), ISSN 0036- 8075. [17] D. Silver, J. Schrittwieser, K. Simonyan, I. Antonoglou, A. Huang, A. Guez, T. Hubert, L. Baker, M. Lai, A. Bolton, et al., Nature 550, 354 (2018). [18] G. Lefebvre, M. Lebreton, F. Meyniel, S. Bourgeois- Gironde, and S. Palminteri, Nature Human Behaviour 1(4) (2017). [19] S. Palminteri, M. Khamassi, M. Joﬃly, and G. Coricelli, Nature communications pp. 1–14 (2015). [20] K. Duncan, B. B. Doll, N. D. Daw, and D. Shohamy, Neuron 98, 645 (2018). [21] I. Momennejad, E. Russek, J. Cheong, M. Botvinick, N. D. Daw, and S. J. Gershman, Nature Human Behav- ior 1, 680–692 (2017). [22] D. Gode and S. Sunder, Journal of Political Economy 101(1) (1993). [23] Y.-J. Hu and S.-J. Lin, 2019 Amity International Con- ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (2019). [24] R. Neuneier, Proc. of the 10th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (1997). [25] Y. Deng, F. Bao, Y. Kong, Z. Ren, and Q. Dai, IEEE Trans. on Neural Networks and Learning Systems28(3) (2017). [26] T. Spooner, J. Fearnley, R. Savani, and A. Koukorinis, Proceedings of the 17th AAMAS (2018). [27] G. Kim and H. M. Markowitz, Journal of Portfolio Man- agement 16, 45 (1989). [28] M. Levy and S. Solomon, International Journal of Mod- ern Physics C 7, 595 (1996). [29] M. Levy, H. Levy, and S. Solomon, Economics Letters 45, 103 (1994). [30] M. Levy, H. Levy, and S. Solomon, Journal de Physique I 5, 1087 (1995). [31] M. Levy and S. Solomon, International Journal of Mod- ern Physics C 7, 65 (1996). [32] M. Levy, N. Persky, and S. Solomon, International Jour- nal of High Speed Computing 8, 93 (1996). [33] M. Levy, H. Levy, and S. Solomon, Physica A 242, 90 (1997). [34] M. Levy, H. Levy, and S. Solomon, Microscopic Simula- tion of Financial Markets (Academic Press, New York, 2000). [35] R. Cont and J. P. Bouchaud, Macroeconomic Dynamics 4, 170 (2000). [36] S. Solomon, G. Weisbuch, L. de Arcangelis, N. Jan, and D. Stauﬀer, Physica A 277(1), 239 (2000). [37] T. Lux and M. Marchesi, Nature 397, 498 (1999). [38] T. Lux and M. Marchesi, Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance 3, 67 (2000). [39] R. Donangelo, A. Hansen, K. Sneppen, and S. R. Souza, Physica A 283, 469 (2000). [40] R. Donangelo and K. Sneppen, Physica A 276, 572 (2000). [41] P. Bak, S. Norrelykke, and M. Shubik, Physical Review E 60, 2528 (1999). [42] P. Bak, S. Norrelykke, and M. Shubik, Quantitative Fi- nance 1, 186 (2001). [43] Z. F. Huang and S. Solomon, European Physical Journal B 20, 601 (2000). [44] J. Lipski and R. Kutner, arXiv:1310.0762 (2013). [45] S. Barde, University of Kent, School of Economics Dis- cussion Papers 04 (2015). [46] J.-P. Bouchaud, Handbook of Computational Eco- nomics 4 (2018). [47] A. Dodonova and Y. Khoroshilov, Manag Decis Econ 39 (2018). [48] P. K. Naik, R. Gupta, and P. Padhi, J Dev Areas 52(1) (2018). [49] R. Cont, Volatility Clustering in Financial Markets: Empirical Facts and Agent-Based Models (A Kirman and G Teyssiere: Long memory in economics, Springer, 2005). [50] M. Cristelli, Complexity in Financial Markets (Springer, 2014). [51] E. Fama, Journal of Finance 25, 383 (1970). [52] A. K. Bera, S. Ivliev, and F. Lillo, Financial Economet- rics and Empirical Market Microstructure (Springer, 2015). [53] M. Potters and J.-P. Bouchaud, Physica A 299, 60 (2001). [54] V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, L. A. Amaral, M. Meyer, and H. E. Stanley, Physical Review E 60(6), 6519 (1999). [55] R. Weron, International Journal of Modern Physics C 12, 209 (2001). [56] Z. Eisler and J. Kertesz, European Physical Journal B 51, 145 (2006). [57] B. Mandelbrot, The Journal of Business pp. 394–419 (1963). [58] R. Cont, Quantitative Finance 1, 223 (2001). [59] J. Bouchaud, R. Cont, and M. Potters, Scale Invariance and Beyond, Proc. CNRS Workshop on Scale Invari- ance, Les Houches (Springer, 1997). [60] Z. Ding, R. Engle, and C. Granger, Journal of Empirical Finance 1, 83 (1993). [61] I. N. Lobato and N. E. Savin, Journal of Business and Economics Statistics 16, 261 (1998). [62] N. Vandewalle and M. Ausloos, Physica A 246, 454 (1997). [63] B. Mandelbrot, A. Fisher, and L. Calvet, A multifractal model of asset returns (Cowles Foundation for Research and Economics, 1997). [64] R. F. Engle, Econometrica 50(4), 987 (1982). [65] C. de Vries and K. Leuven, Stylized facts of nominal ex- change rate returns (Working Papers from Purdue Uni- versity, Krannert School of Management - Center for In- ternational Business Education and Research (CIBER), 1994). [66] A. Pagan, Journal of Empirical Finance 3, 15 (1996). [67] R. Sutton and A. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction (MIT Press Cambridge MA, 1998). [68] M. Wiering and M. van Otterlo, Reinforcement Learn- ing: State-of-the-Art (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012). [69] C. Szepesvari, Algorithms for Reinforcement Learning (Morgan and Claypool Publishers, 2010). [70] R. S. Sutton, D. McAllester, S. Singh, and Y. Mansour, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems12, 1057 (2000). [71] D. Silver, G. Lever, N. Heess, T. Degris, D. Wierstra, and M. Riedmiller, Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Machine Learning 32 (2014). [72] I. Grondman, L. Busoniu, G. Lopes, and R. Babuska, IEEE Transactions on Systems Man and Cybernetics 42, 1291 (2012). [73] J. X. Wang, Z. Kurth-Nelson, D. Kumaran, D. Tiru- mala, H. Soyer, J. Z. Leibo, D. Hassabis, and M. Botvinick, Nature Neuroscience 21, 860 (2018). [74] Y. Duan, J. Schulman, X. Chen, P. L. Bartlett, I. Sutskever, and P. Abbeel, arXiv:1611.02779 (2016). [75] J. Heinrich, Ph.D. thesis, University College London (2017). [76] V. Mnih, A. P. Badia, M. Mirza, A. Graves, T. P. Lillicrap, T. Harley, D. Silver, and K. Kavukcuoglu, arXiv:1602.01783 (2016). [77] J. Andreas, D. Klein, and S. Levine, International Con- ference on Machine Learning (2017). [78] D. Silver, A. Huang, C. J. Maddison, A. Guez, L. Sifre, G. van den Driessche, J. Schrittwieser, and et al., Nature 529, 484 (2016). [79] C. Tessler, S. Givony, T. Zahavy, D. J. Mankowitz, and S. Mannor, arXiv:1604.07255 (2016). [80] S. Bhatnagara and J. R. Panigrahi, Automatica 42 (2006). [81] H. Liang, L. Yang, H. C. W. Tu, and M. Xu, 2017 Chi- nese Automation Congress (2017). [82] A. Y. Ng, D. Harada, and S. Russell, International Con- ference on Machine Learning (1999). [83] P. Abbeel, A. Coates, and A. Y. Ng, The International Journal of Robotics Research (2010). [84] M. Keramati and B. Gutkin, Elife 3 (2014). [85] M. Keramati and B. Gutkin, NIPS (2011). [86] S. Bavard, M. Lebreton, M. Khamassi, G. Coricelli, and S. Palminteri, Nature Communications 4503 (2018). [87] C. J. C. H. Watkins and P. Dayan, Machine learning 8(3-4), 279 (1992). [88] S. Ross, J. Pineau, B. Chaib-draa, and P. Kreitmann, Journal of Machine Learning Research 12, 1729 (2011). [89] S. Katt, F. A. Oliehoek, and C. Amato, Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (2017). [90] L. Pinto, J. Davidson, R. Sukthankar, and A. Gupta, arXiv:1703.02702 (2017). [91] Dividend yield for stocks in the dow jones industrial average, accessed: 2019-05-17, URL http://indexarb. com/dividendYieldSorteddj.html. [92] R. Franke and F. Westerhoﬀ, BERG Working Paper Series on Government and Growth 78 (2011). [93] C. Chiarella, G. Iori, and J. Perell, arXiv:0711.3581 (2007). [94] P. Vernimmen, P. Quiry, M. Dallocchio, Y. L. Fur, and A. Salvi, Corporate Finance: Theory and Practice (John Wiley and Sons, 4th Edition, 2014). [95] M. P. Murray, The American Statistician 48(1), 37 (1994). [96] R. M. N and H. Larralde, arXiv:1601.00229 (2016). [97] F. Delbaen and W. Schachermayer, Notices of the AMS 51(5) (2011). [98] L. McInnes, J. Healy, and J. Melville, arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426 (2018). [99] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, in Advances in neural information processing systems (2014), pp. 2672–2680. [100] M. Christ, N. Braun, J. Neuﬀer, and A. W. Kempa- Liehr, Neurocomputing 307, 72 (2018). [101] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, et al., Journal of machine learn- ing research 12, 2825 (2011). [102] Computations were performed on a Mac Pro with 3,5 GHz 6-Core Intel Xeon E5 processor, and 16 GB 1866 MHz DDR memory [103] We used the implemented tsfresh Python package [100] [104] We used the implementation from scikit-learn Python package [101], with 200 estimators and default values for other hyperparameters.