Reinforcement Learning for Market Making in a Multi-agent Dealer Market Sumitra Ganesh JPMorgan AI Research Nelson Vadori JPMorgan AI Research Mengda Xu JPMorgan AI Research Hua Zheng JPMorgan Quantitative Research Prashant Reddy JPMorgan AI Research Manuela Veloso JPMorgan AI Research Abstract Market makers play an important role in providing liquidity to markets by con- tinuously quoting prices at which they are willing to buy and sell, and managing inventory risk. In this paper, we build a multi-agent simulation of a dealer market and demonstrate that it can be used to understand the behavior of a reinforcement learning (RL) based market maker agent. We use the simulator to train an RL-based market maker agent with different competitive scenarios, reward formulations and market price trends (drifts). We show that the reinforcement learning agent is able to learn about its competitor’s pricing policy; it also learns to manage inventory by smartly selecting asymmetric prices on the buy and sell sides (skewing), and main- taining a positive (or negative) inventory depending on whether the market price drift is positive (or negative). Finally, we propose and test reward formulations for creating risk averse RL-based market maker agents. 1 Introduction Deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have had considerable success in surpassing human level performance in several single and multi-agent learning problems. A key ingredient of these advances has been the availability of gaming and physics simulators which provide a ready stream of experience for developing, training and testing algorithms. However, the ﬁnancial domain lacks a similar suite of simulators that could be used to conduct research. Simulators provide more than just data for sample-intensive RL algorithms; they also provide a platform to conduct controlled experiments to test what is being "learnt" by an agent, how a policy performs in different scenarios and the causality between changes in the environment and agent behavior. Simulators can also be used to train an agent in a diverse set of scenarios, leading to improved generalization and robustness to changes in the environment. In this paper we build a multi-agent simulator for a dealer market and demonstrate that it can be used to train an RL-based market maker agent and understand its behavior. Market makers play an important role in providing liquidity to markets by continuously quoting prices at which they are willing to buy and sell. In this paper, we focus on a dealer market (also commonly known as an over-the-counter or OTC market) where there is a single security being traded and market makers continuously stream prices to buyers and sellers (referred to as investors). The investors, who come to the market to execute their orders, observe these prices and select the market maker they want to trade with. The two types of agents - market makers and investors - interact directly with each other, and only observe the transactions that they are involved in and reference price information from an exchange. 33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada. arXiv:1911.05892v1 [q-fin.TR] 14 Nov 2019 A marker maker’s policies around pricing and risk management in this market depend on its objectives and preferences (e.g. how risk averse it is), the policies of competing market makers, the overall market environment (e.g. volatility) and trade ﬂow from investors. Our objective in this paper is to use the multi-agent simulator to study the performance of a reinforcement learning (RL) based market making agent under different competitive scenarios, reward formulations and market environments. In order to model different competitive scenarios, we formalize the dealer market as a multi-agent system and build a simulator with the ability to instantiate market maker agents with different policies. In particular, we implement an adaptive market maker agent which acts as a realistic benchmark and competitor for the RL agent. We then train an RL-based market maker against different competitors, with varying reward formulations and market environment conditions, and study its behavior and performance. 1.1 Related Work The market making problem has been extensively studied in ﬁnance and economics literature, largely as an optimal control problem. Classical models such as Garman (1976), Amihud and Mendelson (1980), Ho and Stoll (1981), and more recently Avellaneda and Stoikov (2008) and Guéant, Lehalle, and Fernandez-Tapia (2013), focus on the role of inventory risk in determining the optimal pricing strategy for a market maker. Other models, such as Glosten and Milgrom (1985), study the role of adverse selection risk arising from informed traders in the market. All these works model a single market maker and make assumptions about the distributions of order arrivals and price to derive analytical solutions for the market maker’s pricing policy using stochastic optimal control techniques. In contrast, in our approach the distribution of order arrivals for a market maker naturally arises from the strategies and attributes of other agents in the system. Market making has also been studied in the agent-based modeling (ABM) literature (e.g. Darley et al. (2000), Das (2005),Das (2008), Jumadinova and Dasgupta (2010), Wah, Wright, and Wellman (2017)), but the agents tend to be simplistic with a view to studying market equilibria and endogeneous price formation rather than developing realistic market making strategies. Most previous work focuses on market making in limit order book markets where all agents submit their orders to a central matching facility and can observe all outstanding orders and executed transactions in the market. In contrast, there has been relatively little work focused on dealer markets (Guéant (2017), Bank, Ekren, and Muhle-Karbe (2018), Ghoshal and Roberts (2016))where the agents interact directly with each other and only observe the trades they are involved in. Our multi-agent simulation realistically replicates the partial observability conditions of a dealer market allowing us to study the challenges it poses for reinforcement learning algorithms. Chan and Shelton (2001), and more recently, Lim and Gorse (2018) and Spooner et al. (2018) have developed RL-based market making approaches for limit order book markets; however, they do not explicitly model the competing market makers or study different competitive scenarios. 1.2 Our Contributions We make the following contributions in this paper:(i) we formalize the dealer market as a multi-agent system (section 3); (ii) we deﬁne an adaptive market making policy inspired by the mean-variance optimization techniques commonly used in ﬁnance (section 4).;(iii) we conduct extensive experiments with competing market maker agents and are able to draw some key insights about what the RL-based market maker is learning. (sections 5, 6). In particular, we show that the RL-based market maker is able to learn about its competitor’s pricing strategy and manage inventory by skewing prices; it also learns to exploit any signiﬁcant market price drift by building inventory; (iv) we propose and test several reward formulations that can be used to create a risk-averse RL-based market maker (section 6.3). We start by deﬁning the mechanics of the dealer market and key terminology in the next section. 2 Dealer Market - Deﬁnitions Prices and Spreads: In a dealer market with a single traded security, each market maker has to stream two prices at each time step - the price at which it is willing to buy ( bid) and the price at 2 which it is willing to sell (ask). We assume that there is also an exchange limit order book market (LOB) for the same security, and that all market makers receive reference pricing information from this exchange. The exchange reference price can be broken down into two components: (a) the mid-priceP , which is deﬁned as the average of the best bid and ask in the LOB, and (b) the spreadSb ref orSs ref, which is deﬁned as the difference between the price of a buy/sell trade on the exchange and the mid-price. By convention, market makers also quote their buy/sell prices relative to the exchange mid-price i.e. the i-th market maker quotes spreadsSb i (buy) andSs i (sell). Note that this implies that the market maker buys atPt−Sb i and sells atPt +Ss i . Spread PnL: For each trade with an investor, the market maker earns a proﬁt that is referred to as spread PnL. In practice, the spreads are a function of the trade size. Thus, for a trade of sizev, the market maker earns a proﬁt ofv·Sb i (v) if it is a buy, andv·Ss i (v) if it is a sell. Inventory: As the market maker executes trades with investors, it will typically accumulate an inventoryzt, which could be positive or negative depending on whether the agent has bought more than it sold up to timet, or vice versa. By convention, buys are positive and sells are negative in the inventory calculation. 1 Inventory PnL: A non-zero inventory exposes the market maker to risk from mid-price ﬂuctuations. If the market maker holds an inventory ofzt fromt tot + 1, and the mid-price changes fromPt to Pt+1, the value of the inventory changes by (Pt+1−Pt)·zt. Hedging: Ideally, a market maker would like to keep a small inventory so as to minimize risk. The market maker could choose to reduce risk by initiating a trade which reduces its inventory (e.g. try to buy if it has negative inventory) - this is referred to ashedging. In doing so, it incurs a cost since it assumes the role of a price-taker in the hedging transaction. Internalization and Skewing: The market maker could also try to reduce risk organically byskewing its prices to attract trades that offset its inventory. For example, if it has a positive inventory, it could make its buy prices less attractive and sell prices more attractive to investors. The effect of organic risk mitigation by offsetting investor trades is referred to as internalizaton. Market share: As multiple market makers compete in a dealer market, each one captures a portion of the investor trade ﬂow depending on its pricing. The percentage of total trades captured by a market maker, weighted by trade size, is referred to as its market share. 3 Multi-Agent Simulator We consider a dealer market withM market makers andN investors and a single traded security. A trade between market makeri and investorj at timet is denoted byvi,j,t; buys are positive, sells are negative and zero implies no trade. 3.1 Market Maker Agent The observations, actions and rewards for the i-th market maker at time t are summarized below. The market maker receives observations about investor trades it won in the previous time step and reference prices for current time step. It then decides on the prices to stream for time stept and any hedge trades to execute. Finally, it receives a set of rewards in the form of spread PnL, hedge cost and inventory PnL. Observations. (i) Trades executed in previous time step: {vi,j,t−1}j=1:N ; (ii) Inventory zi,t = zi,t−1 +∑ j=1:Nvi,j,t−1; (iii) Reference mid-price Pt and spread curvesSb ref,t(v) andSs ref,t(v); (iv) Market share, or equivalently, total market volume in previous time step. Actions. (i) Pricing: Determine spreads Sb i,t(v) and Ss i,t(v) to stream; (ii) Hedging: Determine fractionxi,t of the inventoryzi,t to hedge. Rewards. (i) Spread PnL: For each investor tradev, the market maker earns|v|·Sb i,t(v) or|v|·Ss i,t(v), depending on whether it is a buy/sell; (ii) Hedge Cost: Market maker pays a cost of|v|· Sb ref,t(v) if 1Buys and sells are from the market maker’s perspective unless otherwise noted. 3 it is selling and|v|· Ss ref,t(v) if it is buying, wherev =−xi,tzi,t; assuming that the market maker hedges with the exchange; (iii) Inventory PnL:(Pt+1−Pt)·zt; (iv) Total PnL =Sspread PnL + Hedge Cost + Inventory PnL. In this paper, we assume that the buy spread streamed by a market maker agent is of the form Sb t (v) :=Sb ref,t(v)· (1 +ϵb), where the market maker subscript is dropped for simplicity (a similar relation is assumed for the sell spread). Thus, the pricing action reduces to a choice ofϵb andϵs at each time stept. Based on this parametrization, we can deﬁne two simple baseline market maker agents: (a) Random Agent that picksϵb,ϵs∼ Unif[ϵmin,ϵmax], and the fraction to hedge x∼ Unif[0, 1] at each time step (b) Persistent Agent that keeps a ﬁxedϵb,ϵs and hedges a ﬁxed fractionx at each time step. 3.2 Investor Agent We assume that each investor agent has a trade generation process speciﬁed by probability distributions for trade size, direction and arrival. The investor agent executes the trade in the same time step by picking the market maker to trade with that offers him the best price. 3.3 Exchange reference price The mid price processP is diffused as a geometric brownian motion with drift µ and volatilityσ, i.e. Pt =Pt−1 exp(µ∆− 0.5σ2∆ +σ √ ∆Zt), where (Zt) are i.i.d. standard normal and ∆ is the timestep value (∆ =15 mins). Note thatE[Pt] =P0 exp(µ∆). The reference spread curvesSs ref,t(v),Sb ref,t(v) are assumed to be equal and are sampled at each timestep from a statistical model calibrated to real market data (details in Appendix). 4 Adaptive Market Maker Agent In this section, we will deﬁne a more realistic, adaptive pricing and hedging policy for the market maker agent. The pricing/hedging algorithms used in this section are inspired by standard mean- variance trade-off formulations used in the mathematical ﬁnance literature for pricing and hedging, cf Almgren and Chriss (2001), Bank, Ekren, and Muhle-Karbe (2018), further tailored to suit our framework. We assume that the adaptive market maker maintains anempirical response table with estimates of the mean and variances of the incoming net ﬂowvϵ and the normalized spread PnLsϵ (normalized bySref(0)) as a function of (ϵb,ϵs). In our experiments, the agent uses its observations at each time step to update the table with an exponential forgetting factor of β (set to 0.35 ). We also assume that the agent holds an estimate of the mid-price volatilityσ, below we will use the normal volatility ˆσ :=σ √ ∆Pt over the each interval [t,t + 1]. Overall, the adaptive market maker’s policy is determined by two static parameters - market share targetηms and risk aversionγ, and the empirical response table which is dynamically updated based on the agent’s observations. Results showing that the adaptive agent outperforms simple baseline agents are included in the Appendix. 4.1 Adaptive Pricing Policy The adaptive market maker chooses (ϵb,ϵs) at each time step to (a) meet its market share targetηms, and (b) internalize by skewing its prices. It does this in two steps: Step 1: The market maker picks ϵb = ϵs = ϵ∗ to achieve its market share target ηms within a toleranceδtol = 5% by solving ϵ∗ = max{ϵ : |cost1(ϵ)−minxcost1(x)|≤ δtol} ; cost1(ϵ) := ⏐⏐⏐⏐ηms− E[vϵ] Vmarket ⏐⏐⏐⏐ where Vmarket is the observed total market volume and E[vϵ] is looked up from the empirical estimates. This step ensures that the market maker is able to adapt its pricing if it is getting little or no trade ﬂow. 4 Step 2: The market maker then skews only one side (buy/sell) to attract a ﬂow that offsets its current inventoryz i.e. if it has negative (positive) inventory it decreases ϵb (ϵs) to attract offsetting buys (sells). However, decreasing spreads impacts spread PnL; so the market maker has to trade-off between the loss of spread PnL and the risk of carrying inventory in deciding how much to skew. It selects the optimal ϵ for the side it is skewing (while the other side is kept ﬁxed to ϵ∗) so as to minimize the below cost function: cost2(ϵ) :=−Sref(0)E[sϵ]| {z } spread PnL +γ vuu√ Sref(0)2var[sϵ]| {z } spread PnL uncertainty + ˆ σ2E[(z +vϵ)2]| {z } cost of risk + internalization In the above, the mid-price increment over one timestep is assumed to be normally distributed with mean 0 and variance ˆσ2;E[sϵ],var[sϵ],E[vϵ],var[vϵ] are empirical estimates; and γ is the risk-aversion parameter representing the mean-variance trade-off. 4.2 Adaptive Hedging Policy The approach we choose for hedging is similar to the mean-variance approach in step 2 of 4.1. In hedging, the market maker has to decide the fractionx of the current inventoryz to hedge by initiating an offsetting trade. In doing so, the market maker has to trade off between (a) the cost of hedging (which increases with the size of the hedge trade), and (b) the risk of carrying inventory and being impacted by mid-price changes. The market makers’s cost over one timestep isc(x) :=|xz|Sref(xz)− ˆσ(z(1−x) +vϵ)Z, where Z∼N(0, 1). This leads to settingx so as to minimize the below cost function: costhedge(x) :=|xz|Sref(xz)| {z } hedge cost +γ √ ˆσ2E[(z(1−x) +vϵ)2]| {z } cost of risk + internalization In the above,E[vϵ] andvar[vϵ] are empirical estimates, and the risk aversion parameterγ is chosen to be the same as the one using in pricing, for consistency. 5 RL-based Market Maker Agent We use a standard implementation of the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) algorithm with clipped objective in Rllib (Schulman et al. (2017), Liang et al. (2017)) to train the RL-based market maker. The input to the policy network includes all the observations available to the agent at that time step (see 3.1), as well as the inventory PnL from the previous time step. The outputs of the policy network are the pricing parametersϵb,ϵs∈ [−1, 1] and the fraction to hedgex∈ [0, 1]. By default, the RL agent uses the Total Pnl speciﬁed in 3.1 as the scalar reward to train its policy. 5.1 Optimal pricing for spread PnL Our primary objective is to understand the behavior of an RL-based market maker when it is trained against different competitors. In order to assess whether the RL agent is learning about its competitor’s policy, we derive the optimalϵb,ϵs in Theorem 1 for a simpliﬁed case where the RL agent competes with exactly one other market maker. (proof in Appendix). Theorem 1 The expected spread PnL of an agent competing with a market maker agent that quotes buy/sell prices according to the distributionsFcomp j (x) :=P [ϵcomp j ≤x],j∈{b,s}, is maximized by setting: ϵj = argmaxϵ(1 +ϵ)(1−Fcomp j (ϵ) +p ˆFcomp j (ϵ)) where p is the probability that the agent wins the trade when both agents quote the same price, ˆFcomp j (ϵ) :=P [ϵcomp j =ϵ] =Fcomp j (ϵ)−Fcomp j (ϵ−). The result holds under the assumption that investor trades are possibly random but independent from ϵcomp b , ϵcomp s . In particular, if Fcomp b , Fcomp s are Unif[a,b ], with−1≤a≤b, then we getϵ∗ b =ϵ∗ s = 1 2 max(2a,b− 1). 5 5.2 Reward formulations for risk aversion Our basic reward deﬁnition of Total PnL models an agent that is not risk averse. However, in practice, a market maker would not prefer its inventory PnL to be volatile, e.g. high losses combined with high gains. To model this risk aversion, we add a penalty term to the Total PnL which aims at reducing the inventory PnL variance. This aversion to mid-price ﬂuctuations is modeled in the adaptive market maker via its risk aversion coefﬁcient. We propose the following risk penalty functions and empirically compare them in our experiments. • [InvPnL Stdev] Penalty =−α·Std10(InventoryPnL) (rolling 10-timestep Stdev). • [InvPnL2] Penalty =−α· InventoryPnL2 • [Asymmetric] Penalty =α· min(0, InventoryPnL) In our experimentsα = 0.4, 0.07 and 0.3, respectively, for the three penalty functions. These values were chosen by trial-and-error to be ranges where the RL agent still chooses to trade; a very large penalty term results in the RL agent choosing not to trade at all by setting a high spread. 5.3 Experimental settings In our experiments, we use a 2-layer fully-connected neural network with 256 nodes in each layer and tanh activation functions for the PPO policy network and a PPO clip parameter of 0.3. For each training iteration, we take one step of minibatch SGD via Adam with a minibatch size of 256 and learning rate of 5e-5. For each of experiments, we trained an RL policy starting from 5 different initial random seeds. In experiments with the RL agent, the agent is ﬁrst trained against the competitor until convergence; the ﬁnal policy is then used to calculate performance measures. 6 Experiments All experiments are conducted with a set of 20 investor agents, each of which generate a buy or sell order of unit size at each time step with equal probability. The exchange mid-price has zero drift (µ = 0) and volatility (σ = 0.1), unless otherwise speciﬁed. In all our experiments, we use the Total Pnl deﬁned in 3.1 as the key performance measure to compare market maker agents. For a given set of agent policies, we evaluate metrics per time-step, averaged across 5000 or more simulation timesteps and 5 random seeds. All PnL metrics are multiplied by 100 for readability. 6.1 Competitive Scenarios We trained an RL-based market maker against competing random, persistent and adaptive market makers. In all experiments, the PPO policy was able to converge (convergence plots in Appendix). Performance: The RL agent was able to outperform the random and persistent agents in all experi- ments (Table 1). It also clearly outperforms the adaptive agent when the adaptive agent is risk averse (γ = 2); but the adaptive agent is able to close the gap/outperform at lower risk aversion (Table 2). Figure 2 shows the convergence of the total reward for the RL and adaptive agents during training. Unlike the random or persistent agents which have ﬁxed policies, the adaptive agent actively responds to changes in RL agent’s policy by adapting its empirical response table. Note that the RL agent in this case is not risk averse and pursues Total PnL. If the adaptive agent is not risk averse (γ = 0) and targets a 0.5 market share, it is able to converge to a similar reward as the RL agent; but it loses if it is risk averse (γ = 2). Learning the competitor pricing strategy: Using Theorem 1, we can compute the optimal strategy for spread PnL maximization. In our experiments (see Table 3), we ﬁnd that the RL agent prices, on average, just below the persistent agent as expected. Against the random agents, it prices, on average, close to the "optimal point" of 0 against Unif[−1, 1] and -0.25 against Unif[−0.5, 0.5]. Furthermore, if we look at the distribution ofϵb for the RL agent (Figure 1), we ﬁnd that the peak of the distribution corresponds to the "optimal pricing point", i.e.ϵ = 0 against the random agent and 6 Table 1: RL Agent vs Random/Persistent: Av- erage excess PnL per time-step of RL agent over competitor Competitor Spread PnL Inventory PnL Hedge Cost Total PnL Persistent (-0.5) 21.60 0.40 8.10 29.30 Persistent (0.0) 74.20 0.20 1.80 76.20 Random (Unif[−0.5, 0.5]) 33.90 0.40 25.50 59.70 Random (Unif[−1.0, 1.0]) 24.00 -0.70 30.80 54.10 Table 2: RL vs Adaptive agent: Average ex- cess PnL per time-step of RL agent over com- petitor Risk Aversion MS target Hedge Cost Inventory PnL Spread PnL Total PnL 0 0.25 -0.73 0.14 81.83 81.24 0.50 -0.00 3.52 -7.92 -4.40 1 0.25 -0.37 0.30 94.16 94.09 0.50 0.74 0.01 4.88 5.64 2 0.25 -0.22 -0.49 93.18 92.47 0.50 2.02 0.54 23.87 26.42 Figure 1: RL Agent vs Competitor: ϵ- distribution. The optimal pricing point ac- cording to Theorem 1 is 0 against the random agent and -0.6 against the adaptive agent. Figure 2: RL vs Adaptive agent: Convergence during training. Left: adaptive agent - ηms = 0.5,γ = 2 . Right: adaptive agent - ηms = 0.5,γ = 0 ϵ =−0.6 against adaptive agent. In the experiment with the adaptive agent, we use the empirical c.d.f. ofϵb for the adaptive agent after convergence (in blue) and theorem 1 to compute the "optimal pricing point" for the RL agent i.e.ϵ =−0.6; this coincides with highest RL pricing density (green). Note, that the "optimal pricing points" are only with respect to spread PnL, whereas the RL agent is maximizing the Total PnL. However, in practice, the average Total PnL is typically driven by spread PnL (see tables 1, 2). The results illustrate that the RL agent is able to learn about its competitor’s pricing strategy from the partial observations of its own pricing and resulting trades. Price skewing for internalization: The RL agent also learns to skew its pricing for internalization (see Figure 3). Unlike the adaptive agent that was explicitly designed to skew, the RL agent was given no prior knowledge or bias to enable skewing. Nevertheless, it learns to skewϵb lower when inventory is negative to attract offsetting buys; similarly for positive inventory it skewsϵs lower to attract sells. 6.2 Price environment The goal is to study the impact of the mid price drift µ on the inventory held by the RL agent (cf. section 3.3). If the drift is positive (resp. negative), it is optimal to hold a positive (resp. negative) inventory as in average on every timestep, the mid-price will go up (resp. down), yielding a positive inventory PnL. The setup consists of 3 agents: RL, Adaptive and persistent (ϵb =ϵs = 0). The RL agent is able to learn that pattern well, in particular that i) the inventory held must be an increasing function of drift and ii) for extremely positive (resp. negative) values of the drift, the inventory held must be signiﬁcantly positive (resp. negative). This is seen on ﬁgure 4 showing a zoom of the inventory over 500 rollout timesteps: forµ = 1, at each new rollout of 200 timesteps, the RL agent starts from 0 inventory and clearly tries to reach as quickly as possible the highest possible inventory, whereas whenµ =−1, the RL agent learned to hold a negative inventory (average of -16.06). For values of mu closer to 0, the inventory is closer to 0 as expected, and in average the inventory held forµ = 0.01 (10.82) is higher than in the case µ =−0.01 (0.97). Table 3: RL Agent vs Random/Persistent: Mean and standard deviation ofϵs andϵb for RL agent Competitor ϵs ϵb Persistent (-0.5) -0.60 ± 0.16 -0.60 ± 0.16 Persistent (0.0) -0.22 ± 0.15 -0.22 ± 0.13 Random (Unif[−0.5, 0.5]) -0.20 ± 0.15 -0.20 ± 0.15 Random (Unif[−1.0, 1.0]) -0.03 ± 0.14 -0.03 ± 0.22 7 Figure 3: RL Agent - Price Skewing. Averageϵb (buy epsilon) andϵs (sell epsilon) for RL agent at different levels of inventory. Left: vs persistent (ϵ = 0). Right: vs adaptive (ηms = 0.5,γ = 2).RL agent skewing: sample simulation against an adaptive agent Figure 4: RL Agent - inventory for various mid-price drift values µ, as a function of time (500 timesteps, i.e. 2.5 rollouts of 200 timesteps) Figure 5: RL Agent - Distributions of in- ventory and inventory PnL for different risk penalties 6.3 Reward function design The goal is to study the impact of the penalty functions proposed in section 5 on the inventory held by the RL agent, as well as its inventory PnL. The setup consists of 2 agents: RL and persistent (ϵb =−0.5,ϵs = 0), and the results are displayed in ﬁgure 5. It is observed that all 3 penalty functions have the desired effect of i) decreasing the inventory and inventory PnL standard deviation and ii) decreasing the absolute inventory mean value. 7 Conclusions and Future Work By using a multi-agent simulator to train an RL-based market maker agent with different competitive scenarios, reward formulations and market price drifts, we have been able to draw key insights into the behavior of the RL agent. We show that the reinforcement learning agent is able to learn about its competitor’s pricing policy; it also learns to manage inventory by skewing prices and to maintain a positive (or negative) inventory depending on whether the market price drift is positive (or negative). We have also shown that different reward formulations can be used to create a risk averse RL-based market maker. This allows us to deﬁne a spectrum of market makers with different preferences and simulate more realistic competitive scenarios. An interesting future direction of research, would be to study the effect of adverse selection and informed investors on market makers. Our multi-agent framework is particularly suitable for this because it explicitly models investor agents and allows market makers to counter adverse selection by tailoring their policies to the agent they are interacting with. 8 References Almgren, R., and Chriss, N. 2001. Optimal execution of portfolio transactions. Journal of Risk 3:5–39. Amihud, Y ., and Mendelson, H. 1980. Dealership market: Market-making with inventory.Journal of ﬁnancial economics 8(1):31–53. Avellaneda, M., and Stoikov, S. 2008. High-frequency trading in a limit order book. Quantitative Finance 8(3):217–224. Bank, P.; Ekren, I.; and Muhle-Karbe, J. 2018. Liquidity in competitive dealer markets. Chan, N. T., and Shelton, C. 2001. An electronic Market-Maker. Technical Report, MIT AI Lab. Cont, R., and Mueller, M. S. 2019. A stochastic partial differential equation model for limit order book dynamics. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3366536. Darley, V .; Outkin, A.; Plate, T.; and Gao, F. 2000. Sixteenths or pennies? observations from a simulation of the nasdaq stock market. In Proceedings of the IEEE/IAFE/INFORMS 2000 Conference on Computational Intelligence for Financial Engineering (CIFEr) (Cat. No.00TH8520), 151–154. Das, S. 2005. A learning market-maker in the Glosten-Milgrom model. In Quantitative Finance. Das, S. 2008. The effects of market-making on price dynamics. InProceedings of the 7th international joint conference on Autonomous agents and multiagent systems - Volume 2, 887–894. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems. Garman, M. B. 1976. Market microstructure. Journal of ﬁnancial economics 3(3):257–275. Ghoshal, S., and Roberts, S. 2016. Optimal FX market making under inventory risk and adverse selection constraints. Technical report, Working paper. Glosten, L. R., and Milgrom, P. R. 1985. Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist market with heterogeneously informed traders. Journal of ﬁnancial economics 14(1):71–100. Guéant, O.; Lehalle, C.-A.; and Fernandez-Tapia, J. 2013. Dealing with the inventory risk: a solution to the market making problem. Mathematics and Financial Economics 7(4):477–507. Guéant, O. 2017. Optimal market making. Applied Mathematical Finance. Ho, T., and Stoll, H. R. 1981. Optimal dealer pricing under transactions and return uncertainty. Journal of ﬁnancial economics 9(1):47–73. Jumadinova, J., and Dasgupta, P. 2010. A comparison of different automated market-maker strategies. In 12th Workshop on Agent-Mediated Electronic Commerce, 141–154. Liang, E.; Liaw, R.; Moritz, P.; Nishihara, R.; Fox, R.; Goldberg, K.; Gonzalez, J. E.; Jordan, M. I.; and Stoica, I. 2017. RLlib: Abstractions for distributed reinforcement learning. Lim, Y .-S., and Gorse, D. 2018. Reinforcement learning for High-Frequency market making. In ESANN. Schulman, J.; Wolski, F.; Dhariwal, P.; Radford, A.; and Klimov, O. 2017. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. Spooner, T.; Fearnley, J.; Savani, R.; and Koukorinis, A. 2018. Market making via reinforcement learning. Wah, E.; Wright, M.; and Wellman, M. P. 2017. Welfare effects of market making in continuous double auctions. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 59:613–650. 9 Disclaimer This paper was prepared for information purposes by the AI Research Group of JPMorgan Chase & Co and its afﬁliates (“J.P. Morgan”), and is not a product of the Research Department of J.P. Morgan. J.P. Morgan makes no explicit or implied representation and warranty and accepts no liability, for the completeness, accuracy or reliability of information, or the legal, compliance, ﬁnancial, tax or accounting effects of matters contained herein. This document is not intended as investment research or investment advice, or a recommendation, offer or solicitation for the purchase or sale of any security, ﬁnancial instrument, ﬁnancial product or service, or to be used in any way for evaluating the merits of participating in any transaction. Appendix 7.1 Proof of Theorem 1 Since the spread PnL is the sum of the sell side and buy side spread PnL, and since we can act independently on the two sides viaϵb,ϵs, it is maximized when both are maximized. Let us then prove the theorem for the sell side, the proof for the buy side is identical. Denote 1{·} the indicator function andvi,i = 1..N the N investor trades (possibly random but independent fromϵs). Then, there are 3 possibilities: eitherϵs >ϵ comp s in which case the RL agent gets 0 trades;ϵs <ϵ comp s in which case the RL agent gets all the trades, andϵs =ϵcomp s in which case for each trade, there is a probabilityp to get it: we model the latter by Bernoulli(p) random variablesyi,i = 1..N, independent from all other random variables, such that the investor trades in case ofϵs =ϵcomp s are given byyivi. We get: SpreadPnL(ϵs) = ( N∑ i=1 |vi|Sref (vi)(1 +ϵs) ) 1{ϵs<ϵcomp s } + ( N∑ i=1 yi|vi|Sref (vi)(1 +ϵs) ) 1{ϵs=ϵcomp s } Taking expectations, using independence between ϵcomp s , yi, vi, and denoting αN :=∑N i=1E[|vi|Sref (vi)] we get: E[SpreadPnL(ϵs)] = (1 +ϵs)αNP [ϵs <ϵ comp s ] +(1 +ϵs)αNE[yi]P [ϵs =ϵcomp s ] Since E[yi] = p, P [ϵs < ϵcomp s ] = 1 − Fcomp s (ϵs), and P [ϵs = ϵcomp s ] = Fcomp s (ϵs)− limx→ϵ− s Fcomp s (x) (where as usualx→ϵ− s denotes the left limit), we ﬁnally get: ϵ∗ s = argmaxϵh(ϵ) : (1 +ϵ)(1−Fcomp s (ϵ) +p ˆFcomp s (ϵ)) In particular ifFcomp s is continuous, we get ˆFcomp s = 0. In the case Unif[a,b ], we have ˆFcomp s = 0 andFcomp s (ϵ) = ϵ−a b−a forϵ∈ [a,b ]. The maximum of the functionh on [−1,∞) is the maximum of that function on [a,b ), since forϵ<a ,h(ϵ) = 1 +ϵ≤ h(a) = 1 +a and forϵ≥b,h(ϵ) = 0. Standard calculus shows that the function ϵ→ (1 +ϵ)b−ϵ b−a has a global maximum located atϵ∗ = b−1 2 . Hence, the maximum ofh on [a,b ) isϵ∗ ifϵ∗≥a, and a otherwise (note that we always haveϵ∗≤b sinceb≥− 1). 7.2 Simulation of the exchange reference price In this section we use the terminology "bid" (resp. "ask") for "buy" (resp. "sell"). The market reference price curveSref (v) is assumed to be known by all participants and speciﬁes the cost of trading a sizev on the reference exchange (relatively to the mid price), which operates like a limit order book (cf. ﬁgure 6). Such a structure is characterized by 2 lists of 2-tuples (na k,ak), (nb k,bk),k≥ 0, where: • (orders available on the ask side) one can buy at most a size ofna k at price levelak, where (ak) is an increasing sequence anda0 is called the ask price, i.e. the lowest price at which you can buy (but only at most a size ofna 0). 10 Figure 6: Illustration of a LOB as displayed in Cont and Mueller (2019) Figure 7: calibration ofSref • (orders available on the bid side) one can sell at most a size ofnb k at price levelbk, where (bk) is a decreasing sequence andb0 is called the bid price, i.e. the highest price at which you can sell (but only at most a size ofnb 0). For example, if you want to buy a total size ofv, the related cost will be given by: (v− n∗−1∑ k=0 na k)an∗ + n∗−1∑ k=0 akna k n∗ :=inf{n :v < n∑ k=0 na k} The reference market spread is deﬁned ass0 :=a0−b0 = 2Sref (0), and the reference market mid price is given byPt = a0+b0 2 . In the following we will assume thatSref (v) is the same on the bid and ask side, so we continue the reasoning with the ask side. The reference market spread s0 is simulated, at each time step, as a normal random variable of mean 0.01% and stdev 0.005% (we further enforces0 to be no less than 0.001% and no more than 0.025%). We model 10 levels of the bid (resp. ask ) side, given bys0 2 +n b.p. (1 b.p.=0.01%),n = 0..9. The volumev(n) available at leveln is modeled as: v(n) = λ|{z} scaler · v(0)|{z} best level volume · shape(n)| {z } shape function shape(0) = 1, v(0)∼ Gamma Law, E [v(0)] = 1. The scalerλ is a constant currently calibrated before the experiment such that investor trades process are able to hit the full range of LOB levels. v(0) and the shape function are random variables calibrated to LOB data (1 day of stock MSFT). We smooth the raw LOB shape data by ﬁtting a 2nd order polynomial to it, and we sample independently the shape and v(0) at each timestep. This methodology is illustrated in ﬁgure 7, where various sample shapes and generatedSref prices are presented, together wit a Gamma ﬁt ofv(0). 7.3 RL agent reward convergence 7.3.1 Random Agent Competitor The goal of this section is to show the convergence of the RL reward function in the learning phase with respect to the number of timesteps, and so for 5 different random number generator seeds. We display in ﬁgures 8 (resp. 9) the reward functions of the RL agent in the learning phase in the case where it competes against a random agent quoting random pricesϵs,ϵb between -1 and 1 (resp. -0.5 and 0.5). The reward function is shown to converge. 11 Figure 8: RL Agent - trained against Random Agent(-1,1) with 5 different seeds Figure 9: RL Agent - trained against Random Agent(-0.5,0.5) with 5 different seeds Figure 10: RL Agent - trained against Per- sistent Agent ϵs = ϵb = 0 with 5 different seeds Figure 11: RL Agent - trained against Persis- tent Agentϵs = ϵb =−0.5 with 5 different seeds 7.3.2 Persistent Agent Competitor The goal of this section is to show the convergence of the RL reward function in the learning phase with respect to the number of timesteps, and so for 5 different random number generator seeds. We display in ﬁgures 10 (resp. 11) the reward functions of the RL agent in the learning phase in the case where it competes against a persistent agent quoting pricesϵs =ϵb = 0 (resp.ϵs =ϵb =−0.5). The reward function is shown to converge. 7.4 RL agent hedging In order to illustrate the ability of the RL agent to outperform its adaptive counterpart in speciﬁc situations, we study the case where hedge cost is zero (i.e. it doesn’t cost anything to hedge inventory), Sref is high so that one is incentivized to trade with investors, but on the other hand, investors are toxic in the sense that they have perfect knowledge of the mid price move on future timesteps, meaning that inventory PnL will always be negative. This setting illustrates the case where e.g. hedge funds possess complex statistical models that allow them to predict accurately future price moves. The adaptive agent is set to 50% target market share and risk aversion of 2. The adaptive agent currently doesn’t keep track of toxicity (i.e. the ability of an investor to predict mid-price move), so it is expected of the RL agent to exploit that weakness. We display in ﬁgure 12 the hedged inventory of both agents as a function of timesteps, as well as the total rewards. It is seen that the RL agent indeed learns to hedge signiﬁcantly more than the adaptive agent in this setting, so that it is able to outperform it. 7.5 Adaptive agent skewing We illustrate in ﬁgures 13, 14 the pricing mechanism of the adaptive agent for risk aversions 0, 2. In this setting, the adaptive agent has a target market share of 25% and competes against a persistent agent quotingϵs = 0,ϵb =−0.5. When the adaptive agent quotes ϵs =ϵb = 0, he would then in average achieve 25% market share (remember that when 2 agents quote the same price, they have probability 50% to be selected by the investor). Hence, in the adaptive pricing policy, if there was no step 2 but only step 1 targeting market share,ϵs =ϵb = 0 would be the optimal level, and this is why in ﬁgures 13, 14, max(ϵb,ϵs) = 0, i.e. at every timestep, the maximum of the blue and green lines correspond to step 1 of the adaptive pricing policy. The reason why ϵb−ϵs⁄= 0 (i.e. skewing) is because of step 2 which consists of optimizing a trade-off between spread PnL and aversion to inventory PnL. When risk aversion is zero (ﬁgure 12 Figure 12: RL Agent Vs. Adaptive agent - toxic investors - hedged inventory and reward. Figure 13: Adaptive agent -ϵb,ϵs and Inven- tory - Risk Aversion=0 Figure 14: Adaptive agent -ϵb,ϵs and Inven- tory - Risk Aversion=2 13), min(ϵb,ϵs) is -0.6 when min(ϵb,ϵs) = ϵb, and -0.2 when min(ϵb,ϵs) = ϵs: that is, when risk aversion is zero, the market maker only tries to optimize spread PnL and so it sufﬁces to price just slightly better than its competitor (which prices at ϵs = 0,ϵb =−0.5). When risk aversion is 2 (ﬁgure 14), the market maker is eager to lower its absolute inventory at the expense of its spread PnL, and that is why in that case, the market maker prices aggressively in order to attract investor ﬂow: in this case we always have min(ϵb,ϵs) =−0.8 so that the adaptive market maker is guaranteed to attract a signiﬁcant amount of investor ﬂow in order to reduce its absolute inventory. 7.6 Adaptive agent hedging policy Table 6 demonstrates that our adaptive hedging policy outperforms alternative policies - persistent, random and a similar adaptive policy which ignores internalization (i.e. vϵ = 0 ). The test was conducted by evaluating the performance of an agent with an adaptive pricing policy but different hedging policies, against a persistent agent (ϵb =ϵs = 0,x = 0.2). As expected, ignoring the effect of internalization leads to over-hedging and poor performance especially when the risk aversion is high (hedge cost of -43 forγ = 2). 7.7 Adaptive vs Random/Persistent Agents We validated the effectiveness of the adaptive agent by evaluating it against a random (ϵb =ϵs∼ Unif[−1, 1]) and persistent (ϵb =−0.5,ϵs = 0,x = 0.2) agent. In each case, we tested different adaptive policies, speciﬁed by the market share target and risk aversion level for the adaptive agent. As shown in tables 4 and 5, the adaptive agent is able to outperform its competitors in terms of Total PnL; in most cases it has an advantage on both spread PnL and hedge cost. However, increasing the risk aversion decreases the competitiveness of the adaptive agent because it tends to hedge more and adjust pricing to maximize internalization rather than spread PnL (in Step 2 outlined in 4.1). 13 Table 4: Adaptive vs. Persistent Agent: Av- erage excess PnL per time-step of adaptive agent over competitor MS target Risk Aversion Spread PnL Inventory PnL Hedge Cost Total PnL 0.25 0 14.64 0.02 8.67 23.33 1 10.34 -0.06 8.21 18.48 2 0.61 0.03 5.19 5.83 0.50 0 55.7 0.14 2.77 58.61 1 47.75 -0.09 2.58 50.23 2 34.01 -0.15 -2.18 31.68 Table 5: Adaptive vs. Random Agent: Aver- age excess PnL of per time-step of adaptive agent over competitor MS target Risk Aversion Spread PnL Inventory PnL Hedge Cost Total PnL 0.25 0 13.85 -0.03 28.98 42.81 1 -7.3 -0.1 28.32 20.92 2 -21.35 -0.07 25.66 4.24 0.50 0 28.81 0.25 25.38 54.44 1 20.84 0.02 24.88 45.74 2 17.05 -0.03 17.19 34.22 Table 6: Adaptive Hedging Policy vs Alterna- tives: Average PnL per time-step (multiplied by 100). Hedging Policy Spread PnL Inventory Hedge Cost Total PnL PnL Random:x∼ [0, 1] 51.36 0.07 -15.70 35.73 Persistent:x = 0.2 51.43 -0.03 -3.84 47.57 Adaptive:γ = 1 51.39 0.02 -0.22 51.19 Adaptive:γ = 2 51.34 0.10 -1.23 50.21 Adaptivevϵ = 0:γ = 1 51.53 -0.07 -2.30 49.17 Adaptive:vϵ = 0:γ = 2 50.56 -0.01 -43.47 7.08 14