Fools Rush In: Competitive Effects of Reaction Time in Automated Trading Henry Hanifan1 and John Cartlidge1 a 1Department of Computer Science,University of Bristol, Merchant Venturers Building, Woodland Road, Bristol, UK hh15092@my.bristol.ac.uk, john.cartlidge@bristol.ac.uk Keywords: Agent Based Modelling, Auctions, Automated Trading, Financial Markets, Simulation, Trading Agents Abstract: We explore the competitive effects of reaction time of automated trading strategies in simulated ﬁnancial mar- kets containing a single exchange with public limit order book and continuous double auction matching. A large body of research conducted over several decades has been devoted to trading agent design and sim- ulation, but the majority of this work focuses on pricing strategy and does not consider the time taken for these strategies to compute. In real-world ﬁnancial markets, speed is known to heavily inﬂuence the design of automated trading algorithms, with the generally accepted wisdom that faster is better. Here, we introduce increasingly realistic models of trading speed and proﬁle the computation times of a suite of eminent trading algorithms from the literature. Results demonstrate that: (a) trading performance is impacted by speed, but faster is not always better; (b) the Adaptive-Aggressive (AA) algorithm, until recently considered the most dominant trading strategy in the literature, is outperformed by the simplistic Shaver (SHVR) strategy—shave one tick off the current best bid or ask—when relative computation times are accurately simulated. 1 INTRODUCTION As trading in ﬁnancial markets has become in- creasingly automated, the importance of speed is paramount. Competition between automated trading systems (ATS) looking to capitalise on ﬂeeting op- portunities ahead of rivals has resulted in a prolif- eration of high frequency trading (HFT) algorithms capable of executing many thousands of trades each second (Dufﬁn and Cartlidge, 2018). The effects of ever-faster ATS (the so calledrace to zero) can be ob- served in the dynamics of modern ﬁnancial markets: individual stocks now frequently exhibit ten percent price swings in less than one tenth of a second (John- son et al., 2013); ﬂash crashes can cause whole mar- kets to lose a trillion dollars in ﬁve minutes (Baxter and Cartlidge, 2013); and when market-leading ATS’s malfunction, the owners can be pushed to bankruptcy in under an hour (Baxter and Cartlidge, 2013). Yet, the literature on automated ﬁnancial trading agents is largely bereft of considerations of compu- tational speed, with the majority of work focusing on pricing strategies. One reason for this is largely historical, with trading agent experiments tending to follow Vernon Smith’s seminal design that helped a https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3143-6355 birth the ﬁeld of experimental economics (Smith, 1962). Using human participants, Smith (1962) set up a simple marketplace where traders took turns to quote prices and execute trades in an open out- cry style marketplace. To enable strict comparisons with earlier work, later studies that introduced new automated trading algorithms (e.g., ZIC (Gode and Sunder, 1993); ZIP (Cliff, 1997); GD (Gjerstad and Dickhaut, 1997); and AA (Vytelingum, 2006)) tended to follow Smith’s original design. Although subse- quent works have gradually introduced a series of adaptations, such as the use of an order book (Das et al., 2001), real-time experiments that include hu- man and agent participants (Das et al., 2001; De Luca and Cliff, 2011; De Luca et al., 2011; Cartlidge and Cliff, 2012), and more realistic market dynam- ics such as continuous replenishment of assignments (De Luca et al., 2011; Cartlidge and Cliff, 2012) and continuously varying equilibria (Cliff, 2019; Snashall and Cliff, 2020), the time taken for agents to com- pute their strategy has remained signiﬁcantly under- studied. Several works have demonstrated that altering the design of trading agent experiments can raise doubt over how well previously established results trans- late to real world markets. This had led several au- thors to call for more experimental realism (e.g., De arXiv:1912.02775v2 [q-fin.TR] 29 Nov 2020 Hanifan & Cartlidge (2020), Fools Rush In: Competitive Effects of Reaction Time in Automated Trading Luca et al. (2011); Cartlidge and Cliff (2012, 2018); Cliff (2019); Snashall and Cliff (2020)). Here, we address that challenge by introducing minimal mod- els of computation time (‘thinking’ time, or ‘reac- tion’ time, of traders) into the standard experimental framework. Using an adaptation of the Bristol Stock Exchange (Cliff, 2018), we explore the competitive effects of computation speed on a suite of reference trading algorithms available on the platform: GVWY , SHVR, ZIC, ZIP, and AA. Perhaps unsurprisingly, results demonstrate that the relative speeds of trading strategies does affect proﬁtability. However, depending on the particular strategies competing in the market, being faster is not necessarily better . Further, we show that when relative reaction times are accurately modelled, AA – long considered the dominant trading agent strat- egy in the literature – is beaten in static symmetric markets by the simple non-adaptive trading strategy SHVR. Given other recent evidence that AA’s domi- nance is sensitive to the mixture of competing strate- gies in the market (Vach, 2015; Cliff, 2019; Snashall and Cliff, 2020), and the complexity of the market dynamics (Cliff, 2019; Snashall and Cliff, 2020) this result adds further support that AA is non-dominant when markets are more realistically modelled. The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Section 2 we review related work and introduce key economic concepts and technical details of the trad- ing agents used in these experiments. In Section 3 we introduce three methods for modelling trader speed: (i) ﬁxed ordering, (ii) tournament ranking, and (iii) speed proportional selection . Section 4 presents re- sults from a series of experiments with homogeneous markets (containing one trader type) and heteroge- neous pair-wise balanced markets (containing two trader types). In Section 5 we discuss the implications of results and describe avenues for future work. Fi- nally, Section 6 presents the conclusion that reaction speeds matter, and therefore the research community will beneﬁt from future focus in this area. 2 BACKGROUND 2.1 Trading Agent Experiments In the 1960s, Vernon Smith conducted a series of trad- ing experiments with small groups of untrained hu- man participants (i.e., students) to investigate compet- itive market behaviours (Smith, 1962). He was able to demonstrate that these simple simulations of ﬁnan- cial markets produced surprisingly efﬁcient equilibra- Figure 1: Symmetric supply and demand schedules, show- ing a market withn = 10 buyers (demand) andn = 10 sellers (supply). Limit prices for buyers (maximum price to buy) and sellers (minimum price to sell) are evenly distributed over the interval [£0.10,£1.90], giving theoretical equilib- rium price P0 = £1.00± 0.10 and expected quantity trans- acted Q0 = n/2 = 5. Intra-marginal traders, to the left of Q0, expect to transact. Extra-marginal traders do not. tion behaviours, with trade prices quickly tending to the theoretical equilibrium value predicted by the un- derlying market supply and demand. Intriguingly, three decades later, Gode and Sunder (1993) were able to reproduce similar results, but this time using ‘zero intelligence’ (ZI) algorithmic traders that gen- erate random quote prices. Despite their simplicity, markets of ZIC traders (the letter C indicating traders are constrained to not make a loss) were shown to exhibit equilibration behaviours similar to that of hu- mans, suggesting that intelligence is not necessary for competitive markets to behave efﬁciently: the market mechanism (the rules of the continuous double auc- tion) performs much of the work. However, Gode and Sunder’s (1993) result was later shown to only hold when market demand and supply are symmetric (i.e., when the magnitude of the gradient—the price elasticity—of supply and demand schedules are similar, such as the example shown in Figure 1). For asymmetric markets, such as when the supply curve is horizontal, ‘zero’ intelligence is not enough to provide human-like levels of market efﬁ- ciency (Cliff, 1997). To account for this, Cliff intro- duced a new minimally-intelligent trading algorithm, which he named Zero Intelligence Plus (ZIP). ZIP maintains an internal proﬁt margin, µ, which is in- creased or decreased by traversing a decision tree that considers the most recent quote price, the direction of the quote (buy or sell) and whether it resulted in a trade. Margin, µ, is then adjusted with magnitude pro- portional to a learning rate parameter, similar to that used in Widrow-Hoff or in back-propagation learn- ing. Cliff (1997) successfully demonstrated that mar- kets containing only ZIP traders will exhibit human- like behaviours in all of Smith’s original experimental In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Agents and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ICAART) 2 Hanifan & Cartlidge (2020), Fools Rush In: Competitive Effects of Reaction Time in Automated Trading market conﬁgurations, both symmetric and asymmet- ric. Other intelligent trading agents have been devel- oped to maximise proﬁts in experimental markets that follow Smith’s framework. Most notably, these in- clude: GD, named after its inventors, Gjerstad and Dickhaut (1997); and Adaptive-Aggressive (AA), de- veloped by Vytelingum (2006). GD selects a quote price by maximising a ‘belief’ function of the likely proﬁt for each possible quote, formed using histori- cal quotes and transaction prices in the market. Over time, the original GD algorithm has been successively reﬁned: ﬁrst by Das et al. (2001) and Tesauro and Das (2001) (named Modiﬁed GD , or MGD) to en- able trading using an order book (see example in Figure 2), and to reduce belief function volatility; and then by Tesauro and Bredin (2002), who used dynamic programming to optimise cumulative long- term discounted proﬁtability rather than immediate proﬁt ( GD eXtended, or GDX). In contrast, AA in- corporates a combination of short-term and long-term learning to update an internal proﬁt margin, µ. In the short-term, µ is updated using rules similar to ZIP. Over the long-term, AA calculates a moving average of historical transaction prices to estimate the market equilibrium value, P0, and current price volatility cal- culated as root mean square deviation of transaction prices around the estimate P0. If the AA trader es- timates that it is extra-marginal (and will therefore ﬁnd it difﬁcult to trade proﬁtably: see Figure 1) it trades more aggressively (by reducingµ), if it is intra- marginal (and will therefore ﬁnd it easier to proﬁt) it trades more passively (by increasing µ). For a summary of trading strategies, see Table 1. 2.2 The Battle for Trading Dominance For the last two decades, a research theme has emerged: to develop the best trading agent that can successfully beat human participants and other trad- ing agents in Smith-style experiments (see Snashall and Cliff (2020) for a detailed historical account). It was ﬁrst demonstrated that trading agents, specif- ically ZIP and MGD, outperform humans when di- rectly competing in human-agent markets (Das et al., 2001): “. . . the successful demonstration of machine superiority in the CDA and other common auctions could have a much more direct and powerful ﬁnan- cial impact—one that might be measured in billions of dollars annually” . This announcement quickly generated global media coverage and signiﬁcant in- dustry interest. Shortly afterwards, Tesauro and Bredin (2002) suggested that GDX “may offer the best performance of any published CDA bidding strat- Volume Price Price Volume 1 0.97 0.99 2 2 0.96 1.01 1 1 0.94 1.03 3 1 0.90 1.04 1 Bids Asks Figure 2: A Limit Order Book (LOB), presenting the cur- rent market state. Bids (orders to buy) are presented on the left hand side, ordered by price descending. Asks (or- ders to sell) are presented on the right hand side, ordered by price ascending. V olume indicates the quantity avail- able at each price. The top line presents the Best Bid (BB = 0.97) and Best Ask ( BA = 0.99) prices in the mar- ket, and the difference between these prices is called the spread = BA− BB = 0.02. The midprice of the book is (BB + BA)/2 = 0.98; the microprice is volume weighted midprice, calculated as: (2/3)0.97 + (1/3)0.99 = 0.977. Orders can be submitted at any price, subject to a mini- mum resolution, or tick size ( tick = 0.01). Aggressive or- ders that cross the spread (i.e., an ask with price pa≤ 0.97, or a bid with price pb≥ 0.99) will immediately execute at the price presented in the LOB (i.e., the ask will transact at price BB = 0.97; the bid will transact at price BA = 0.99). Passive orders that do not cross the spread will rest in the LOB, with position determined by price. egy”. Subsequently, after it’s introduction in 2006 (Vytelingum, 2006), AA was shown to dominate ZIP and GDX (Vytelingum et al., 2008) and also humans (De Luca and Cliff, 2011): “we therefore claim that AA may offer the best performance of any published strategy”. And so, for several years, AA held the undisputed algo-trading crown. However, more recently, doubt about the domi- nance of AA has emerged. In particular, for markets containing AA, GDX, and ZIP strategies, the mix- ture (i.e., the proportion) of strategies in the market has been shown to affect AA performance. In par- ticular, AA only dominates when there is a signiﬁ- cant proportion of other AA agents in the market; in other cases, it is regularly beaten by GDX and ZIP (Vach, 2015). This ﬁnding was supported by Cliff (2019), through exhaustive testing of markets contain- ing mixtures of MAA (a slightly modiﬁed version of AA which utilises microprice of the orderbook; re- fer to Figure 2), ZIC, ZIP, and SHVR (a simple non- adaptive strategy that quotes prices one tick inside the current best price on the order book). Further, Cliff (2019) found that introducing more realistic mar- ket dynamics—continuous replenishment of assign- ments, rather than periodic replenishments at regu- lar intervals; and also a continuously moving equilib- rium, P0, which was set to follow real world historical trade price data—MAA did not dominate, and when considering proﬁtability, MAA was signiﬁcantly out- performed by ZIP and SHVR. A related study by Snashall and Cliff (2020) also showed that GDX In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Agents and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ICAART) 3 Hanifan & Cartlidge (2020), Fools Rush In: Competitive Effects of Reaction Time in Automated Trading Table 1: Summary of trading agent strategies when acting as a buyer. When selling, prices are moved in the opposite direction. Q is new quote price, L is limit price, T is tick size, BB is best bid on the LOB. Traders cannot make a loss, i.e., Q≤ L. Agent Name Method to Determine New Quote Price, Q GVWY Giveaway Q = L. Always post quote at price equal to limit price. SHVR Shaver Q = min(BB + T,L). Post quote one tick inside current best bid. ZIC Zero Intelligence Constrained Q = q∈ U[0.01,L]. Quote randomly from Uniform distribution bounded by system minimum value (one tick, T = 0.01) and limit price, L. ZIP Zero Intelligence Plus Q = L(1− µ), where 0≤ µ < 1 is an internal proﬁt margin. When a trade occurs, if Q is greater than trade price, then decrease µ (i.e., raise price), otherwise increase µ. If new best bid on LOB has price BB > Q, decrease µ (i.e., raise price). AA Adaptive Aggressive Q = L(1− µ), where 0≤ µ < 1 is an internal margin. Estimate market equilibrium, P0, to determine whether L is intra-marginal (L≥ P0) or extra-marginal (L < P0). If extra-marginal, increase aggressiveness (decrease µ); else increase µ. GDX GD eXtended (not used in this study) Q selected by dynamic programming to maximise cumulative long-term discounted proﬁtability of a ‘belief’ function that calculates likely outcome of each price, q, based on the success of previous quotes and transaction prices in the market. dominates MAA, ZIP, ZIC, and ASAD (Assignment- Adaptive, developed by Stotter et al. (2013)) in these more realistically complex markets (SHVR was not tested in the latter study). 2.3 Latency and Reaction Speed Throughout the previous works, the primary motiva- tion has been focused on pricing strategies for trad- ing efﬁciency (i.e., proﬁt maximisation and market equilibration behaviours). However, if we are to bet- ter understand the behaviour of these algorithms in more realistic environments, it is important to con- sider latency, a key real-world factor that is missing in most of these studies. In real-world ﬁnancial mar- kets, communication latency (the differential delays in which traders can access trading information and initiate trades with an exchange), and trading latency (or reaction time: the time it takes for a human or algorithmic trader to react to new information) are major determinants of trading behaviours and mar- ket dynamics (Dufﬁn and Cartlidge, 2018; Snashall and Cliff, 2020). In real markets, the proliferation and proﬁtability of high frequency trading (HFT) evi- dences the efﬁcacy of harnessing reduced latency, en- abling traders to capitalise on ﬂeeting opportunities ahead of competitors. Several studies have conducted human-agent and agent-agent trading experiments using real-time asyn- chronous trading platforms. For their seminal demon- stration of agents outperforming human traders, Das et al. (2001) used a hybrid platform consisting of two of IBM’s proprietary systems: GEM, a dis- tributed experimental economics platform; and Ma- genta, an agent environment. Although real-time asynchronous, trading agents were constrained to op- erate on a sleep-wake cycle of ¯ s seconds, with fast agents having mean sleep time ¯s = 1, and slow agents having mean sleep time ¯s = 5. A random jitter was in- troduced for each sleep s such that: s∈ [0.75 ¯s,1.25 ¯s]. Fast agents were set to wake on all new orders and trades, slow traders were set to wake only on trades. Therefore, although this real-time system enabled asynchronous actions, algorithmic traders were artiﬁ- cially slowed to have reaction times comparable with human traders. Following Das et al. (2001), other real-time human-agent experiments have invoked a similar sleep-wake cycle. Using the Open Exchange (OpEx) platform,1 De Luca et al. (2011) demonstrated AA, GDX, and ZIP outperform humans when agents have sleep-wake cycle ¯ s = 1; agent-agent experiments, demonstrating AA dominance, were performed us- ing a discrete event model (such that reaction times were ignored). OpEx has also been used for further human-agent experiments, for example, to demon- strate that: aggressive ( spread-jumping) agents that are faster (i.e., those with lower ¯ s values) can per- form less well against humans (De Luca et al., 2011); faster trading agents can reduce the efﬁciencies of hu- man traders in the market (Cartlidge et al., 2012); and agents with reaction speeds much quicker than hu- mans can lead to endogenous fragmentation within a single market, such that fast (slow) traders are more likely to execute with fast (slow) traders (Cartlidge and Cliff (2012); a result that has analogies with the robot phase transition demonstrated in real-world markets (Johnson et al., 2013)). Agent-only real-time asynchronous experiments have also been conducted using the Exchange Por- 1OpEx: The Open Exchange. Available at: https://sourceforge.net/projects/open-exchange In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Agents and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ICAART) 4 Hanifan & Cartlidge (2020), Fools Rush In: Competitive Effects of Reaction Time in Automated Trading tal (ExPo) platform. 2 Stotter et al. (2013, 2014) used ExPo to introduce a new Assignment-Adaptive (ASAD) trading agent. They demonstrated that in ASAD:ZIP markets (with sleep-wake cycle, ¯ s = 4), signals produced by the trading behaviour of ASAD are beneﬁcially utilised by ZIP traders, to the detri- ment of ASAD themselves. Communications latency has been considered in other works, e.g.: Dufﬁn and Cartlidge (2018) model latency arbitrage in fragmented markets; and Miles and Cliff (2019) study the effects of latency in simu- lated markets distributed globally in the cloud. Trad- ing speed has also been incorporated into strategies, e.g.,: Gjerstad (2003) used a pace parameter to con- trol the arrival rate of GD (renamed Heuristic Belief Learning, or HBL) traders, and to alter quote price as a function of elapsed time; and McGroarty et al. (2019) introduced an agent model of ﬁnancial mar- kets with agents that operate on different timescales to simulate common strategies and behaviours, such as market makers, fundamental traders, high frequency momentum and mean-reversion traders, and noise traders. These works are representative of the literature relevant to reaction time in trading algorithms. In all, we see that computation times are either skewed by enforced sleep, directly encoded, or drawn from a probability distribution. As far as the authors are aware, there is no attempt to systematically under- stand the effects of reaction time using accurate com- putation times of individual strategies. Here, we at- tempt to address this gap. 3 METHODOLOGY 3.1 BSE: The Bristol Stock Exchange The Bristol Stock Exchange (BSE) is a minimal, discrete-time simulation of a centralised ﬁnancial market, containing a single exchange with Limit Or- der Book (LOB), and reference implementations of several leading trading strategies from the literature, including ﬁve trading strategies that we consider in this paper: GVWY , SHVR, ZIC, ZIP, and AA. For a summary description of each trader, see Table 1. For full details on BSE, refer to Cliff (2018).3 2ExPo: The Exchange Portal. Available at: https://sourceforge.net/projects/exchangeportal 3BSE: The Bristol Stock Exchange. Available at: https://github.com/davecliff/BristolStockExchange. In this paper, we use BSE version 22/07/18, commit hash: c0b6a1080b6f0804a373dbe430e34d062dc23ffb. 3.1.1 Random Order Selection (BSE Default) Each time step, BSE ensures all traders act exactly once by selecting traders at random, without replace- ment. As such, there is no concept of relative reaction times of traders. Over the course of a simulation ex- periment, a fast trader will have the same number of opportunities to act as a slow trader. Due to the ran- domised sequence of actions, the slower trader will be able to act ﬁrst when presented with ‘lucky’ opportu- nities as often as the fast trader. This is unrealistic. In the following section, we introduce three simple models of reaction time to the BSE framework. 3.2 Modelling Reaction Time 3.2.1 Fixed Order Selection The simplest model of reaction time that we imple- ment is the ordering model. Here, traders are selected to update and act in a ﬁxed order, alternating each time step between buyers ﬁrst and sellers ﬁrst to en- sure bias is not introduced. For each buyer bi∈ B and seller si∈ S (where|B| =|S| = n), we introduce two orderings: OrderA = s1,b1,s2,b2, . . . ,sn,bn (1) OrderB = b1,s1,b2,s2, . . . ,bn,sn (2) In the ﬁrst time step, one of the orderings is se- lected at random (e.g, OrderA); in the second time step, the ordering is switched (i.e., OrderB); the third time step returns to the ﬁrst ordering ( OrderA); etc. In this way, traders s1 and b1 are always selected to act ﬁrst each time step; sn and bn are always selected to act last. We can consider this as traders s1 and b1 as acting much quicker (having a smaller computation time, or reaction time) than traders sn and bn. 3.2.2 Tournament Ranking Selection The second model of reaction time assigns a speed ranking to each trader. Each time step, we perform the routine presented in Algorithm 1. We begin by creating a pool containing all traders, and then se- lect two traders at random from the pool and compare rank. The trader with the lowest rank is selected to act and then removed from the pool. This simulates two traders racing to act on new market information. We repeat these steps until all traders have acted and the pool is empty. Similar to the previous random order (Section 3.1.1) and ﬁxed order (Section 3.2.1) models, this process ensures that all traders act exactly once each time step. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Agents and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ICAART) 5 Hanifan & Cartlidge (2020), Fools Rush In: Competitive Effects of Reaction Time in Automated Trading Algorithm 1: Tournament Ranking Result: All traders have acted exactly once input : P is the set of all traders, size 2n while (size(P) > 1) do Randomly select trader A from P; Randomly select trader B from P; if (rank(B) > rank(A)) then Trader A to act; Remove A from set P; else Trader B to act; Remove B from set P; end end Select remaining trader in P to act; 3.2.3 Speed Proportional Selection The ﬁnal model of reaction time is the most realistic. Every trader is initially assigned a reaction time. Each time step, traders are selected to act in proportion to their relative speeds, such that trader A, with a reac- tion time of RA = 1 would act twice as often as trader B with a reaction time ofRB = 2. To achieve this, each time step we select traders from a biased pool contain- ing multiple references to each trader, such that the number of references is inversely proportional to each trader’s relative reaction time. For example, ifRA = 1 and RB = 2, we generate a biased pool, P ={A,A,B}, containing two references to trader A and one refer- ence to trader B. Each time step, traders are randomly selected to act, without replacement, until the pool is empty. We use notation RA B = 1/2 to indicate A’s re- action time is half B’s reaction time; similarlyRB A = 2 indicates B’s reaction time is twice as long as A. This model provides two advantages over the pre- vious models. First, it enables faster agents to act multiple times before a slower agent can act (for RB A = 2, each time step A acts twice, while B acts only once). Second, it allows slower traders to occasion- ally get ‘lucky’ by being selected ﬁrst. Therefore, of the simple models presented here, this process most accurately simulates the real world. 3.3 Experimental Conﬁguration For all experiments, markets contained an equal number of n buyers and n sellers, with assignment limit prices distributed evenly across the interval [£0.10,£1.90], as shown in Figure 1. Market sessions lasted 330 time steps, with assignments replenished periodically every 30 time steps. Each simulation conﬁguration was repeated 100 times. Error bars on graphs indicate 95% conﬁdence intervals. Statistical Figure 3: Fixed order selection for homogeneous ZIP mar- kets. Buyers (solid blue line) perform better when selected earlier, while sellers (dashed green line) perform worse. Figure 4: Fixed order selection for homogeneous AA mar- kets. All traders tend to perform better when selected later. signiﬁcance is calculated using Student’s t-test. This simple, static, symmetric market is deliberately cho- sen to enable comparisons with the literature. Reac- tion time, using the procedures deﬁned in Section 3.2, is the only independent variable that we manipulate, with the BSE default setting (all traders have equal re- action times) directly equivalent to previous studies. 4 RESULTS We present results of experiments originally per- formed for an MSc project. For further details, see Hanifan (2019). 4.1 Fixed Order Results We ran a series of experiments using homogenous trading populations with ﬁxed order selection. Re- sults demonstrate that the order in which traders act had no effect on traders’ performance (measured by proﬁt generated) for GVWY , SHVR, and ZIC markets (results not shown). This result is perhaps predictable, as these simple trading agents cannot identify and op- timally capitalise on proﬁt making opportunities, un- less they do so accidentally. However, a difference In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Agents and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ICAART) 6 Hanifan & Cartlidge (2020), Fools Rush In: Competitive Effects of Reaction Time in Automated Trading (a) AA Proﬁts Figure 10: The distribution of the ask and bid quote prices with the homoge- neous AA BSErank experiment. These results show that within this market the sellers are generally o ↵ering quote prices with larger proﬁt margins than the buyers, since the prices they o↵er are further away from the market equilibrium (see Fig 10) and both buyers and sellers have identical customer orders that are centered around the market equilibrium. This trend of the sellers operating with a large proﬁt margin but the buyers operating with a small proﬁt helps to explain why the slower seller against outperform their faster counterparts, whereas the faster buyers outper- formed their slower counterparts. In general within this market the quote prices from the buyers are coming in higher compared to the equilibrium than the quote prices from the sellers are coming in low. Due to this it is better for a supplier to act towards the end of the timestep as by this point more buyers have been able to update their bids on the LOB, providing more bids to generate proﬁt o↵. This is the opposite for the buyers as the o↵ers on the LOB are generally providing smaller proﬁts since the prices are so high, in the rare case however that the supplier o ↵ers a very low bid it is a beneﬁt for the buyer to act faster in order to secure this trade. 8.3.3Balanced T ests: T rader A vs T rader B The next experiment I carried out was still within the BSErank system, but instead of being homogeneous tests, were balanced tests between two traders. The previous two experiments have shown that time can a↵ect the performance of a trader, namely if the trader is a ZIP buyer. Since we now know that time can be a factor, we want to analyse how this factor e ↵ects di↵erent markets and whether it impacts di↵erent markets in the same way. For example, so far the GVWY trader’s performance hasn’t been e↵ected, but within markets containing di↵erent strategies, the speed it reacts to transactions could make a 28 (b) AA Quote Prices Figure 5: Tournament ranking selection for homogeneous AA markets: (a) fast (grey) buyers outperform slow (white) buyers, while slow (white) sellers outperform fast (grey) sellers; (b) distribution of quote prices, showing asks (left box-plot) tend to be posted farther from equilibrium (green line) than bids (right box-plot). can be observed in results for homogeneous ZIP mar- kets and homogeneous AA markets. In ZIP markets (Figure 3), there is a signiﬁcant difference in perfor- mance between traders selected ﬁrst (trader 0) and traders selected last (trader 9). However, perhaps sur- prisingly, while it is advantageous to be selected ear- lier when a buyer, it is better to be selected later when a seller. In AA markets (Figure 4), the ordering has less impact, but there is a general trend that being selected later improves performance. In particular, traders selected last generate signiﬁcantly more proﬁt than traders selected ﬁrst. This could be because AA traders that act later each time step have additional information available to produce a better estimation of P0, and therefore are likely to post a more prof- itable quote. However, this simple ordered model is very contrived and so we only present these results as evidence that selection ordering impacts proﬁtability of the adaptive traders, AA and ZIP. We investigate further using more realistic models in the following sections. 4.2 Tournament Ranking Results 4.2.1 Homogeneous Markets We performed tournament ranking selection in homo- geneous markets. When pitted against only traders of the same type, GVWY and ZIP perform better when faster, but the difference is not signiﬁcant. For other traders there is no difference between fast and slow traders. However, for AA (see Figure 5), we see that fast buyers signiﬁcantly outperform slow buyers, while slow sellers signiﬁcantly outperform fast sell- ers. Overall, sellers generate signiﬁcantly more proﬁt than buyers, which is a result of prices tending to ap- proach equilibrium from above. We see that asks (i.e., sell quotes) tend to be farther from equilibrium than bids (i.e., buy quotes), suggesting that sellers are re- Figure 6: Balanced test SHVR:GVWY , using tournament ranking selection. As GVWY (red) increases relative speed (left to right), SHVR (green) increasingly outperforms GVWY . Both traders beneﬁt from being ranked slowest. Figure 7: Balanced test ZIP:SHVR, using tournament rank- ing selection. ZIP signiﬁcantly outperforms SHVR when ZIP is faster (grey bars), but is signiﬁcantly outperformed by SHVR when ZIP is slower (white bars). taining higher proﬁt margins than buyers. Therefore, as there are fewer opportunities for buyers to get a good deal, being faster is beneﬁcial. Conversely, for sellers, it is better to be slower, and wait for more at- tractive bids to arrive each time step before acting. 4.2.2 Heterogeneous: Balanced Tests In many balanced tests there was no signiﬁcant dif- ferences in outcomes between trader strategies when In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Agents and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ICAART) 7 Hanifan & Cartlidge (2020), Fools Rush In: Competitive Effects of Reaction Time in Automated Trading (a) AA:GVWY (b) AA:SHVR (c) AA:ZIC (d) AA:ZIP Figure 8: Sensitivity analysis of AA using speed proportional selection in heterogeneous markets. Reaction time of AA relative to the competing trader type is varied from RAA∗ = 1 to RAA∗ = 40 (x-axis). Each test, AA (light blue) outperforms the competitor (purple dash) when compute times are equal (RAA∗ = 1). As RAA∗ increases, AA performance falls, until an inversion point is reached where AA no longer outperforms the competitor. For SHVR, inversion occurs between 1 < RAA SHV R < 2. varying speed using the ranking model (not shown). However, results for SHVR are interesting. For GVWY:SHVR (see Figure 6), it can be seen that it beneﬁts SHVR to be slower than GVWY . GVWY is an honest strategy (always quoting at the current limit price) with no consideration of the order book. Therefore, SHVR beneﬁt from na ¨ıve GVWY traders posting earlier each time step. For ZIP:SHVR (see Figure 7), we see that faster ZIP outperform slower SHVR, while faster SHVR outperform slower ZIP. This is the result that we may intuitively expect, if we consider that faster is always better. These results indicate that the beneﬁts of speed de- pend on the competing strategies in the market. For the parasitic SHVR, which requires a ‘sensible’ order book to trade sensibly, it is better to be fast when intel- ligent traders are quoting in the market. Conversely, when competitors are trading honestly, it is beneﬁ- cial to be slower. However, while the ranking model enables traders to directly compete for opportunities on speed alone, it does not allow faster traders to act more often than slower traders, which is unrealistic. We remove this constraint in the following model. 4.3 Speed Proportional Results 4.3.1 AA: Reaction Speed Sensitivity Analysis Figure 8 presents results of speed sensitivity analysis of AA performance in heterogeneous balanced-group tests against each of the other four trading strategies: (a) GVWY , (b) SHVR, (c) ZIC, (d) ZIP. The reac- tion time of AA relative to the competing trader type is varied from RAA ∗ = 1 to RAA ∗ = 40. Graphs show the effect of increasing RAA ∗ (x-axis). In each case, we see that when RAA ∗ = 1 (i.e., equal reaction times), AA (light blue line) outperforms the competing trader (purple dashed line). This is the BSE default setting, and the result conforms to previous ﬁndings that AA dominates in symmetric markets with balanced num- bers of traders (De Luca and Cliff, 2011). However, as relative AA reaction time RAA ∗ is in- creased, we see that AA performance gradually falls, until a point is reached where AA is beaten by the competing trader group. This inversion point varies between trader groups, but occurs very quickly for SHVR, between RAA SHV R = 1 and RAA SHV R = 2, suggest- ing that AA’s dominance over SHVR is sensitive to small variations in relative trader speeds. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Agents and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ICAART) 8 Hanifan & Cartlidge (2020), Fools Rush In: Competitive Effects of Reaction Time in Automated Trading 4.3.2 Proﬁling Reaction Times of Traders Here, we attempt to accurately proﬁle the reaction times of each trading agent. In BSE, the computa- tion time of an agent is composed of two methods: getOrder, which is called each time a trader is se- lected to submit a new order into the market, thus re- quiring the calculation of a new quote price, Q; and respond, which is called after each market event, and is used by traders to update internal parameters based on the event data (e.g., a new trade, or a new best bid or ask on the LOB). Of the trading agents considered in this work, three are stateless: GVWY , SHVR, and ZIC. These traders have no internal parameters to update and therefore take no action when their respond method is called. Only ZIP and AA have an internal state. These traders use their respond method to update in- ternal variables in order to calculate a new proﬁt mar- gin, µ. When getOrder is called, ZIP and AA use their current proﬁt margin, µ, to calculate a new quote price, Q = µL. In comparison, GVWY and ZIC gen- erate a quote price without reference to market data; SHVR uses the current best bid and ask in the LOB to generate a new quote price. Table 2 shows the proﬁled reaction times of each trading agent, observed across 52 million method calls under varying market conditions including pop- ulation size, mix of traders in the market, assignment replenishment schedules, etc. (see Hanifan (2019) for details). Unsurprisingly, we see that the traders with the longest computation times, ZIP and AA, are those with an internal state that requires continuous updating. The relative reaction times between the fastest and slowest traders is roughly a factor of two: RAA GWVY = 2.26. The relative reaction times between AA and ZIP is RAA ZIP = 1.13. This result is consistent with the average relative times RAA ZIP = 1.19 presented by Snashall and Cliff (2020), and we take this as con- ﬁrmatory evidence that our proﬁling is accurate. The ﬁnal column of Table 2, headedR∗ SHV R, presents reac- tion time of each trader relative to SHVR. Generating a quote price relative to the current LOB, SHVR is the only stateless (and therefore fast) trader that reacts to market information; although it does so in a simplistic non-adaptive fashion (unlike the slower AA and ZIP). 4.3.3 Results Using Proﬁled Reaction Times We used proﬁled computation times (Table 2) for pro- portional selection in heterogeneous balanced-group tests for pairwise comparisons between all trader types. The majority of results showed no signif- icant difference, suggesting the relative differences in reaction speeds between the trader agents are not Table 2: Proﬁled reaction times of trading agents. Trader Time ( µs) Stateful Reactive R∗ SHV R GVWY 4.2 N N 0.61 SHVR 6.9 N Y 1.00 ZIC 7.1 N N 1.03 ZIP 8.4 Y Y 1.22 AA 9.5 Y Y 1.38 large enough to have an impact. However, results for ZIP:SHVR and AA:SHVR were particularly in- teresting (see Figure 9). For ZIP:SHVR (Figure 9(a)), under BSE’s default randomised selection process (white bars), ZIP outperforms SHVR. However, when selecting traders proportional to their true relative speeds (grey bars) SHVR outperforms ZIP (although the difference is not signiﬁcant). A similar, but more pronounced trend emerges between AA:SHVR (Fig- ure 9(b)). Here, AA signiﬁcantly outperforms SHVR under the default randomised selection (white), and signiﬁcantly underperforms SHVR under speed pro- portional selection (grey). 5 DISCUSSION The result presented in Figure 9, demonstrating SHVR is more proﬁtable than AA (signiﬁcantly, p < 0.05) and ZIP (not signiﬁcant, p > 0.05) is a novel result. By accurately accounting for the relative re- action times of the two algorithms, we have demon- strated that, in balanced tests, SHVR—the simple non-adaptive order book strategy—is able to gener- ate more proﬁt than AA in a Smith-style static sym- metric marketplace, of the kind that AA was specif- ically designed to succeed in (Vytelingum, 2006), and in which several studies have previously demon- strated AA as being the dominant known strategy (Vytelingum et al., 2008; De Luca and Cliff, 2011). More recently, the dominance of AA has been questioned in several works. Using the discrete-event simulation mode of OpEx, Vach (2015) used Smith- style markets (similar to those used here) to com- pare efﬁciencies of traders in markets containing AA, GDX, and ZIP, as the proportion of each trader type in the market was varied. He showed that for large regions of the mixture space, GDX was the dominant strategy in these 3-way markets. Later, using BSE, Cliff (2019) demonstrated that in Smith-style markets containing equal proportions of MAA (AA modiﬁed to use microprice), SHVR, ZIC, and ZIP, proﬁts per trader have no signiﬁcant difference; while in more complex markets with continuously varying equilib- ria, SHVR and ZIP signiﬁcantly outperform MAA on In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Agents and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ICAART) 9 Hanifan & Cartlidge (2020), Fools Rush In: Competitive Effects of Reaction Time in Automated Trading (a) ZIP:SHVR (b) AA:SHVR Figure 9: Comparison of results between random selection (white) and speed proportional selection (grey), for heterogeneous markets using proﬁled thinking times (see Table 2): (a) SHVR outperforms ZIP under speed proportional selection (not signiﬁcant); (b) SHVR signiﬁcantly outperforms AA under speed proportional selection. proﬁts. A follow-up study (Snashall and Cliff, 2020) demonstrated that GDX dominates in complex mar- kets containing MAA, ASAD, GDX, and ZIP; and on average scores greater efﬁciency than AA in the simpler Smith-style markets. These works show that AA’s previously perceived dominance is sensitive to the mixture of competing strategies in the market, and the complexity of market dynamics. Here, we were able to demonstrate that even in Smith-style markets with two balanced groups of traders (the exact mar- kets that AA was previously shown to dominate), AA is less proﬁtable than the simple SHVR strategy when we account for reaction speed. We believe that this ﬁnding is signiﬁcant, not only because it contributes to the recent body of evidence suggesting that AA is non-dominant, but also because it demonstrates that the performance of adaptive trad- ing algorithms (AA and ZIP) are sensitive to reaction time; and once reaction time is considered, SHVR may be relatively superior. In more complex markets designed to emulate real-world ﬁnancial dynamics, SHVR has previously been shown to outperform AA and to perform similarly to ZIP (Cliff, 2019). Here, we extend this result to show that SHVR can also outperform in simple markets, once we account for speed. In this study, we have not considered the GDX trading strategy and we reserve this for future work. However, we note that Snashall and Cliff (2020) have recently proﬁled the reaction time of GDX and shown it to be an order of magnitude slower than AA. We therefore believe that, given the evidence we have pre- sented here, if we factor in speed using proportional selection, GDX would likely perform less well than SHVR (and also AA and ZIP), as each competing trader strategy would be able to act ten times for every GDX trader’s action. All evidence is starting to suggest that SHVR, al- though extremely simple, could be a proﬁtable trading strategy to employ. However, we should perhaps not be too surprised. SHVR is the only agent described in this paper that directly uses the current order book to determine quote price (by simply shaving one tick off the current best bid or ask). While AA, GDX, and ZIP are able to trade in markets containing an order book, metrics such as the current spread, volumes, buy/sell imbalances, etc., are not considered. This is valuable information that is routinely used by HFT strategies in the real markets. We therefore suggest that more emphasis is placed on utilising order book metrics for trading algorithms. We note that the MAA ( modiﬁed AA) strategy introduced by Cliff (2019) considers the order book microprice to perform calculations for up- dating proﬁt margin. This is a useful start, however we believe that this approach should be taken further, such that strategies should separate into two processes the long-term function of determining a desired price (e.g., by updating proﬁt margin), and the short-term function of working to achieve that price (e.g., by shaving the bid). One could easily imagine a sim- ple combination of ZIP and SHVR that could perform this strategy. We aim to investigate the incorporation of order book metrics into trading agent strategies in future work. In real-world markets, order book information and reaction speed is so strategically useful that, in or- der to stop a trader’s trading intention from being used adversely by predatory competitors, some trad- ing venues, described as dark pools , do not reveal quotes (see, e.g., Cartlidge et al. (2019), for a sum- mary of dark pools and methods for implementing cryptographically secure dark pool mechanisms us- ing multi-party computation (MPC)). Further, as the majority of predatory HFT strategies rely on being quick(est) to act, there is also some movement in real In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Agents and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ICAART) 10 Hanifan & Cartlidge (2020), Fools Rush In: Competitive Effects of Reaction Time in Automated Trading markets towards introducing artiﬁcial delays ( speed bumps), non-continuous trading, and re-ordering poli- cies (see, e.g., Mavroudis and Melton (2019) for a study on the effects of a temporal fairness policy on the Reﬁnitiv Matching foreign exchange). In real markets, communications latencies can be orders of magnitude larger than the reaction times of automated execution algorithms. However, these la- tencies can be (relatively easily) minimised by pay- ing for (costly) services such as exchange hosting (enabling traders to co-locate equipment within the same data centre as the exchange matching engines and market data systems for the lowest latency ac- cess) and direct market access feeds. Therefore, for all automated trading systems (ATS) making use of these low-latency services (including the majority of HFT), communications latency becomes a level play- ing ﬁeld. In these circumstances, reaction time is the principle speed differentiator. 6 CONCLUSIONS We have introduced methods for simulating the reac- tion time of trading agents in ﬁnancial market experi- ments, using the open-source Bristol Stock Exchange (BSE) platform. Historically, trading agent experi- ments have not considered the time it takes for agent strategies to compute: each time step, agents are se- lected to act in random order, and agents are unre- stricted in the (real-world) time taken to compute an action. This is unrealistic, particularly given the un- questionable emphasis placed on trading speed in the real ﬁnancial markets. To simulate reaction time, three models were con- sidered: (i) ﬁxed ordering of agents; (ii) tourna- ment selection using speed rankings; and (iii) propor- tional selection of agents relative to speed. The latter model—the most realistic—enabled fast traders to act multiple times for each individual action taken by a slower agent. We demonstrated, unsurprisingly, that speed does affect trader performance, although being faster is not always better: the outcome depends on the competing trader strategies present in the market; sometimes it can be beneﬁcial to let the fools rush in. Signiﬁcantly, we were able to show that when sim- ulating accurate reaction times of agent strategies, the simplistic SHVR strategy is more proﬁtable than AA. Until relatively recently, AA had been considered the dominant trading algorithm in the published litera- ture, and this is the ﬁrst time AA has been shown to be outperformed by a simple non-adaptive strategy in a static symmetric market containing two strategy types with equal numbers. This result conﬁrms that speed matters, and if we are to better understand real-world markets it is nec- essary for reaction times to be considered more thor- oughly. It also demonstrates that simple order book strategies can outperform intelligent trading strategies that make use of machine learning. This suggests that there should be further investigation into methods for incorporating order book information into adaptive trading strategies. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS John Cartlidge is sponsored by Reﬁnitiv. REFERENCES Baxter, G. and Cartlidge, J. (2013). Flying by the seat of their pants: What can high frequency trading learn from aviation? In Proc. 3rd International Conference on Ap- plication and Theory of Automation in Command and Control Systems, ATACCS, pages 56–65. Cartlidge, J. and Cliff, D. (2012). Exploring the ‘robot phase transition’ in experimental human-algorithmic markets. In The future of computer trading in ﬁnancial markets, Driver Review DR25 . Foresight, Government Ofﬁce for Science: London UK. Cartlidge, J. and Cliff, D. (2018). Modelling complex ﬁnan- cial markets using real-time human-agent trading experi- ments. In Chen, S.-H. et al., editors, Complex Systems Modeling and Simulation in Economics and Finance , pages 35–69. Springer International, Cham. Cartlidge, J., Smart, N. P., and Alaoui, Y . T. (2019). MPC joins the dark side. In Proc. 14th ACM Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security , AsiaCCS, pages 148–159. Cartlidge, J., Szostek, C., De Luca, M., and Cliff, D. (2012). Too fast too furious: Faster ﬁnancial-market trad- ing agents can give less efﬁcient markets. In Proc. 4th International Conference on Agents and Artiﬁcial Intel- ligence: Vol. 2, ICAART, pages 126–135. Cliff, D. (1997). Minimal-intelligence agents for bargain- ing behaviours in market-based environments. Technical Report HPL-97-91, Hewlett-Packard Labs. Cliff, D. (2018). An open-source limit-order-book exchange for teaching and research. In 2018 IEEE Symposium Se- ries on Computational Intelligence , SSCI, pages 1853– 1860. Cliff, D. (2019). Exhaustive testing of trader-agents in re- alistically dynamic continuous double auction markets: AA does not dominate. In Proc. 11th International Con- ference on Agents and Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Vol. 2 , ICAART, pages 224–236. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Agents and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ICAART) 11 Hanifan & Cartlidge (2020), Fools Rush In: Competitive Effects of Reaction Time in Automated Trading Das, R., Janson, J., Kephart, J., and Tesauro, G. (2001). Agent-human interactions in the continuous double auc- tion. In Proc. 17th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Vol. 2, IJCAI, pages 1169–1176. De Luca, M. and Cliff, D. (2011). Human-agent auction interactions: Adaptive aggressive agents dominate. In Proc. 22nd International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Vol. 1, IJCAI, pages 178–185. De Luca, M., Szostek, C., Cartlidge, J., and Cliff, D. (2011). Studies of interactions between human traders and algo- rithmic trading systems. In The future of computer trad- ing in ﬁnancial markets, Driver Review DR13. Foresight, Government Ofﬁce for Science: London UK. Dufﬁn, M. and Cartlidge, J. (2018). Agent-based model exploration of latency arbitrage in fragmented ﬁnancial markets. In 2018 IEEE Symposium Series on Computa- tional Intelligence, SSCI, pages 2312–2320. Gjerstad, S. (2003). The strategic impact of pace in dou- ble auction bargaining. Working Paper, Department of Economics, University of Arizona. Gjerstad, S. and Dickhaut, J. (1997). Price formation in double auctions. Games and Economic Behavior , 22(1):1–29. Gode, D. K. and Sunder, S. (1993). Allocative efﬁciency of markets with zero-intelligence traders: Market as a par- tial substitute for individual rationality. Journal of Polit- ical Economy, 101(1):119–137. Hanifan, H. (2019). Investigating the impact speed has on the performance of algorithmic traders within the BSE simulation. Master’s thesis, Department of Computer Science, University of Bristol, UK. Johnson, N., Zhao, G., Hunsader, E., Qi, H., Johnson, N., Meng, J., and Tivnan, B. (2013). Abrupt rise of new machine ecology beyond human response time.Scientiﬁc Reports, 3(2627):1–7. Mavroudis, V . and Melton, H. (2019). Libra: Fair order- matching for elecronic ﬁnancial exchanges. In Proc. 1st ACM Conference on Advances in Financial Technolo- gies, AFT, pages 156–168. McGroarty, F., Booth, A., Gerding, E., and Chinthalapati, V . L. R. (2019). High frequency trading strategies, market fragility and price spikes: an agent based model perspec- tive. Annals of Operations Research, 282(1):217–244. Miles, B. and Cliff, D. (2019). A cloud-native globally dis- tributed ﬁnancial exchange simulator for studying real- world trading-latency issues at planetary scale. In Proc. 31st European Modelling and Simulation Symposium , EMSS, pages 294–303. Smith, V . (1962). An experimental study of competi- tive market behavior. Journal of Political Economy , 70(2):111–137. Snashall, D. and Cliff, D. (2020). Adaptive-aggressive traders don’t dominate. In Agents and Artiﬁcial Intel- ligence: 11th International Conference, ICAART 2019, Revised Selected Papers, LNAI. Springer International. Stotter, S., Cartlidge, J., and Cliff, D. (2013). Explor- ing assignment-adaptive (ASAD) trading agents in ﬁ- nancial market experiments. In Proc. 5th International Conference on Agents and Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Vol. 1, ICAART, pages 77–88. Stotter, S., Cartlidge, J., and Cliff, D. (2014). Behavioural investigations of ﬁnancial trading agents using exchange portal (ExPo). In Nguyen, N. T. et al., editors, Trans- actions on Computational Collective Intelligence XVII , pages 22–45. Springer, Berlin. Tesauro, G. and Bredin, J. L. (2002). Strategic sequen- tial bidding in auctions using dynamic programming. In Proc. 1st Int. Joint Conf. on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems: Part 2, AAMAS, pages 591–598. Tesauro, G. and Das, R. (2001). High-performance bidding agents for the continuous double auction. InProceedings of the 3rd ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce , pages 206–209. Vach, D. (2015). Comparison of double auction bidding strategies for automated trading agents. Master’s thesis, Faculty of Social Sciences, Charles University in Prague, CZ. Vytelingum, P. (2006). The Structure and Behaviour of the Continuous Double Auction. PhD thesis, School of Elec- tronics and Computer Science, University of Southamp- ton, UK. Vytelingum, P., Cliff, D., and Jennings, N. (2008). Strategic bidding in CDAs. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 172(14):1700– 1729. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Agents and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ICAART) 12