Noname manuscript No. (will be inserted by the editor) To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! Transitions in sniping behaviour among competing high-frequency traders Somayeh Kokabisaghi · Andr´ e B. Dorsman· Eric J. Pauwels Received: date / Accepted: date Abstract In this paper we extend the investigation into the transition from sure to probabilistic sniping as introduced in Menkveld and Zoican [16]. In that paper, the authors introduce a stylized version of a competitive game in which high fre- quency traders (HFTs) interact with each other and liquidity traders. The authors then show that risk aversion plays an important role in the transition from sure to mixed (or probabilistic) sniping. In this paper, we re-interpret and extend these conclusions in the context of repeated games and highlight some diﬀerences in results. In particular, we identify situations in which probabilistic sniping is gen- uinely proﬁtable that are qualitatively diﬀerent from the ones obtained in [16]. It turns out that beyond a speciﬁc risk aversion threshold the game resembles the well-known prisoner’s dilemma, in that probabilistic sniping becomes a way to cooperate among the HFTs that leaves all the participants better oﬀ. In order to turn this into a viable strategy for the repeated game, we show how compliance can be monitored through the use of sequential statistical testing. Keywords algorithmic trading · bandits· , high-frequency exchange · Nash equilibrium· repeated games· sniping· subgame-perfect equilibrium· Sequential probability ratio· transition Somayeh Kokabisaghi Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica, Amsterdam, Netherlands. E-mail: karen.kokabisaghi@cwi.nl, ORCID: 0000-0002-4589-7638 Andr¨ e B. Dorsman Vrije University, Amsterdam, Netherlands. E-mail: a.b.dorsman@vu.nl Eric J. Pauwels Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica, Amsterdam, Netherlands. E-mail: Eric.Pauwels@cwi.nl, ORCID: 0000-0001-7518-6856 arXiv:1912.04012v2 [q-fin.MF] 11 Sep 2020 2 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels 1 Introduction 1.1 Motivation The burgeoning of algorithmic and high-frequency trading on modern ﬁnancial exchanges has give rise to theoretical investigations scrutinizing the mechanisms that underpin these markets. To analyse this complexity of continuous-time trad- ing, a number of authors (e.g. [2,16]) have proposed stylized models of the stock market. Although these stylized models can not capture all the intricacies of the markets in detail, they are nonetheless very useful as they often hint at interesting behaviour. As a case in point, Menkveld and Zoican [16] designed a simple model (referred to as the MZ game from here on) to study the impact of exchange la- tency on liquidity. They show that faster exchanges reduce payoﬀ risk and spread, but also give rise to speculative behaviours among high frequency traders (HFT). More speciﬁcally, they envisage a situation in which a group of competing but comparably equipped HFTs is operating alongside a large crowd of traditional liquidity traders (LT). A market is created by selecting a single market maker (MM) from among the HFTs. This market maker then publishes an ask-bid quote for a single ﬁnancial asset on the exchange, and stands to earn the spread when this quote is hit by a liquidity trader. However, what makes this game interesting is that fresh news items, published at random times, push the intrinsic value of the asset either up or down. The ensuing jump in value causes all the HFTs to race to the exchange, albeit it with diﬀerent intentions. The market maker attempts to cancel his own now stale quotes 1, while the other HFTs (dubbed bandits hereafter) race to take advantage of the arbitrage opportunity created by the outdated quotes. This type of opportunistic behaviour on the part of the bandits, is called sniping. The authors in [16] conclude (among other things) that increasing risk aversion in the market induces a qualitative transition in the sniping behaviour of HFTs. While these results are intriguing and highly non-trivial, they hinge on some subtle but important features of the game. In particular, the authors study this problem in the context of a single-shot game, and focus on Nash equilibria as their main solution concept. In this paper we espouse an alternative view by interpreting the market activities of the HFTs as a repeated game with an inﬁnite horizon . In this alternative setting a player can adopt more far-sighted strategies that attempt to maximise long-term gains. This change of viewpoint has a number of important consequences: – It identiﬁes situations in which probabilistic sniping is genuinely proﬁtable and therefore extends the conclusions in [16] by introducing qualitatively diﬀerent solutions. More speciﬁcally, it shows that forms of informal collaboration in which bandits voluntary decrease their sniping frequency, results in better utility for everyone. This explains why bandits are willing to engage in probabilistic sniping, for which there seems to be no compelling reason in the original MZ model. 1 A quote for an asset is stale when it no longer reﬂects the most recent information. To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 3 – It allows us to identify two thresholds (for risk aversion) that govern the tran- sitions between the three diﬀerent sniping regimes: from sure sniping to prob- abilistic sniping to no sniping. – Finally, we identify a way for an individual HFT to monitor the behaviour of the other HFts in order to detect non-compliance. This detection mechanism is necessary to deter devious HFTs from exploiting trustworthy colleagues by sniping more than is optimal. 1.2 Overview and contributions of this paper The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. – In section 2 we introduce the MZ-game, and show how one can compute the utility of each possible outcome. Combining these outcomes with the prob- abilities of the corresponding events yields the expected utility for both the market maker and any one of the bandits. It turns out that both these utilities are linear functions of the spread s. The intersection of these two utility lines determines a point of indiﬀerence (s∗,u∗) (see Fig. 2) that predicts the be- haviour of the agents. More precisely, since at the start of the MZ game, HFTs are still unsure about their role in the game (market maker or bandit) they will advertise a spread s that makes them indiﬀerent (in terms of expected utility) to the outcome of this selection. The point of indiﬀerence (s∗,u∗) is therefore a focal point and constitutes a Nash equilibrium of the game whenever u∗ > 0. However, this is no longer the case when u∗≤ 0 and this is where probabilistic sniping becomes relevant. . – Section 3 takes a detailed look at the concept of probabilistic sniping: rather than attempting to snipe at every possible opportunity ( sure sniping), bandits voluntarily restrain themselves and only enter the sniping race with a probability p < 1. Less sniping is obviously beneﬁcial for the market maker but, under certain circumstances, this also protects bandits from adverse eﬀects. As a consequence, depending on the choice of the sniping probability p, the point of indiﬀerence shifts to a (potentially) more favourable position (s∗(p),u∗(p)) (see Fig. 3). In this section we characterize in detail how utilities (and derived quantities such as the point of indiﬀerence) depend on the sniping probability. – Whether or not probabilistic sniping results in better utility (for all HFTs in- volved) depends ultimately on the game parameters (see Fig. 4): changing these parameters might induce a transition in optimal behaviour , e.g. from sure sniping to probabilistic sniping. In section 4 we show how a simple ge- ometric argument allows us to characterise the conditions under which two transitions between the diﬀerent types of sniping occur: viz. from sure snip- ing to probabilistic sniping to no sniping (see sections 4.1 and 4.2). We then highlight the speciﬁc role of risk aversion γ in these sniping transitions and identify the relevant thresholds γK and γL (section 4.3). Finally, we intro- duce the optimal sniping probability p∗ K (section 4.4) that results in the best possible utility u∗ K. 4 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels – Up to this point in the paper, the equilibria obtained under various conditions were optimal, but not necessarily Nash equilibria for the single-shot MZ game. In section 5 we explain what the implications are of shifting our viewpoint from one-shot to repeated games . In particular, we argue that probabilistic sniping will give rise to a new set of playable subgame-perfect Nash equi- libria. To turn this into a workable solution, we need to be able to reliably detect non-compliance on the part of the other agents, in order to be able to take retaliatory measures. We therefore quantify the eﬀect that devious agents (agents that pretend to snipe probabilistically, but in fact snipe for sure) have on the utility of trustworthy agents (see e.g. Figs. 12 or 13). We conclude this section by discussing how Wald’s sequential probability ratio test can be used to reliably detect non-compliance (see Fig. 14). – Finally, in section 6 , we discuss how our work compares to related research and ﬁnish by oﬀering some conclusions and suggestions for further research in section 7. – The main part of this paper focuses on the conceptual framework that un- derpins our results. All the computational details are therefore relegated to sections A through J in the appendix. Since the mathematical characteri- sation of the results often requires tedious but straightforward algebra, we also provide Python notebooks to support all the computations. These can be found: KPD supplementary material link to GitHub Contributions The main contributions in this paper can be found in sections 3 through 5, and can be summarized as follows: 1. We show how the MZ model of the stock exchange can be re-interpreted as a repeated (sequential) game against nature. In addition, we think of the choice of sniping probability (for the bandits) as a choice of a pure action from a continuous action space, rather than a probabilistic mixing of two pure strategies (i.e. sniping and non-sniping). This change of viewpoint allows us to identify a wider set of conditions under which probabilistic sniping makes sense (see section 3.4) . Put succinctly, although these new equilibria are not Nash equilibria for a one-shot stage game, they are genuine subgame-perfect equilibria in the corresponding repeated game with inﬁnite horizon. 2. We identify two threshold values (viz. γK andγL) for the risk aversion factor γ that govern the transition to probabilistic sniping. More speciﬁcally, when γ increases beyond γK, probabilistic sniping becomes advantageous for all HFTs involved. Conversely, whenγ exceedsγL, even probabilistic sniping is no longer proﬁtable. 3. We show that under conditions for which probabilistic sniping is advantageous, there is an optimal sniping probability p∗ K that maximises expected utilities for both the market maker and the bandits. Both the sniping probability and the corresponding optimal utility vary continuously as functions of the game parameters (see Fig. 9). To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 5 4. When the game conditions call for probabilistic sniping in order to optimise utility, the agents are tempted to snipe for sure as this maximises their own utility to the detriment of their compliant colleagues whose utility is negatively aﬀected. As a consequence, agents participating in such a probabilistic sniping regime need a strategy to detect the non-compliance of deceptive agents. We show how this can be done using Wald’s sequential probability ratio test (section 5.3.2). 5. Reproducible research: We provide Python notebooks that will allow the dili- gent reader to check the straightforward but tedious calculations underpinning our arguments, as well as simulations that illustrate the ﬂuctuations about the mean values that result from the theoretical approach. 2 The Menkveld-Zoican (MZ) game revisited 2.1 A bird’s eye view of the MZ game As this paper builds on the MZ paper [16], we brieﬂy highlight some of the main arguments and conclusions from that paper. In [16], the authors deﬁne a stylized version of the behaviour and strategies of high frequency traders (HFT) interacting with an (high-frequency) exchange. We defer some details to section 2.2 but, roughly speaking, they envisage a game in which, during an initial pre-game stage, the HFTs have to pick the value of the (half) spread s in order to post a single bid-ask quote (v±s) for a ﬁnancial asset of (commonly perceived) value v. One of the HFTs is then selected as market maker, whereas the others are relegated to the role of bandit. Only the quotes of the market maker will enter the order book, so he is the only one who can beneﬁt from trading with liquidity traders who visit the exchange at random times (with rate µ). The bandits will try to gain some payoﬀ by attempting to snipe stale quotes (see section 2.2 for more details). The game is initiated by a trigger event which can be either the publication of news item (changing the intrinsic value v of the asset), or the interaction of a liquidity trader with the market maker (resulting in income for the latter). The latter event does not evoke any reaction from the HFTs, but the former alters the intrinsic value of the asset and causes all the HFTs to race towards the exchange, albeit for diﬀerent reasons. The market maker attempts to cancel his now stale quotes, whereas the bandits hope to obtain ﬁnancial gain by sniping the market maker. The outcome of this race if further complicated by the fact that, during the race, another event (news or liquidity trade) might occur. This is less likely when the exchange is fast (low exchange latency δ). In [16] the authors investigate in detail how the interplay between various game parameters aﬀect the behaviour and strategies of the HFTs. Although this model is highly stylized and therefore somewhat unrealistic, it is the contention of the MZ authors that even under these simplifying assumptions, interesting and non-trivial conclusions can be drawn. This suggests that a more realistic model will give rise to even more intriguing insights. 6 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels 2.2 Primitives for the MZ game Because they are important to understand the rest of the paper, we brieﬂy reca- pitulate the main ingredients and assumptions governing the MZ game. For more details we refer to the original paper [16]. – Agents or Players The players in this game is the group of H > 2 high- frequency traders (HFTs) who operate in an environment populated by an inﬁnite number of (uninformed) liquidity traders (LT). All HFTs have simulta- neous and instantaneous access to all public information aﬀecting the market. At the start of the game, one HFT is assigned to the role of market maker. The remaining (H− 1) HFTs take up the role of high-frequency bandits (HFB), intent on ﬁnancial gain by sniping the stale quotes whenever an opportunity presents itself. A ﬁnal important characteristic of all HFTs is that they are risk-averse, i.e. the utility of negative pay-oﬀs is inﬂated by a factor γ >1. – Exchange latency δ measures the time delay δ between the trigger event (that sets oﬀ the game) and the arrival of one HFT at the matching engine where each order is actually processed. This delay determines the time span over which the race game is played out and, as such, has a direct impact on the expected number of additional events that might occur during the race. – Exogenous events The behaviour of the HFTs is aﬀected by two types of exogenous events that happen independent of the HFTs actions: 1. Publication of news item causing a common value shock: the publi- cations of news (either good or bad) is observed by everyone, and changes the intrinsic value of an asset. This process is modelled as a Poisson process with rateα (number of news events per time unit). The size of the shock is ﬁxed at±σ. Throughout this paper we are assuming that the (half) spread (s) is (strictly) less than σ (0<s<σ ). 2. Private value shock: These are only known to the LTs and cause one of them them to join the matcher queue to hit the outstanding quote (resulting in income for the market maker). These events are modelled as an independent Poisson process with rate µ (number of LT arrivals per time unit). – Detailed chronology of the MZ game The description below is based on the MZ paper, but attempts to clarify the process in more detail (cf. Fig 1). Fig. 1 Chronology of the MZ game – Att =−1, Strategy selection: all HFTs are informed about the game’s parameters (i.e. α,µ,δ,σ and H). Based on this information they can To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 7 then compute the expected utility as a function of the spread s (and the sniping behaviour) for both the market maker and bandits (more details in section 2.3), but are still unsure about which one applies to them. Taking this uncertainty into account, each HFT decides on a spread s, and posts a single bid and ask quote in an empty order book (i.e. initially each HFT has a zero position 2). – Att =−1/2, Type assignation: one of the HFTs is chosen to be the market maker, whereas all the others will become ”bandits” (eager to snipe). The selection process of the market maker proceeds in two steps: 1. First, the HFT(s) that posted the smallest spread s are selected; 2. If there are multiple HFTs that posted the same minimal spread, then one of them is selected at random (uniformly). The fact that the outcome of this selection process is uncertain, is an important aspect of the game that the HFTs need to take into account when selecting a strategy at t =−1 as it is impossible for them to change their position at a later time. – Att = 0, Initial trigger starts game: one of two possible trigger events occurs: 1. News event (public) that changes the value of the asset (i.e. value shock of±σ). This immediately triggers a race among the HFTs: the market maker will try to update his stale quotes, while the bandits will attempt to snipe. The winner of this race is randomly (uniform) chosen among all contestants. The winner is known at time t =δ. 2. LT arrives at matcher (queue) . This will result in a transaction, which is invariably proﬁtable for the market maker as he will cash in the spread (s). This event does not elicit any reaction from the HFBs. – Interval 0<t<δ During this interval one (and only one) of three things can happen: 1. An additional news event becomes (publicly) known (rate α). 2. Another LT arrives at the matcher, intent on interacting with the market maker (rate µ); 3. Nothing happens. – Att =δ, Conclusion and pay-oﬀ: The game concludes and the posi- tions are used to compute the pay-oﬀ and corresponding utility for both the bandits and market maker (see section 2.3 for more details). Importantly, the utility of a negative pay-oﬀ is further inﬂated by the risk-aversion factorγ: utility = { pay-oﬀ if pay-oﬀ ≥ 0 γ· pay-oﬀ if pay-oﬀ < 0 (1) where γ≥ 1. In the next sections we will explore some of the concepts in more detail, starting with the detailed computation of the pay-oﬀ. 2 A zero position is when traders don’t own any amount of ﬁnancial assets or commodity 8 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels 2.3 Payoﬀ and utility computation 2.3.1 General principles To compute the payoﬀ for speciﬁc game-outcomes for each HFT we observe that there are three sources of payoﬀ: – Changes in position : obtaining more (or less) of a ﬁnancial asset results in a corresponding change in wealth; – Change of the intrinsic value of an asset: if the intrinsic value of an asset changes (due to good or bad news), the owner beneﬁts (or suﬀers) accordingly; – Income from a successful transaction (either buy or sell). The income can be both positive or negative depending on whether the HFT gets paid or needs to pay to complete the transaction. These observations can be summarized in the following equations: payoﬀ = position(t=δ)× value(t=δ) | {z } ﬁnal + income| {z } during − position(t=0)× value(t=0) | {z } initial but since we are assuming that all HFTs start with a zero position, the last term vanishes and we therefore get the simpliﬁed formula: payoﬀ = position(t=δ)× value(t=δ) + income(t=δ) (2) The corresponding utilities UM (for the market maker) and UB (for a bandit) can then by inﬂating negative payoﬀs with the risk aversion factor γ (cf. eq. 1). In addition to the primary MZ-parameters introduced above (viz. H,α,µ,δ and γ) we will introduce some useful shorthand notation for derived quantities that recur throughout this paper: – α := αδ/2 and µ := µδ/2 are (half) the expected number of news and LT arrivals, respectively, in the interval between the start of game ( t = 0 ) and its conclusion (at t =δ). Since we are assuming that δ is suﬃciency small so that we expect less than one event to happen in each interval, we have the following strict inequality: (α +µ)δ <1 or again α +µ< 1 2. (3) – β :=α/(α +µ) is the probability that the trigger event will be arrival of news rather than an LT arrival. Obviously, the latter therefore has probability 1−β. – Some additional notation to streamline the equations below: q :=γ− 1 and m = 1−µ and θ = 2 αµ α +µ. (4) Notice that θ is the harmonic mean of α andµ therefore tends to be closer to the smaller of the two. To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 9 2.3.2 Payoﬀs for speciﬁc event-sequences Since the chronology of the MZ game is strictly deﬁned, there are only 20 possible event sequences that can happen between the initial trigger (at t = 0 ) and the ﬁnal conclusion of the game at t = δ. All the possible combinations and their corresponding payoﬀs (and utilities) are given in [16] and summarized for the reader’s convenience in Table 1. It is important to realise that bandits can only beneﬁt from the game if their sniping attempt is successful. Hence, if there is no race (i.e. trigger event is the arrival of a liquidity trader), or if a bandit loses the race, then their payoﬀ equals zero. Furthermore, if a race ensues which the market maker loses, only the successful sniper will gain utility (2nd utility column in table). For a detailed explanation of each event’s payoﬀ and probability we refer to the appendix C, but we will illustrate the general ideas using NG-LA (ﬁrst event is good news and the second event is arrival of LT on ask) as a speciﬁc example: – Probability of event: Since, in general, the ﬁrst (trigger) event is either the publication of a news item (rate α) or the arrival of a liquidity trader (LT, rate µ), the probability of the former equals β :=α/(α +µ). Since for half of these events the news is good, the probability of the trigger event being NG equals β/2. The probability of a second news event arriving in the interval [0, δ) equals αδ and if we insist on this news item also being good, the probability halves to αδ/2 = α. Since the two events are independent, we can simply multiply the two probabilities. – Payoﬀ of event: In the case of NG-LA, the ﬁrst (i.e. trigger) event is good news and hence increases the intrinsic value of the asset (by an amount σ). As a consequence, the market maker (MM) will race to the exchange to cancel his (now stale) order in order to prevent loses, while all other HFTs (bandits) race to snap up the higher value asset at the outdated low price (sniping). The second event is the arrival of LT on ask (value +s) and means that an uninformed liquidity trader (LT) happens to join the queue at the matching engine ahead of all the HFTs (who are still racing) and manages to buy the asset at the outdated (low) ask price. This is of course bad news for the market maker who ends up selling an asset below its current market value. The payoﬀ for all the bandits is zero as they failed to snipe. By referring to equation (2), we can compute payoﬀ for market maker: payoﬀM = (position)(t=δ)× (value)(t=δ) + income = (−1)× (v +σ) + ( v +s) =−(σ−s) (5) Since the payoﬀ is negative, the corresponding utility ( uM ) is inﬂated by the risk aversion factor γ, hence: uM =−γ(σ−s) and uB = 0. (6) 10 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels For more details, see: KPD_supplementary_material_1.ipynb (section.1) Utilities MM loses race MM wins race (Prob = h) (Prob = 1−h) Event code 1st and 2nd event prob MM B (sniper!) MM B (all!) NG-NG 1 2β α −γ(2σ−s) 2σ−s 0 0 NG-NB 1 2β α s −γs 0 0 NG-LA 1 2β µ −γ(σ−s) 0 −γ(σ−s) 0 NG-LB 1 2β µ 2s σ−s σ +s 0 NG-no 1 2β 1− 2(α +µ) −γ(σ−s) σ−s 0 0 NB-NG 1 2β α s −γs 0 0 NB-NB 1 2β α −γ(2σ−s) 2σ−s 0 0 NB-LA 1 2β µ 2s σ−s σ +s 0 NB-LB 1 2β µ −γ(σ−s) 0 −γ(σ−s) 0 NB-no 1 2β 1− 2(α +µ) −γ(σ−s) σ−s 0 0 No race! MM B (all!) - - LA-NG 1 2 (1−β) α −γ(σ−s) 0 - - LA-NB 1 2 (1−β) α σ +s 0 - - LA-LA 1 2 (1−β) µ s 0 - - LA-LB 1 2 (1−β) µ 2s 0 - - LA-no 1 2 (1−β) 1− 2(α +µ) s 0 - - LB-NG 1 2 (1−β) α σ +s 0 - - LB-NB 1 2 (1−β) α −γ(σ−s) 0 - - LB-LA 1 2 (1−β) µ 2s 0 - - LB-LB 1 2 (1−β) µ s 0 - - LB-no 1 2 (1−β) 1− 2(α +µ) s 0 - - Legend NG/NB: Good/Bad News, LA/LB = liquidity trader on ask/bid, no = no event Table 1 Payoﬀ table for all possible events in MZ-game. For instance, in NG-LA, the ﬁrst event is good news and the second event is arrival of LT on ask. The negative payoﬀs are made explicit using a minus sign and are inﬂated with the risk aversion factor γ≥ 1 in order to obtain the actual utility. The trigger event for the ﬁrst ten cases is the publication of a news item which sets oﬀ a race. A bandit can only receive payoﬀ if he succeeds in winning that race, in all other cases there is no payoﬀ. For that reason we only list the utility of the bandit that was successful as a sniper. For the explanation of the probabilities that the market maker will lose or win the race, we refer the reader to section 3.2). Notice that for the last ten events for which the trigger event is the arrival of liquidity trader, there is no race, and so no need to distinguish between the possible fates of the market maker. For detailed computation of the table, see appendix C. To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 11 2.3.3 Expected utilities Table 1 lists the utilities of speciﬁc events for both the market maker and any of the bandits once we specify the spread s. However, in the actual game these events are generated according to a stochastic process and the utilities are therefore stochastic variables (denoted by capital letters UM and UB). To compute the expected utilities ( EUM and EUB) we need to sum the utilities of all relevant events weighted by the corresponding probabilities. The event probabilities are listed explicitly in the table. But we also have to take into account the probabilities with which any of the HFTs will win or lose the race as this changes their pay-oﬀ. Below we explore this in more detail for the market maker and bandit separately. Market maker A glance at Table 1 shows that the market maker receives non- trivial utility for all the events. To streamline the exposition we will introduce a wildcard and denote all event codes that correspond to a news trigger event as N***. Each of these events occurs with probability β/2 and provokes a race. Similarly, events triggered by an LT arrival will be denoted as L*** and occur with probability (1−β)/2 but don’t spark a race. Furthermore, when there is an actual race, the market maker’s utility depends on whether or not he beats the other HFTs to the ﬁnish. To take this into account, we introduce h to denote the probability that the market maker will lose the race. Since all the HFTs enter the race and have the same probability of winning it, we conclude: h :=P{MM loses race | there is a race} = H− 1 H . (7) Gathering all this information we can now express the expected utility of the market maker as a weighted sum over the possible second event e2 where p(e2) and uM (e2) are the corresponding event probability and utility, respectively: EUM (s) = β 2 [ ∑ e2∈N∗∗∗ p(e2){huM (e2| MM loses) + (1−h)uM (e2| MM wins)} ] + ( 1−β 2 )[ ∑ e2∈L∗∗∗ p(e2)uM (e2) ] . (8) In section 3.2 we will see how we need to re-interpret this expression in the case of probabilistic sniping. Individual bandit The expected utility for an individual bandit can be computed along similar lines. In fact, the calculation is easier as a bandit only receives payoﬀ if his sniping attempt is successful. If there is a race (event code N***), the probability that a speciﬁc, individual bandit will win equals g :=P{bandit wins race | there is a race} = 1 H (9) 12 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels as there are H agents in the race. Notice that this is identical to the probability 1−h that the market maker will win the race – for the obvious reason. It might therefore seem an unnecessary complication of the notation, but once we introduce the concept of probabilistic sniping, these two quantities will diverge in meaning. Since all L*** events result in zero utility for a bandit (no race), we only need to sum over the N*** events, resulting in the following expression: EUB(s) = β 2g ∑ e2∈N∗∗∗ p(e2)uB(e2| MM loses race ) where g = 1 H. (10) See KPD_supplementary_material_1.ipynb (section.2.1) Some simpliﬁcations Expanding eqs. 8 and 10 is straightforward but tedious and therefore deferred to appendix D. However, even without plowing through the algebra, a cursory inspection of table 1 shows that all event utilities are proportional to either the spread s or the diﬀerence ( wσ±s, where w = 1, 2) of spread and jumpsize σ. From this, we can introduce the following notational simpliﬁcations: – Rescaling We can factor out σ by dividing both the spread s and utility U byσ. This amounts to rescaling both spread and utility by using the jumpsize σ as a natural yardstick: s−→ ˜s := s σ and U−→ ˜U := U σ This rescaling allows us to ﬁx σ≡ 1 which slightly simpliﬁes the equations in the remainder of the paper without having any impact on the qualitative nature of the conclusions. Notice that we will drop the tildes for notational convenience, and simply use s and U to denote spread and utility measured using σ as unit. – Utilities are linear in s The expected utilities for both the market maker (EUM ) and bandit ( EUB) are linear combinations of the utilities in the table and therefore result in linear (or more precisely, aﬃne) functions in the spread s: EUB(s) = A(1−s)+Bs, where A := EUB(s = 0) and B := EUB(s = 1), (11) and similarly: EUM (s) = C(1−s)+Ds, where C := EUM (s = 0) and D := EUM (s = 1). (12) Hence, the values A,B,C andD are the endpoints of the linear line-segments that represent the expected utilities for the market maker and a bandit as a function of spread 0≤s≤ 1 (also see Fig. 2). Expressing the utilities in terms of these endpoints is useful as it simpliﬁes some the formulae in the remainder of this paper. To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 13 2.4 Computing the point of indiﬀerence Recall from the description of the MZ-game in section 2.2 that at the inception of the game (i.e. at t =−1 when they need to specify the spread s for their quotes), the HFTs are agnostic about their eventual role in the game as this is only assigned at t =− 1 2 . The intersection point between the two utilities will therefore play a pivotal role in the HFT’s decision making as it represents the spread (hereafter denoted by s∗) that makes them indiﬀerent as to which role they will play. In terms of the quantities A,B,C and D as deﬁned above, it is straightforward to determine s∗ and the corresponding utility u∗ := EUB(s∗)≡ EUM (s∗) by computing the intersection of the linear utility functions (also see Fig. 2): s∗ = (A−C) (A−C) + (D−B) and u∗ = (AD−BC ) (A−C) + (D−B) (13) It is shown in [16] that, if u∗ > 0 (intersection lies above x-axis), the MZ game has a unique pure Nash equilibrium in which all HFTs will pick the optimal spreads∗ and expect to earn the utility u∗. For more details,see: KPD_supplementary_material_numeric.ipynb (section.2) However, if u∗ ≤ 0 (intersection lies on or below x-axis), things are less straightforward as pursuing the above strategy will now result in losses for both the market maker and the bandits. One of the contribution in [16] is the realisa- tion that probabilistic sniping might suggest an additional equilibrium. This will be explored in detail in the next section. 3 Probabilistic versus Sure Sniping 3.1 The rationale for probabilistic sniping Up till now we have assumed that all bandits will race to the exchange whenever an opportunity arises (i.e. whenever the trigger event is the publication of a news item). This seems reasonable as a successful snipe is the only way a bandit can gain positive utility. However, a careful inspection of Table 1 reveals that sniping has a potential down-side. For instance, if a positive news fact is followed by a negative one (NG-NB), or vice versa (NB-NG), the sniper acquires an asset that has no added value and, as a consequence, incurs negative utility. Hence, under these circumstances it might be more proﬁtable to refrain from sniping, or to snipe only occasionally. This is translated into the idea of probabilistic sniping in which an individual bandit enters the race with sniping probability p. Obviously, less sniping is always advantageous for the market maker as sniping reduces his payoﬀ. So it seems that there are situations (e.g. high news rates α, see caption of Fig. 7) for which probabilistic sniping could actually be advantageous for all parties. In the next sections we will quantify in more detail how probabilistic sniping aﬀects the various utilities. 14 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels Fig. 2 Graph representing the expected utilities EUB(s) (line AB) and EUM (s) (line CD) for a bandit and the market maker, respectively. The HFTs will select spread s∗ (resulting in expected utility u∗) by determining the intersection of the two utilities (point of indiﬀerence). For the time being, we only consider sure sniping which corresponds to p = 1 . For more details on probabilistic sniping (for which p< 1), see section 3. 3.2 The impact of probabilistic sniping We start by deﬁning more formally the sniping probability p to be the probability that an individual bandit will participate in the race, given that there is a race, i.e. given that the initial trigger event is ”news”: p :=P{Individual bandit will race | Tr(igger) = N(ews)} (14) Obviously,p = 1 in the case of sure sniping. Notice also that this probability is only relevant for bandits, as the market maker will always enter the race! The corresponding change in sniping behaviour implies that we have to re-evaluate the probabilities h (probability that the market maker will lose the race) and g (probability that an individual bandit who entered the race, will actually win it) as both quantities will now depend on p. 1. Probabilityh(p) that market maker will lose the race In the case of sure sniping, all HFTs enter the race and since they all have equal probability of winning, the probability that the market maker will lose equalsh = (H−1)/H. However, when individual bandits snipe (independently!) with a probability p <1, the probability that the market maker will get sniped depends on the number of bandits that do attempt to out-race him, and therefore depends on p. We will therefore denote it as h(p), deﬁned formally as: h(p) := P{MM will lose MZ race | individual bandits enter race with prob p} (15) To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 15 A straightforward calculation (see Appendix E) shows that h(p) = (1−p)H− (1−Hp) Hp (16) which indeed reduces to h≡ h(1) = (H− 1)/H in the case of sure sniping (p = 1). Furthermore, using the expansion (1−p)H = 1−Hp +H(H− 1) 2 p2−H(H− 1)(H− 2) 3! p3+... +(−p)H (17) shows that we have the following asymptoptics for small values of p↓ 0: h(p) = (H− 1 2 ) p +o(p2), (18) whence limp↓0h(p) = 0 . The probability h(p) plays a crucial role in the utility computation for both the market maker and the bandits. 2. Conditional probability g(p) that an individual bandit wins race, given he enters race In the case of probabilistic sniping, the probability that an individual bandit will win the race needs to be conditioned on him actually entering the race, as this is no longer a sure thing. Therefore, we introduce the following formal deﬁnition of this conditional probability: g(p) := P{individual bandit will win race| he participates in the race} (19) The actual computation g(p) is deferred to Appendix E but yields: g(p) = (1−p)H− (1−pH) H(H− 1)p2 = h(p) (H− 1)p. (20) Intuitively, this result makes sense: h(p) is the probability that a bandit rather than the market maker will win the race, which is then divided by (H− 1)p, i.e. the expected number of bandits in the race. Another way to see the connection between h(p) and g(p) is to observe that pg(p) is the un-conditional probability that an individual bandit will win the race. For this to happen, the market maker needs to lose the race (probability h(p)) and each of the (H− 1) bandits has the same odds. Hence: pg(p) = h(p) H− 1 (21) Notice also that if every bandit races for sure ( p = 1 ), then the probability that an individual bandit will win, simpliﬁes to g≡g(1) = 1/H as expected. In the same vein, using the asymptotics in eq. (18), it follows that lim p↓0 g(p) = 1/2. (22) This also makes sense: if p≈ 0 then any bandit that is in the race will probably be the only bandit in that race, and therefore will have a probability of 1/2 to outrun the racing market maker. For more details, see: (KPD_supplementary_material_2.ipynb) 16 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels 3.3 Expected utilities under probabilistic sniping Now that we have a precise deﬁnition of the probabilities h(p) and g(p) we are in a position to determine the expected utilities for both the market maker and individual bandits under probabilistic sniping. 3.3.1 Expected utility for bandit As pointed out above, the bandit will only race if the trigger event ( Tr ) is the arrival of a news item (N). Recall that this happens with probabilityβ =α/(α+µ). Hence, we can compute the expected utility by conditioning on the trigger event being news. Furthermore, we need to take into account that the bandit will only participate in the race with probability p, and needs to win the race in order to gain utility. We therefore ﬁnd: EUB = E(UB | Tr =N )P (Tr =N ) = E(UB | Tr =N )β = E(UB | Tr =N & bandit enters race )P{bandit enters race}β = E(UB | Tr =N & bandit enters and wins race )P{bandit wins race | he races}pβ = E(UB | Tr =N & bandit enters and wins race )g(p)pβ From this we conclude: EUB(s,p ) = βg(p)p E(UB | Tr =N & bandit enters and wins race ) (23) To further elaborate the expression for EUB we need to condition the RHS on the second event. This amounts to summing the utilities (weighted with the probabil- ities of the second event) in the sniper column of Table, which yields: and a straightforward but tedious calculation shows: E(UB | Tr = N & bandit enters and wins race ) = (1−µ)(1−s)−αqs. Plugging this into eq. 23 shows how the expected utility of each bandit depends on spread s, sniping probability p and risk aversion γ≥ 1: EUB(s,p,γ ) = βpg(p){(1−µ)(1−s)−α(γ− 1)s} =βpg(p){m(1−s)−αqs}. (24) In particular, this means that the end points of the line segment, as functions of p and γ, are given by: A≡A(p) := EUB(s = 0) = mβpg(p) B≡B(p,γ ) := EUB(s = 1) =−α(γ− 1)βpg(p) (25) We conclude this paragraph with a straightforward but useful observation. The value s∗∗ for which the bandit’s utility becomes zero (i.e. the intersection point To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 17 with the x-axis, see Fig. 3) does not depend on the sniping probability. Indeed, a straightforward computation shows: s∗∗ = A A +B = m m−αq (26) This means that geometrically speaking, probabilistic sniping makes the bandit’s utility function pivot about the intersection point s∗∗ towards the horizontal axis (see Fig. 3). For more details, see: KPD_supplementary_material_1.ipynb(section.2.1) 3.3.2 Expected utility for market maker The computation of the expected utility EUM proceeds along similar lines but is somewhat more involved. Again, we start by conditioning on the trigger event (Tr) which can either be the arrival of news (N, prob = β ) or a liquidity trader (LT, prob = 1−β): EUM = E(UM | Tr =N )β + E(UM | Tr =LT )(1−β) The second term (trigger event is the arrival of a liquidity trader ) is relatively simple as no sniping is involved. A straightforward computation yields: E(UM | Tr =LT ) = (1 + µ)s−αq(1−s) (27) In case the trigger event is news, the market maker’s payoﬀ depends on whether or not he loses the ensuing race and therefore gets sniped. Using the notation introduced above we conclude: E(UM | Tr =N ) = E(UM | Tr =N & MM loses race )h(p) + E(UM | Tr =N & MM wins race )(1−h(p)) Again, a straightforward but tedious calculation shows that the market maker’s utility in case he gets sniped equals: E(UM | Tr =N & MM loses race ) = (2µ−αq)s−γ(1−µ)(1−s) (28) Similarly: E(UM | Tr =N & MM wins race ) = ((γ + 1)s−γ + 1)µ (29) From the expressions above we can constitute the linear function EUM (s) but in the remainder of the paper we only need explicit expressions for the endpoints: C≡C(p,γ ) := EUM (s = 0) =− { qθ +β(mγ−µq)h(p) } D≡D(p,γ ) := EUM (s = 1) = (1 + µ)−β(m +αqh(p)) (30) See also: KPD_supplementary_material_1.ipynb (section.2.2) 18 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels 3.3.3 Indiﬀerence spread and utility for probabilistic sniping From the discussion above we know that for probabilistic sniping the end-points of the linear utility functions are replaced by their probabilistic counterparts: A→A(p), B →B(p), C →C(p), and D→D(p). Using the same logic as before we conclude that the point of indiﬀerence for probabilistic sniping is given by (cf. eqs. 13): s∗(p) = A(p)−C(p) (A(p)−C(p)) + (D(p)−B(p)) (31) u∗(p) = A(p)D(p)−B(p)C(p) (A(p)−C(p)) + (D(p)−B(p)) (32) For ease of reference, we will denote the common denominator by Q(p) := A(p)−C(p) +D(p)−B(p), (33) and introduce N (p) := A(p)D(p)−B(p)C(p). (34) Hence, we arrive at the useful shorthand u∗(p) = N (p) Q(p). (35) See also: KPD_supplementary_material_1.ipynb (section.4) 3.3.4 Impact of risk aversion and probabilistic sniping on utilities Since the point of indiﬀerence is completely determined by the utility endpoints (A, B, C and D), it is helpful to make their dependence on the parameters γ (risk aversion) and p (individual sniping probability) explicit. To this end we hark back to eqs. (25) and (30), from which we can compute: dA dγ = 0, dB dγ =−αβpg(p)< 0, dC dγ =−(θ +β(1− 2µ)h(p))< 0, dD dγ =−αβh(p)< 0. (36) It therefore transpires that increasing risk aversion pushes the utility endpoints (except for A) down, dragging the utility u∗ along. We will return to this obser- vation in section 4 where we will show how increasing risk-aversion will induce transitions in sniping behaviour. To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 19 The dependence of the utilities on the sniping probability p can be classiﬁed in a similar fashion: dA dp =mβ(g(p) +pg′(p))> 0, dB dp =−αqβ(g(p) +pg′(p))< 0 dC dp =−mβh′(p)< 0, dD dp =−αβqh′(p)< 0. (37) Notice that since g(p) +pg′(p) = (pg(p))′ =h′(p)/(H− 1)> 0, it follows that (see Fig 3) probabilistic sniping (i.e. reducing p) will pivot the bandit’s utility towards smaller values about the ﬁxed intersection point s∗∗. Similarly, since both dC/dp < 0,dD/dp < 0 the utility for the market maker (unsurprisingly) shifts upwards when p is lowered and the bandits snipe only occasionally. See also: KPD_supplementary_material_1.ipynb (section.3) Fig. 3 Basic geometry of probabilistic sniping: The solid lines (AB for the bandit, and CD for the market maker) represent the expected utilities (as function of the spread s) in the case of sure sniping. The resulting point of indiﬀerence (s∗,u∗) is non-playable since u∗ < 0. Reducing the probability of sniping to p< 1 pushes the MM utility function CD upwards (as the MM beneﬁts from less sniping), while the bandit’s utility pivots about its zero crossing. As a consequence, the point of indiﬀerence moves to the new intersection point (s∗(p),u∗(p)) which is now playable as u∗(p)> 0. 3.4 When is probabilistic sniping advantageous? 3.4.1 Geometric interpretation: Probabilistic sniping shifts point of indiﬀerence Is there an advantage in switching from sure sniping to probabilistic sniping? Ob- viously, less sniping is advantageous for the market maker as his pay-oﬀ is reduced by sniping. In section 3.1 we argued that less sniping might also protect bandits 20 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels from acquiring assets whose values are unstable (e.g. due to subsequent emergence of contradictory news). Some further intuition is gleaned from Fig. 4, which illus- trates the diﬀerence between sure and probabilistic sniping. More speciﬁcally, let us assume that sure sniping results in an equilibrium E such thatu∗ :=u(s∗) = 0 . Sure sniping (p = 1 ) is represented by the two blue lines (AB and CD, expected utility for bandit and market maker, respectively). Changing to probabilistic snip- ing (p < 1) results in two diﬀerent lines ( A′B′ and C′D′, respectively). Notice that A′B′ pivots about the equilibrium point E, while C′D′ shifts upwards (as less sniping means less risk for the market maker). As a consequence, the new intersection point E′ will yield a (strictly) positive utility. Another way to put this is that the derivative du∗/dp (evaluated at p = 1 ) is negative: smaller values for p result in higher utility (for a concrete, numerical example, see Fig 5 below). In section 4 below, we will recast this geometric insight into an algebraic expression, but ﬁrst we will show that this new equilibrium is not a Nash equilibrium for the one-shot MZ 1. Fig. 4 LEFT: Geometric representation that illustrates why probabilistic sniping is advantageous whenu∗ = 0. The blue lines AB (bandit) and CD (market maker) represent the expected utilities under sure sniping yielding a point of indiﬀerence E corresponding to zero utility u∗(p = 1) = 0 . Probabilistic sniping (with sniping probability p < 1) shift these utilities to A’B’ and C’D’ respectively, resulting in a new point of indiﬀerence E’ that corresponds to strictly better utility u∗(p <1) > 0. RIGHT: Conﬁguration in which probabilistic sniping results in lower expected utility and sure sniping is to be preferred. See main text for more information. 3.4.2 Does (s∗(p),u∗(p)) constitute a Nash equilibrium of the MZ 1 game? One of the reasons why for p< 1 the new intersection point (s∗(p),u∗(p)) is not considered in the MZ paper (even if u∗(p)> 0), is that it does not constitute a Nash equilibrium for the (single-shot) MZ game. To see this, it suﬃces to realise that when p <1, a bandit will always beneﬁt from unilaterally deviating to sure sniping (assuming u∗(p)≡UB(s∗(p))> 0). As a consequence, these intersection points are uninteresting in terms of the single-shot version of the MZ game. However, the reason that probabilistic sniping (and the corresponding role of s∗(p) and u∗(p)) is of interest nonetheless, is that things change when we will consider (in section 5) the inﬁnite horizon repeated game version (MZ ∞). The To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 21 Fig. 5 An example where probabilistic sniping is advantageous even though sure sniping results in a strictly positive utility. In this example, we depict the evolution of the point of indiﬀerence as a function of the sniping probability p, i.e. (s∗(p),u∗(p)), where p starts at p = 1 and is decremented with steps of 0.05 to p = 0 . Notice how the expected utility rises from 0.02 for sure sniping (p = 1) to a maximum of 0.05 for p≈ 0.15, before dropping to zero when there is no sniping (p = 0). promise of higher pay-oﬀs means that even purely selﬁsh agents are incentivised to collaborate if they expect this cooperation to be proﬁtable. This new equilibrium is stabilized by the implicit threat that, if anyone breaks the tacit plan, opponents will do the same and opportunities will instantly evaporate. Working out whether cooperation is the rational choice involves estimating what is most favourable: the exceptional but one-oﬀ payoﬀ one stands to gain from defecting, or the smaller but accumulating payoﬀs that result from continuing collaboration that over time, will eclipse the former. For more details, we refer to section 5. 4 Characterising the transitions in sniping behaviour In this section we use a geometric argument to deduce the general conditions under which, ﬁrst, the transition from sure to probabilistic sniping occurs, and second, probabilistic sniping ceases to be proﬁtable (i.e. transition from probabilistic to no sniping). We will then show how these general conditions can be related to risk aversion γ and how they give rise to two thresholds ( γK and γL) that govern these transitions. 22 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels 4.1 Transition from pure to probabilistic sniping Geometric interpretation As argued above, the equilibrium (s∗,u∗) can be seen as a function of the sniping probability p, i.e. (s∗(p), u∗(p)). To decide whether probabilistic sniping is advantageous, we need to determine when the slope of the tangent to the curve u∗(p) at p = 1 changes sign (see Fig. 6): du∗(p) dp ⏐⏐⏐⏐ p=1 > 0 (sure sniping) −→ du∗(p) dp ⏐⏐⏐⏐ p=1 < 0 (probabilistic sniping) (38) Indeed, if the slope of this tangent is positive, it means that reducing p from 1 (sure sniping) to a lower value p <1 decreases the value of u∗(p). Hence, sure sniping is better than probabilistic sniping. Conversely, if the slope of the tangent is negative, moving from sure to probabilistic sniping (i.e. reducing p) does improve u∗(p) and therefore probabilistic sniping is to be preferred. Using the notation introduced in eq. (35) we know that u∗(p) = N (p)/Q(p), and hence du∗(p) dp ⏐⏐⏐⏐ p=1 = N′(1)Q(1)−N (1)Q′(1) Q2(1) (39) Hence the threshold is determined by the equation: du∗(p) dp ⏐⏐⏐⏐ p=1 = 0 ⇐⇒ N′(1)Q(1)−N (1)Q′(1) = 0 (40) See : KPD_supplementary_material_1.ipynb (section.5) 4.2 Transition from probabilistic to cessation of sniping (non-sniping) If the expected utility associated with the sure sniping equilibrium is suﬃciently negative (i.e. u∗(s∗,p = 1) ≪ 0), even probabilistic sniping will not be able to turn this into proﬁts. Geometrically, this corresponds to a situation in which the path traced by (s∗(p),u∗(p)) will never enter (strictly) positive territory before it hits the x-axis at p = 0 (see Fig. 6 bottom-right panel). This transition can therefore be characterised by a condition which is analo- gous to the characterisation of the transition from pure to probabilistic sniping in eq.(38), this time however focusing on the tangent at p = 0: du∗(p) dp ⏐⏐⏐⏐ p=0 > 0 (probabilistic sniping) −→ du∗(p) dp ⏐⏐⏐⏐ p=0 < 0 (no sniping) (41) This transition therefore occurs when du∗(p) dp ⏐⏐⏐⏐ p=0 = 0 (42) To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 23 Expanding du∗(p) dp ⏐⏐⏐⏐ p=0 = N′(0)Q(0)−N (0)Q′(0) Q2(0) and using that N (0) = 0 whileQ(0) = D−C >0, we see that eq. (42) simpliﬁes to: N′(0) = 0. (43) Expanding equation (43): N′(0) = A′(0)D(0) +A(0)D′(0)−B′(0)C(0)−B(0)C′(0) and using A(0) = B(0) = 0 , condition (43) can be further simpliﬁed to: N′(0)≡A(0)D′(0)−B′(0)C(0) = 0. (44) See : KPD_supplementary_material_1.ipynb (section.6) 4.3 Increasing risk aversion induces transitions In section 3.3.4 we showed how the endpoints of the utilities (except for A) are pushed down by increasing risk aversion γ, dragging the point of indiﬀerence (s∗,u∗) down in their wake. Since u∗ decreases, there will be a value for γ beyond which probabilistic sniping becomes more favourable than sure sniping. Increasing γ even further will eventually result in a utility that is so low that even probabilistic sniping is no longer proﬁtable. Hence we see that increasing risk aversion γ is one way to induce the two transitions in sniping behaviour discussed above. In this section we will translate the general transition conditions (40) and (44) into precise transition thresholds for γ. 4.3.1 Threshold γK: Transition from sure to probabilistic sniping Both N and Q depend on risk aversion γ and expanding the transition condition eq. (40) as a function of γ yields a cubic polynomial (denoted by K(γ)), for which we need to ﬁnd a zero-crossing: N′(1)Q(1)−N (1)Q′(1)≡K3γ3 +K2γ2 +K1γ +K0| {z } :=K(γ) = 0 (45) The computation of the polynomial coeﬃcients is cumbersome and uninteresting and is therefore relegated to the supplementary material. See: KPD_Supplementary_material_1.ipynb (section.5.1) In terms of this notation, the threshold condition in eq. (40) amounts to ﬁnding the appropriate zero-crossing K(γ) = 0 . Recall that a cubic equation has at least one solution (zero-crossing). However, we need to make sure that this solution satisﬁes γ≥ 1 and can therefore be interpreted as a risk aversion factor. This is proven in the following theorem in which we also deﬁne the transition threshold: 24 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels Proposition 1 (Risk aversion threshold for transition from pure to probabilistic sniping) The cubic polynomialK(γ) speciﬁed in eq. (45) has a unique zero-crossing greater than 1. We will denote this unique zero-crossing by γK≥ 1 as it is the threshold that governs the transition from sure to probabilistic sniping. The proof of this proposition can be found in appendix F. Fig. 6 Examples of transition thresholds in sniping behaviour. In the above example we ﬁx the parameters α = .45, µ= .5, δ= .5, H= 5 . From these values we can compute the threshold values γK = 2.515 and γL = 7.831 (for a deﬁnition of γK and γL see section 4). Next we set γ to four diﬀerent values: γ = 1.7575 (slightly risk-averse, sure sniping), γ =γK = 2.5150 (risk averse, knife edge), γ = 3.5 (probabilistic sniping), and ﬁnally, γ =γL = 7.8313 (strongly risk-averse, no more sniping). Notice that in the bottom left picture probabilistic sniping yields a better utility, even though the utility for sure sniping is positive! See also: KPD_supplementary_material_numeric.ipynb (section.3.4) 4.3.2 Threshold γL: Transition from probabilistic sniping to non-sniping A similar approach can be taken to quantify how a further increase in risk aversion γ gives rise to the threshold γL beyond which even probabilistic sniping is no longer proﬁtable, i.e. both sure and probabilistic sniping results in negative utility u∗(s∗,p )< 0, (∀ 0≤p≤ 1). To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 25 In order to determine this threshold value, we expand transition condition eq.(44) as a function of γ and obtain a quadratic polynomial (denoted by L(γ)) for which a zero-crossing needs to be found: N′(0) = 0 ⇐⇒ L(γ) := L2(γ− 1)2 +L0 = 0, (46) which can easily be solved explicitly. We can summarize all of these observations in the following proposition. Proposition 2 (Risk aversion threshold for transition from probabilistic to non-sniping) There is a unique threshold γL for risk aversion γ that governs the transition from probabilistic to no sniping. Speciﬁcally: γL = 1 + √ (1−µ)Z αθ where Z = 1 +µ−β(1−µ). (47) The proof of this proposition is straightforward and can be found in Appendix section G. See: KPD_supplementary_material_1.ipynb (section.6) 4.4 Optimal sniping probability p∗ K In the preceding sections we have shown that increasing risk aversion ( γ > 1) creates multiple sniping regimes for the bandits: – 1≤γ <γK: Sure sniping is most proﬁtable; This situation corresponds to the top left panel in Fig. 6. – γK ≤ γ <γL: Probabilistic sniping results in higher utilities; in fact, there is an optimal sniping probability p∗ K (see below) which results in a maximal (positive) utility. This situation corresponds to the bottom left panel in Fig. 6. – γ≥γL: No sniping (resulting in zero utility) is the best option. This situation corresponds to the bottom right panel in Fig. 6. The situation in the second case γK < γ <γL is schematically illustrated in Fig. 8. It follows that there is an optimal sniping probability that yields the largest utility: p∗ K := arg max p u∗(p) (48) We introduce the following notation for the corresponding utility u∗ K and spread s∗ K. Since this is a unique optimal point it provides a natural focal point for the game [19]. In addition, Fig. 9 compares the expected utilities under both sure and (optimal) probabilistic sniping as a function of risk aversion γ, showing clearly that proﬁtability can be sustained for higher values of γ. See: u_depend_on_gamma_p_v2.m 26 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels Fig. 7 These ﬁgures show the evolution of transition thresholds γK (blue) and γL (red) as functions of the rates for the trigger event: arrival rate of news ( α, TOP) and arrival rate of LT (µ, bottom). Notice (top) how increasing the news rate α results a faster transition to probabilistic sniping (as explained in section 3.1 ). 5 Optimal probabilistic sniping as SPE in repeated MZ ∞ game In the previous section we have shown that if the risk aversion factor γ satisﬁes γK <γ <γL, all bandits are better oﬀ if they implement probabilistic sniping, i.e. engage in racing with probability p∗ K only. However, this is not a Nash equilibrium for the stage game, as bandits will be tempted to snipe more frequently. This is a situation reminiscent of the classical prisoner’s dilemma (PD) where the Nash To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 27 Fig. 8 Deﬁnition ofp∗ K: When probabilistic sniping is advantageous (i.e.γK <γ <γL) reducing the sniping probability p shifts the equilibrium position (s∗(p),u∗(p)) along a concave arc, the top of which corresponds to the optimal sniping probability p∗ K. equilibrium forces the players into a strategy that results in the worst social welfare possible [12]. However, it is well-known that if we repeat the prisoner’s dilemma an indef- inite number of times, it becomes possible to devise strategies that do yield the optimal utility. This reversal of fortune is due to the fact that agents can build up reputations that encourage collaboration that is guaranteed to be proﬁtable for all parties. Exactly the same rationale will also play out in the (inﬁnite horizon) repeated MZ-game (MZ∞). 5.1 The MZ stage game as a sequential game Game Tree Before we explore the strategies that are available in the (indeﬁnitely) repeated MZ game (a.k.a. MZ ∞), we need to pause for a minute and clarify the nature of the strategies that are available to the players in the single-shot stage game (a.k.a. MZ 1). To this end, it is helpful to realise that the stage game involves diﬀerent interdependent steps and can therefore be seen as a sequential game involving a (possibly) random move by “nature”. Below, we give an explicit representation of the decision tree for the game and clarify a subtle but important point in the interpretation of probabilistic sniping. In section 2.2, we already outlined the detailed chronology of the various deﬁn- ing events in the game. For the interpretation of the MZ game as a sequential game it is also helpful to highlight the various steps for an individual HFT in the corresponding decision tree (also see Fig. 10): 28 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels Fig. 9 TOP: The ﬁgure shows the equilibrium utility spread as a function of risk aversion in both sure sniping ( u∗ K (p = 1) blue line) and optimal probabilistic sniping ( u∗ K = u(p = p∗ K ), red line). BOTTOM: corresponding optimal sniping probability p∗ K, which drops from p∗ K = 1 (sure sniping) when γ≤γK to 0 (no sniping) when γ≥γL. 1. HFT (at time t =−1) has to choose a spread s from the continuous action space 0≤s≤σ. Alternatively, he can refrain from playing altogether (NULL action resulting in zero utility). 2. Nature (at time t =−1/2) selects one of the HFTs as MM (using the rule speciﬁed earlier in section 2.2), relegating the others to the role of bandit; 3. At t = 0, each HFT knows its type (market maker or bandit) and can therefore make his reaction to the trigger event (news or LT arrival) contingent on his type. This results in a new bifurcation of the decision tree: To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 29 – if he’s bandit: he has to choose between quitting the game (NULL-action with utility 0), or some form of sniping: sure p = 1, no (p = 0) or proba- bilistic sniping ( 0<p< 1) resulting in a utility uB(s,p ). – if he’s MM: he either proceeds and the game ends with utility uM (s,p ) (which actually also depends on p), or he withdraws from the game (NULL with utility 0): Fig. 10 The MZ game as a sequential game against nature. Notice that in the last decision point, the MM is uncertain about his utility uM (s,p ) as it depends on the bandit’s sniping probability which at the moment of decision is unknown to him! Actions and Strategies Disregarding the trivial NULL action, what actions and strategies are available to the players? At the ﬁrst decision point, it is clear that each HFT can choose a spread s, which corresponds to a pure but continuous action. At the second HFT decision point, the HFTs know their type. The strategy for the market maker is straightforward: if the trigger event is the publication of a news item, the intrinsic value of the asset jumps and he will race to cancel his stale quotes. The choice of strategies for the other HFTs (bandits) is more subtle. Indeed, in the MZ paper [16], the authors describe mixed sniping as randomly mixing between the pure and discrete strategies of sniping and and not sniping. As a consequence, mixed sniping will only feature as a Nash equilibrium when the bandits are indiﬀerent between sniping and not sniping! In our interpretation, we think of each bandit selecting a sniping probability p as him choosing a pure strategy from a continuous action space. This allows us to introduce probabilistic sniping in situations where the expected utilities at the extremes (i.e. p = 0 or 1) are not necessarily the same. 30 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels Fig. 11 Interpretation of the sniping probability.Left: In the MZ paper, the pure actions available to the bandit are sniping and not sniping. Mixed or (probabilistic) sniping is therefore only possible when the bandit is indiﬀerent between the pure actions. Right: In this paper, we interpret the sniping probability as a pure but continuous action that the bandit can take. In this interpretation the bandit need not be indiﬀerent between the extremes in order to adopt a probabilistic strategy. 5.2 Subgame-Perfect Equilibria (SPE) in repeated games 5.2.1 The emergence of collaboration in repeated games In the sections above we identiﬁed the risk aversion threshold γK above which probabilistic sniping has the potential of yielding better utilities for both the market maker and the bandits. When γ >γK there is a corresponding optimal sniping probabilityp∗ K that yields the most favourable outcome for all parties. The problem with this strategy is that it does not constitute a Nash equilibrium for the single- shot MZ1 game as bandits will be tempted to snipe more often than is allowed (see section 3.4). However, things are diﬀerent when we consider the inﬁnite horizon repeated game version (MZ ∞). Indeed in this case, we can invoke the so-called folk theorems that show that any equilibrium that is strictly better than a Nash equilibrium in the single-shot (stage) game gives rise to a new Nash equilibrium (NE) in the repeated game (at least, under the mild assumption that all the players are suﬃciently patient) [1]. However, for this to become a viable strategy we need to make the threat of rescinding the cooperation implicit in probabilistic sniping, credible by devising a method to detect non-compliance among the other agents. This is non-trivial since even deceptive agents would still advertise spread s∗ K, as spreads are publicly ob- servable, and deviating from this would immediately ﬂag their non-compliance and trigger a collapse of the (implicit) agreement. Deceptive agents would therefore stick to spread s∗ K but snipe for sure, rather than with probability p∗ K. However, the sniping behaviour of agents is hidden to the other agents as it is not publicly known who entered the race and who won it. An agent only has access to its own utility (aggregated over many repetitions of the stage game). So each agent will To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 31 have to base his decision (on whether or not to continue with the game) on the impact that sniping by the deceptive agents has on his own utility. 5.2.2 Impact of deceptive sniping When γK <γ <γL and all agents snipe with optimal probability p∗ K they stand to earn u∗ K > 0 (on average). If, however, there are rogue agents that engage in sniping at every possible occasion, then the utility for the trustworthy agents will go down for two reasons: 1. as market makers they will suﬀer from more intense sniping; 2. as bandits they will have to race against an (on average) larger group of competing bandits. The combination of these two eﬀects will aﬀect their outcomes in various but related ways: It will reduce the number of times they succeed in winning the race, and this in turn will push down their aggregated utility. This is illustrated in Fig. 12 where the blue error-bars show the average util- ity (averaged over 10000 simulations of the stage game) when all agents snipe probabilistically (with probability p∗ K). These results are clearly consistent with the theoretically predicted value u∗ K = 0.015 (blue dotted line). However, things change signiﬁcantly when there is even a single devious agent (HFT 5 in the ﬁg- ure) that snipes for sure (red error-bars). The utility for this deceptive agent more than doubles while the expected utility for the trustworthy agents (1 through 4) dips below zero (u =−0.0016, red dotted line). See:KPD_supplementary_material_game_simulations.ipynb (section 7.2) Observing this unexpected downturn in utility an agent can suspect (some of) the other agents are not complying, and consequently decide to renege on his earlier commitment to the probabilistic sniping strategy. To turn this intuition into a reliable operational strategy, we need to quantify the eﬀect that deceptive agents have on the expected utility of the trustworthy agents. This is taken up in the next section. 5.3 Expected utility in the presence of deceptive agents 5.3.1 Generalising probabilities h(p) and g(p) when there are deceptive agents To evaluate the expected utility of a speciﬁc trustworthy agent amidst deceptive agents, we consider the case where the total of H agents is divided into Ht trust- worthy agents (who stick to probabilistic sniping) and Hd deceptive agents who pretend to restrict their sniping but in reality enter the sniping race at every possi- ble occasion (obiously, Ht +Hd =H). We can now build on the earlier exposition in section 3.3 where, in eqs. (25) and (30), we expressed the expected utilities in terms of the probabilities h(p) and g(p). Closer inspection of these equations shows that only these probability functions need to be modiﬁed in the presence of 32 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels Fig. 12 Mean utility for agent group of Ht = 4 trustworthy agents (agents 1 through 4) and Hd = 1 deceptive agent (agent 5). The mean and error-bars ( ±1 standard error) show the results for a simulation of a large number of stage games, while the dotted lines indicate the theoretically predicted value. When everyone adheres to probabilistic sniping, the mean is the same for all agents. When the deceptive agent snipes for sure, the theoretical mean (dotted red line) corresponds to the expected utility for the trustworthy agents (1 through 4). The deceptive agent (agent 5) is clearly able to increase his gains at the expense of the trustworthy agents. deceptive agents as the other factors only depend on the game parameters. We therefore introduce the following notation which extends the probabilities h(p) and g(p): – htm(p,Ht,Hd) is the probability that a speciﬁc individual trustworthy agent, who is acting as market maker , will lose the MZ-race given that the Hd deceptive agents snipe for sure, while the remaining Ht− 1 trustworthy agents enter the sniping race with probability p (denoted as: wp. p): htm(p,Ht,Hd) := P{MM will lose race| Hd agents snipe for sure,... . . . while (Ht− 1) remaining trustworthy agents snipe w.p. p}(49) In addition to the market maker, the number of agents in the race is Hd (all the deceptive agents snipe for sure) plus a sample (of stochastic size Nt∼Bin(Ht− 1,p )) of the remaining Ht− 1 trustworthy agents who snipe with probability p. Hence: htm(p,Ht,Hd) = E ( Hd +Nt 1 +Hd +Nt ) where Nt∼Bin(Ht− 1,p ) (50) To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 33 – gtb(p,Ht,Hd) is the conditional probability that a speciﬁc trustworthy agent, acting as bandit, wins the sniping race, given that he actually enters the race , andHd deceptive agents snipe for sure, while the remaining Ht−1 trustworthy agents enter the race with probability p: gtb(p,Ht,Hd) := P{agent will win race | he enters the race as bandit, ... ... while the remaining Ht− 1 trustworthy agents snipe w.p. p, ... ... and the Hd deceptive agents snipe for sure} (51) A similar reasoning implies that gtb(p) is a weighted average of the following two terms: – if the market maker happens to be selected from the group of trustworthy agents (probability (Ht− 1)/(H− 1)) then the list of agents in the race is composed of: the agent under scrutiny, the market maker, all the deceptive agents (Hd) and a random selection of the remaining Ht− 2 trustworthy agents; – if the market maker happens to be selected from the group of deceptive agents (probability Hd/(H− 1)), the list of agents in the race comprises, in addition to the trustworthy agent under scrutiny, the market maker, all the remaining deceptive agents ( Hd− 1), as well as a random selection from the remaining Ht− 1 trustworthy agents. Recasting this logic in mathematical parlance, we arrive at the following ex- pression: gtb(p,Ht,Hd) = (Ht− 1 H− 1 ) E ( 1 2 +Hd +N (m) t ) + ( Hd H− 1 ) E ( 1 2 + (Hd− 1) +N (b) t ) = (Ht− 1 H− 1 ) E ( 1 2 +Hd +N (m) t ) + ( Hd H− 1 ) E ( 1 1 +Hd +N (b) t ) where N (m) t ∼Bin(Ht− 2;p) and N (b) t ∼Bin(Ht− 1;p) (52) (For the sake of completeness we add that the binomial random variables are independent). An alternative characterisation of gtb which, from a computational point of view, is slightly more convenient is presented in appendix H. See: KPD_Supplementary_material_2.ipynb (section.3) 5.3.2 Non-compliance detection based on sequential utility testing Rather than basing the non-compliance test on the aggregated utility (which is a rather crude measure), we monitor the rate of occurrence of each individual utility outcome. To this end, we utilise the fact that since the game parameters 34 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels are common knowledge, each agent can use Table 1 to compute the values of the J = 9 diﬀerent possible utilities. In addition, combining the event probabilities in that table with the generalisation htm and gtb speciﬁed in eqs. (50) and (52), he will be able to compute the corresponding probability of each utility outcome, both under the assumption of compliance (Hd = 0) and non-compliance (Hd > 0). These probabilities are listed in Table 2. utility probability 0 1 H{β(1− 2µ)(1−htm(p))} + H−1 H {1−βpgtb(p)(1−µ)} −γ(2σ−s) αβ· ( 1 H ) ·htm s ( 1 H ) {αβhtm(p) + (1−β)(1− 2α−µ)} −γ(σ−s) ( 1 H ) {α(1−β) +βhtm(p)(1− 2(α +µ)) +βµ} s +σ ( 1 H ) {βµ(1−htm(p) +α(1−β)} 2s µ· ( 1 H ) {βhtm(p) + (1−β)} 2σ−s H−1 H {αβpgtb(p)} σ−s ( H−1 H ) ·βpgtb(p){1− 2α−µ} −γs ( H−1 H ) · β 2·αpgtb(p) Table 2 Overview of unique utilities and corresponding probabilities (for a trustworthy agent). So, in essence, we have a situation in which each stage game produces a utility outcome uj (j = 1, 2,...,J ) with a known probability distribution π0 = (π0 1,...,π 0 J ) under the assumption of overall compliance (null-hypothesis of fair behaviour with everyone sniping probabilistically at the optimal rate p∗ K) and an alternative known distribution π1 = (π1 1,...,π 1 J ) that applies to a trustworthy agent, assuming that there are a speciﬁc number Hd > 0 of deceptive agents that snipe for sure (see Appendix J). This is illustrated in Fig 13 where we have plotted the probability of occurrence of the nine possible outcomes under two diﬀerent regimes (with and without deceptive agents). When, after stage gamet, an individual trustworthy agent receives utilityut, he can compute the likelihood of this outcome under the two alternative hypotheses i.e. without (null hypothesis H0) or with (alternative hypothesis H1) deceptive snipers, and determine which one is more likely: P (ut|H 0)≤??≥P (ut|H 1) For illustrative purposes we look at a concrete example, See, KPD_supplementary_material_game_simulations.ipynb (section 9) Wald’s sequential probability ratio test (SPRT) [21] provides a principled way of aggregating the evidence collected over a sequence u1,u 2,...,u t of utility To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 35 Fig. 13 Probability distribution (taken from Table 2) for the ﬁnite set of utility outcomes under two diﬀerent regimes (BLUE: Fair ( Hd = 0 ), RED: Hd = 1 ). Bottom: Same ﬁgure as above, but probability of zero utility has been suppressed for reasons of clarity. observations. More speciﬁcally, at every time (stage game) t we construct the following test statistic: S(t) = t∑ τ =1 logP (uτ |H 1) P (uτ |H 0). (53) 36 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels To implement the sequential test procedure we ﬁrst need to compute the following two threshold values: a :=− log ( 1−α β ) b := log ( 1−β α ) (54) where α is type I error (related to signiﬁcance) and β is the type II error (related to power). We then get the following stopping rule: – if a<S t <b : continue testing; – if St <a : acceptH0 (all HFTs are trustworthy) – if St >b : acceptH1 (i.e. rejectH0, there is at least one devious HFT) So, any trustworthy agent that is monitoring his accumulated utility will com- pose the Wald test-statistic as follows: at time (stage game)τ he will receive utility uj(τ ). Once this result is known, he will compute the probability ratioπ1 j(τ )/π0 j(τ )of this event under both hypotheses (fair H0 and deceptive H1) and then sum the logs of these ratios. He will then continue testing until hitting one of the two thresholds in eq.(54), whereupon he can draw a statistically signiﬁcant conclusion regarding the compliance of the other agents. This is illustrated in Fig. 14 where the top row shows the fate of a trustworthy agent in a group of three additional agents one of which is cheating. The bottom row shows the fate of a trustwor- thy agent when each of his three colleagues is honouring the implicit contract of optimal probabilistic sniping. See, KPD_supplementary_material_game_simulations.ipynb (section.10) 6 Related work High-frequency trading Over the last decades, ﬁnancial markets have changed sig- niﬁcantly and become fragmented. Hence, traders can search across many markets, but this requires costly infrastructure and technology to make trading proﬁtable [8]. In addition, high speed trading is now considered to be a crucial part of the trading technology. In 2010, the speed of round-trip between NASDAQ and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange decreased from over 14.5 milliseconds to under 8.1 milliseconds in 2014 [5]. Also NASDAQ supports high frequency traders by oﬀering faster access to their infrastructure and trade data transmission [13]. In response to these drastic changes in ﬁnancial markets, algorithmic trading harnesses ad- vanced technologies to connect to diﬀerent markets directly and trade ever faster at lower costs. Therefore, high-frequency traders (HFTs) can trade continuously and beneﬁt from serial order processing. This continuous time trading has given rise to a speed race and sniping has emerged as an opportunity for HFTs to beneﬁt from a stale quote [11]. In [2] it is shown that HFTs will tend to post thin but strictly positive bid-ask spreads to compensate the costs of getting sniped even without asymmetric information about fundamentals. The emergence of high-speed trading has spurred on a lot of research regarding the eﬀects on important market parameters such as liquidity. The seminal paper by To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 37 Fig. 14 TOP: Simulation results for a group of 4 agents, three of which are trustworthy and snipe with optimal probability p∗ K while one of them is deceptive and snipes for sure. The evolution of the utility of one of the trustworthy agents during the repeated game is plotted on the right, and the corresponding Wald SPRT statistic on the left. Around stage game 115 the Wald statistic hits the upper limit ( b in eq. 54) indicating that the null hypothesis of FAIR game can be rejected. This would therefore be the moment the trustworthy agent would choose to quit the game. BOTTOM: Same statistic and data but this time for a group of four agents that are all abiding by implicit probabilistic sniping contract. In this case the Wald statistic hits the lower limit (a in eq. 54) around stage game 175, allowing the agent to accept the null hypothesis of FAIR game. Menkveld and Zoican [16] has been the starting point for this research and has been discussed extensively in this paper. The focus in both this and the MZ paper has been on a stylized version of the interactions occurring at high frequency electronic exchanges. However, real market are competitive and continuous, and algorithmic traders need to choose their strategies from scratch and for a longer period in order to beneﬁt from the dynamic of the market and speed (arms race). Moreover, traders should have a set of predeﬁned strategies [6] and traders’ behaviour may be inﬂuenced by observing their competitors [18]. Therefore, we explain agent’s strategies and the reason why repeated game instead of one shot Nash equilibrium is a better choice to explain behaviours in the electric exchange. The case for repeated games is further strengthened by research by Bruce (2007) that shows 38 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels that a one-shot stage game brings signiﬁcant surplus loss to the traders in a dynamic setting [4]. More recently, some studies showed that repetition in the game allows decision makers (agents, players in the market) to construct their strategies explicitly and beneﬁt in the long-run [7,18]. Breitmoser(2015) analyzed individual strategies that are cooperate after mu- tual cooperation, defect after mutual defection, otherwise randomize. He ﬁnds a semi-grim equilibrium as a threshold that agents start cooperating in the ﬁrst round by knowing treatment parameters and switch to semi-Grim with equal prob- ability in the repeated game. At the end, sustain mutual cooperation led to the long-run welfare [3] and [10]. Furthermore, agents gain experience from the his- tory of the game and trust is built [14] and an indeﬁnitely repeated games with high continuation probability helps agents to mix strategies with minimal restric- tions on the type and lengths of pure strategies [18]. While repeated game helps sustain cooperation, it is important to monitor the game in case of any defec- tions. In 1947, Wald [21] develops a statistical test called Sequential probability ratio test (SPRT) based on likelihood ratio. This test is applied repeatedly during the sampling process and terminate whenever there is suﬃcient evidence in the data for one of the hypotheses of interest. In this paper, we use SPRT to detect non-compliance agent in diﬀerent scenarios. 7 Conclusions and further research In this paper we re-analysed the MZ game, a stylized version of a market interact- ing with a high frequency exchange as originally described in [16], and argued that a recasting of the problem in terms of repeated games oﬀers a natural interpreta- tion in which the solution space of equilibria accommodates genuine probabilistic sniping. Probabilistic sniping was introduced in the original paper to account for changes in the behavior of HFTs when risk aversion increases, but its practical sig- niﬁcance in the single-shot game is limited. However, in the context of repeated games probabilistic sniping provides genuinely new and interesting insights. In par- ticular: – We outlined a simple geometric argument that allows one to deduce the general conditions that govern the transitions in sniping behaviour. By translating these conditions in terms of the risk aversion parameter γ we obtained two new thresholds (γK and γL). – Contrary to the situation in the single-shot game, we predict that probabilistic sniping will start playing a role even before the equilibrium utility for sure sniping is reduced to zero (by increasing risk aversion). – We deﬁned unfavourable scenario in which there are deceptive agents in the game. In comparison with favorable (fair) situation, the presence of non- compliant agents reduces trustworthy agent’s expected utility. We showed how one can use Wald’s SPRT to monitor the sequential game and ﬂag when the utility for trustworthy agents deviates from the optimum point. To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 39 Some notes on extensions for further research In both this paper and the original MZ paper it was shown how simple and highly stylized models can already provide unexpected insights and interesting conclusions. We therefore expect that more realistic models will yield even more intriguing insights. Some of the challenges we intend to tackle in an upcoming paper are: – We showed how important quantities that determine the qualitative transitions in the results (such as s∗ K orγK) can be computed based on the knowledge of the game parameters, i.e. α,µ,δ andH. However, in most realistic situations, these parameters are unknown and need to be estimated from observations. As a result there is an amount of uncertainty and noise associated with these results. How stable are the conclusions with respect to noisy game parameters? – In the repeated game scenario expounded in this paper, each stage game starts from zero position. It can be modiﬁed to a more realistic strategy, as the traders want to regress back to zero-positions. – Risk aversion varies depending on position. One reason for this is that traders dread reporting bad news. Hence, when they ﬁnd themselves in a negative position, they are willing to take more risk since, if they are lucky, they can redeem themselves, and if they are unlucky, the ”size” of their bad news does not make all that much diﬀerence. Acknowledgements The authors are very grateful to Profs. Menkveld and Zoican for their detailed feedback on earlier drafts of this paper. References 1. Abreu, D, Dutta, P, K, & Smith, L, The folk theorem for repeated games: a NEU condition. Econometrica, 62, 939–939 (1994). 2. Budish, E, Cramton, P, & Shim, J, The high-frequency trading arms race: Frequent batch auctions as a market design response, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130, 1547-1547 (2015). 3. Breitmoser, Y, Cooperation, but no reciprocity: Individual strategies in the repeated prisoner’s dilemma, The American Economic Review, 105, 2882-2910 (2015). 4. Bruce Ian Carlin, Miguel Sousa Lobo, & Viswanathan, S, Episodic Liquidity Crises: Cooper- ative and Predatory Trading, The Journal of Finance, 62, 2235-2274 (2007). 5. Baldauf, M, & Mollner, J, High-Frequency Trading and Market Performance, conference proceeding (2014). 6. Cason, T, & Mui, V, Individual versus group choices of repeated game strategies: A strategy method approach, Games and Economic Behavior, 114, 128-145 (2019). 7. Dal Bo, P, & Frechette, G, R, Strategy Choice in the Inﬁnitely Repeated Prisoners’ Dilemma, WZB Berlin Social Science Center (2015). 8. Delaney, L, Investment in high-frequency trading technology: A real options approach, Euro- pean Journal of Operational Research, 270, 375-385 (2018). 9. D, Fudenberg, & J, Tirole: Game Theory, 148, MIT Press (1991-2009). 10. Fudenberg, D, Rand, D, & Dreber, A, Slow to anger and fast to forgive: Cooperation in an uncertain world, The American Economic Review, 102, 720-749 (2012). 11. Hagstr¨ omer, B, & Nord´ e, L, The diversity of high-frequency traders, Journal of Financial Markets, 16, 741-770 (2013). 12. Holt, C A, Roth, A E, & Smith, V L, The nash equilibrium: a perspective. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 101, 3999–4002 (2004). 40 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels 13. Kauﬀman, R, Hu, Y, & Ma, D, Will high-frequency trading practices transform the ﬁnancial markets in the asia paciﬁc region?, Financial Innovation, 1, 1-27 (2015). 14. Kagel, J, & McGee, P, Team versus individual play in ﬁnitely repeated prisoner dilemma games, American Economic Journal. Microeconomics, 8, 253-276 (2016). 15. Laclau, M, A folk theorem for repeated games played on a network, Games and Economic Behavior 76, 711–37 (2012). 16. Menkveld, A, & Zoican, M, Need for speed? exchange latency and liquidity, The Review of Financial Studies, 30, 1188-1228 (2017). 17. Pinto, B, Repeated games and the reciprocal dumping model of trade, Journal of Interna- tional Economics, 20, 357-366 (1986). 18. Romero, J, & Rosokha, Y, Constructing strategies in the indeﬁnitely repeated prisoner’s dilemma game European Economic Review, 104, 185-219 (2018). 19. Schelling, T, C, The strategy of conﬂict, Cambridge: Harvard University Press (1960). 20. Tomala, T, Fault reporting in partially known networks and folk theorems, Operations Re- search, 59, 754-763 (2011). 21. Wald, A, Sequential tests of statistical hypotheses. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 16, 117–186 (1945). 22. Link to KPD 2021 GitHub repository, https://github.com/Karen-20/Karen.git (2020) To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 41 Appendix: Supplementary Material A List of notation and abbreviations MZ or MZ 1 Menkveld-Zoican (single-shot) stage game MZ∞ inﬁnite horizon repeated MZ game HFT High Frequency Trader, also called agent LT Liquidity trader (operates in background by hitting available quotes) MM or M market maker (selected from among the HFTs) B or HFB (high frequency) bandit (all HFTs that were not selected as market maker) H total number of HFT agents ( H =Ht +Hd) Ht total number of trustworthy agents (snipe probabilistically) Hd total number of deceptive agents (snipe for sure) v intrinsic value of a (ﬁnancial) asset s (half) spread ( 0≤s≤σ), simply referred to as spread p sniping probability α arrival rate for news events (Poisson process) σ jump size upon news µ arrival rate for LT arrivals (Poisson process) δ exchange latency (duration of MZ race) γ risk aversion factor (γ >1) β probability that trigger (i.e. ﬁrst) event is news: β =α/(α +µ) 1−β probability that trigger (i.e. ﬁrst) event is LT arrival: 1−β =µ/(α +µ) α (half) the expected number of news arrivals in interval [0, δ) µ (half) the expected number of LT arrivals in interval [0, δ) m 1−µ θ harmonic mean of α and µ s∗,u∗ spread and utility at point of indiﬀerence s∗(p),u∗(p) same as above under probabilistic sniping p∗ K optimal sniping probability (maximises expected utility) s∗ K corresponding optimal spread s∗ K =s∗(p∗ K ) γK γ-threshold for transition from sure to probabilistic sniping γL γ-threshold for transition from probabilistic to no sniping h(p) probability that market maker will lose race (when HFTs snipe wp. p g(p) probability that bandit will win the race, given he enters race and all HFTs snipe wp. p htm(p,Ht,Hd) h(p) for trustworthy market maker when there are Ht trustworthy and Hd devious HFTs gtb(p,Ht,Hd) g(p) for trustworthy bandit when there are Ht trustworthy and Hd devious HFTs 42 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels B Computer code 1. Simulation experiments: KPD_supplementary_material_game_simulations.ipynb 2. Check the existence of the solutions: KPD_supplementary_material_1.ipynb 3. Check the sniping probability properties and numerical test: KPD_supplementary_material_2.ipynb 4. Check the numerical analysis: KPD_supplementary_material_numeric.ipynb C Details of payoﬀ computation The payoﬀ for each agent is based on eq. (2) which we here restate: payoﬀ = position(t=δ)× value(t=δ) + income(t=δ) This allows us to compute the payoﬀ for each event-code. See table (3) and (4) for detailed payoﬀ and utility computation. To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 43 Event codes Values at t =δ MM loses race MM wins race when there is a race MM B MM B NG-NG Position = −1 +1 0 0 Value = 2σ 2σ 2σ 2σ Income = s −s 0 0 payoﬀ = −2σ +s 2σ−s 0 0 Utility = -γ(2σ−s) 2σ−s 0 0 NG-NB Position = −1 +1 0 0 Value = 0 0 0 0 Income = s −s 0 0 payoﬀ = 0 +s 0−s 0 0 Utility = s -γs 0 0 NG-LA Position = −1 0 -1 0 Value = σ σ σ σ Income = s 0 s 0 payoﬀ = −(σ−s) 0 −(σ−s) 0 Utility = -γ(σ−s) 0 -γ(σ−s) 0 NG-LB Position = 0 +1 +1 0 Value = σ σ σ σ Income = 2s −s −(−s) 0 payoﬀ = (0)(σ) + 2s σ−s σ +s 0 Utility = 2s σ−s σ +s 0 NG-no Position = −1 +1 0 0 Value = σ σ σ σ Income = s −s 0 0 payoﬀ = −(σ−s) σ−s 0 0 Utility = -γ(σ−s) σ−s 0 0 NB-NG Position = +1 −1 0 0 Value = 0 0 0 0 Income = s −s 0 0 payoﬀ = 0 +s 0−s 0 0 Utility = s -γs 0 0 NB-NB Position = +1 −1 0 0 Value = 2σ 2σ 2σ 2σ Income = s −2s 0 0 payoﬀ = −2σ +s 2σ−s 0 0 Utility = -γ(2σ−s) 2σ−s 0 0 NB-LA Position = 0 −1 −1 0 Value = -σ -σ -σ -σ Income = 2s −s s 0 payoﬀ = (0)(−σ) + 2s 0 σ +s 0 Utility = 2s σ−s σ +s 0 NB-LB Position = +1 0 +1 0 Value = −σ −σ −σ −σ Income = s 0 s 0 payoﬀ = -σ +s 0 -σ +s 0 Utility = -γ(σ−s) 0 -γ(σ−s) 0 NB-no Position = +1 −1 0 0 Value = -σ -σ -σ -σ Income = −s s 0 0 payoﬀ = -(σ−s) σ−s 0 0 Utility = -γ(σ−s) σ−s 0 0 Table 3 This table represents a list of possible events, when there is a race, from t = 0 tot =δ with detailed computation of payoﬀ and utility based on eq. (2) 44 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels Event code No race Event code No race MM B MM B LA-NG Position = −1 0 LB-NG Position = +1 0 Value = σ σ Value = σ σ Income = s 0 Income = s 0 payoﬀ = -σ +s 0 payoﬀ = σ +s 0 Utility = -γ(σ−s) 0 Utility = σ +s 0 LA-NB Position = −1 0 LB-NB Position = +1 0 Value = -σ -σ Value = -σ -σ Income = s 0 Income = s 0 payoﬀ = σ +s 0 payoﬀ = -σ +s 0 Utility = σ +s 0 Utility = -γ(σ−s) 0 LA-LA Position = −1 0 LB-LA Position = +1 0 Value = 0 0 Value = 0 0 Income = s 0 Income = 2s 0 payoﬀ = s 0 payoﬀ = 2s 0 Utility = s 0 Utility = 2s 0 LA-LB Position = 0 0 LB-LB Position = +1 0 Value = 0 0 Value = 0 0 Income = 2s 0 Income = s 0 payoﬀ = 2s 0 payoﬀ = s 0 Utility = 2s 0 Utility = s 0 LA-no Position = −1 0 LB-no Position = +1 0 Value = 0 0 Value = 0 0 Income = s 0 Income = s 0 payoﬀ = s 0 payoﬀ = s 0 Utility = s 0 Utility = s 0 Table 4 This table represents a list of possible events, when there is no race, from t = 0 to t =δ with detailed computation of payoﬀ and utility based on eq. (2) To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 45 D Expected utility for market maker and bandit Expected utility for market maker To compute the expected value EUM we ﬁrst condition on the nature of the trigger event: news (prob = β) or LT arrival (prob = 1−β). Next, in case the trigger event is news, a race ensues, and we additionally condition on whether (prob: 1−h) or not (prob. h) the market maker wins. To streamline the notation we split an eventcode e into the ﬁrst and second event e = (e1,e 2) (e.g. for e = LA-NG we have, e1 = LA and e2 = NG. Referring to the probability tree in Fig. 15) we see that the probability of each eventcode e can be decomposed as: p(e) = p(e1)p(e2) =    ( β· 1 2 ) ·p(e2) if e∈ N*** ( (1−β)· 1 2 ) ·p(e2) if e∈ L*** Hence, we get the following expansion in terms of possible event-codes e: EUM (s) = β   ∑ e∈N∗∗∗ p(e)uM (s| e)   | {z } Trigger = News (race!) + (1 −β)   ∑ e∈L∗∗∗ p(e)uM (s| e)   | {z } Trigger = LT (no race!) = β   1 2 ∑ e1∈N∗ ∑ e2 p(e2)uM (s| e)   + (1 −β)   1 2 ∑ e1∈L∗ ∑ e2 p(e2)uM (s| e)   = β 2 ∑ e1∈N∗ ∑ e2 [ p(e2) { h·uM (s| e & MM loses ) + (1−h)·uM (s| e & MM wins ) }] + (1−β) 2 ∑ e1∈L∗ ∑ e2 {p(e2)uM (s| e)} Based on the equation above, the following three sums need to be evaluated (using Table 1). 1. There is a race which MM loses: S1 := 1 2 ∑ e1∈N∗ ∑ e2 p(e2)uM (s| e & MM loses ) = 1 2 [2αs (1−γ) − 2µ (γ(s− 1)− 2s) + 2γ(s− 1))] (55) 2. There is a race which MM wins: S2 := 1 2 ∑ e1∈N∗ ∑ e2 p(e2)uM (s| e2 & MM wins ) = 1 2 [2µ ((γ + 1)s−γ + 1)] (56) 3. No race: S3 := 1 2 ∑ e1∈L∗ ∑ e2 p(e2)uM (s| e) = 1 2 [2α (s (γ− 1) + 1−γ) + 2 s(µ + 1)] (57) Recombining we get: EUM (s) = β (hS1 + (1−h)S2) + (1−β)S3 In addition, it is useful to compute the values at the endpoints ( s = 0 and s = 1): 46 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels C = EUM (s = 0) = βh(−γm) + (1−h)(−µ(γ− 1) + (1−β)(α(1−γ)) =βh(µq−mγ)−qθ =βh(2µq +µ−q− 1)−qθ D = EUM (s = 1) = −β(αhq +m) + (µ + 1) (58) See: KPD_Supplementary_material_1.ipynb (section.2.3) Expected utility for bandit Since the bandit only gets utility when he wins the race, we have to condition three events: 1. there is a race: prob = β 2. the bandit enters the race: prob = p 3. he wins the race (given that he entered): prob = g(p) Using this information we can make the following factorisation: EUB(s) = βpg(p)EUB(s| bandit enters and wins race ) (59) = 1 2βpg(p) ∑ e1∈N∗ ∑ e2 p(e2)uB(s| e2 & bandit wins race ) = βpg(p)S (60) where we can use Table 1 to compute S := 1 2 ∑ e1∈N∗ ∑ e2 p(e2)uB(s| e & bandit wins ) = αs (1−γ) + (µ(s− 1)−s + 1) (61) From this we get: A := EUB(s = 0) = (1 −µ)βpg(p) = mβpg (p) B := EUB(s = 1) = −α(γ− 1)βpg(p) =−αqβpg (p) (62) See: KPD_Supplementary_material_1.ipynb (section.2.1) To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 47 Fig. 15 Schematic representation of the probabilities of the ﬁrst and second event. Since these two events are independent, the total probability of any event code is the product of two of these probabilities. 48 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels E Probability of sniping computation E.1 Probability h(p) Recall from eq.(15) that h(p) is deﬁned as the probability that the market maker will lose the race given that there is a race and all the bandits will attempt to snipe with probability p: h(p) := P{MM will lose MZ race | individual bandits enter race with prob p} It is conceptually easier to focus on the complementary probability h(p) := 1−h(p) that the market maker will win the MZ-race and therefore thwart the sniping attempts of the bandits. Speciﬁcally, since the H− 1 bandits decide independently and with equal probability p, whether or not they will snipe, the number of bandits that will enter the race is a random variable ( NB say) that is distributed according to a binomial distribution: NB∼Bin(H− 1,p ). This is equivalent to saying that the probability of havingb = 0, 1,...,H −1 bandits participating in a race, equals: P (NB =b) = (H− 1 b ) pb(1−p)H−1−b forb = 0, 1,...,H − 1 (63) When there are b bandits racing, the probability that the market maker will win the race equals 1/(1 + b) since each participant has the same probability of winning. As a consequence, the probabilityh(p) that market maker will win the race (and therefore escape sniping) equals h(p) = H−1∑ b=0 1 b + 1 (H− 1 b ) pb (1−p)H−1−b (64) which can be recast as: h(p) = E ( 1 NB + 1 ) where NB∼Bin(H− 1,p ). (65) Computation of h(p) and h(p) To prove that eqs. (64) and (65) can be expanded to give rise to h(p) = 1− (1−p)H pH , (66) we proceed as follows (we introduce n =H− 1 for notational convenience). Recall that it is a straightforward consequence of the deﬁnition of binomial coeﬃcients that: (n + 1 b + 1 ) = n + 1 b + 1 (n b ) whence 1 b + 1 (n b ) = 1 n + 1 (n + 1 b + 1 ) Substituting this in eq. (64) yields: To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 49 h(p) = n∑ b=0 1 (b + 1) (n b ) pb(1−p)n−b = 1 p(n + 1) n∑ b=0 (n + 1 b + 1 ) pb+1(1−p)(n+1)−(b+1) = 1 p(n + 1) n+1∑ k=1 (n + 1 k ) pk(1−p)(n+1)−k (subs: k =b + 1) = 1 p(n + 1) (n+1∑ k=0 (n + 1 k ) pk(1−p)(n+1−k) | {z } =1 −p0(1−p)n+1 ) = 1− (1−p)n+1 p(n + 1) = 1− (1−p)H pH (n =H− 1). The computation above also implies that h(p) = 1−h(p) = E ( NB 1 +NB ) = (1−p)H− (1−Hp) Hp (67) where NB∼Bin(H− 1,p ). Some special cases Notice that for sure sniping (i.e. p = 1 ) we get the familiar factor h :=h(1) = (H− 1)/H. Similarly, we can diﬀerentiate eq.(67) to obtain: h′(p) = 1− (1−p)H−1(Hp + 1−p) Hp 2 =⇒ h′(1) = 1 H (68) To investigate the behaviour for small values p↓ 0 we use the standard binomial expansion: (1−p)H = 1−Hp + H(H− 1) 2 p2− H(H− 1)(H− 2) 6 p3 +... from which we conclude: h(p) = H− 1 2 p− (H− 1)(H− 2) 6 p2 +o(p3) as p→ 0. (69) and therefore: h(0) = 0 and h′(0) = H− 1 2 . (70) E.2 Probability g(p) Recall eq.(19) and (20) g(p) := P{individual bandit will win race| he participates in the race} Since the market maker always races, and we condition on this bandit also being in the race, the number of agents in the race equals 2 +NB where NB∼Bin(H− 2,p ). Hence: g(p) = E ( 1 2 +NB ) 50 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels Using the binomial identity: (n + 2 b + 2 ) = (n + 2)(n + 1) (b + 2)(b + 1) (n b ) a computation completely analogous to the one for h(p) shows that: g(p) = H−2∑ b=0 1 b + 2 (H− 2 b ) pb(1−p)H−2−b = (1−p)H− (1−pH) H(H− 1)p2 = h(p) (H− 1)p (71) Special cases In the paper we need the following special cases: – Limit for sure sniping p→ 1 g(1) = h(1) H− 1 = 1 H (72) and also: g′(p) = h′(p)p−h(p) (H− 1)p2 =⇒ g′(1) = h′(1)−h(1) H− 1 =− H− 2 H(H− 1) (73) – Limit for no sniping p→ 0 Using the expansion eq. 69 for h(p), we get a similar expansion forg(p): g(p) = 1 (H− 1)p {H− 1 2 p− (H− 1)(H− 2) 6 p2 +o(p3) } = 1 2− H− 2 6 p +o(p2) (74) From this we can conclude: g(0) = 1 2 and g′(0) =−H− 2 6 . (75) See: KPD_Supplementary_material_2.ipynb To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 51 F Proof of Proposition 1: Existence and uniqueness of γK To prove the existence and uniqueness of the transition threshold γK we need to show that the cubic polynomial (cf. eq. 45): K(γ) = K3γ3 +K2γ2 +K1γ +K0 has a unique zero-crossing greater than 1. To this end we prove the following three steps (also see Fig 16): 1. K3 < 0 indicating that limγ→∞K(γ) = −∞, i.e. K(γ) will be negative for suﬃciently large values of γ; 2. K(1) = K3 +K2 +K1 +K0 > 0. which in combination with K3 < 0, shows that there is at least one zero-crossing greater than 1; 3. Finally, we show that K′′(1) = 6K3 + 2K2 < 0 which proves that the cubic polynomial is concave to the right of γ = 1. This implies that the zero-crossing γK is in fact unique. The detailed calculations that prove the three steps above can be found in the Python notebook: See: KPD_Supplementary_material_1.ipynb (section.5) Fig. 16 The proof of the existence and uniqueness of the threshold γK is based on the following three properties of the K(γ) cubic polynomial: (i) K3 < 0,K (1)> 0, and K is concave to the right of 1. G Proof of Proposition 2: Existence and uniqueness of γL To prove that the transition threshold γL exists and is unique, we point out that (cf. eq. (42)) du∗(p) dp ⏐⏐⏐⏐ p=0 = 0 ⇐⇒ N′(0) = 0. 52 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels The right hand side can be expanded as a function of γ, or even more conveniently, as a function of q =γ− 1. It turns out : N′(0) =− 1 2αβθq2 + 1 2β(1−µ)(βµ−β +µ + 1). Computing the zero-crossings for the quadratic equation on the right hand side, we conclude that there is a unique solution greater than 1, viz.: γL = 1 + √ (1−µ)Z αθ where Z = 1 + µ−β(1−µ). This concludes the proof. The detailed calculations that prove the three steps above can be found in the Python notebook: KPD_Supplementary_material_1.ipynb (section.6) H Alternative computation of gtb Let A be the stochastic variable representing the number of agents in the race. Denote by M∈T (D) the event that the market maker is one of the trustworthy ( T ), or deceptive (D) agents, respectively. Then A = (A| M∈T )P (M∈T ) + (A| M∈D )P (M∈D ) We can make the following decomposition: – Since we condition on a speciﬁc trustworthy agent in the race, there are H− 1 agents left, Ht− 1 of them are trustworthy. – We can visualise the selection process as follows. Line up the agents. The ﬁrst Ht are trustworthy, the next Hd are the devious ones. Indicate who will race or not. Agent 1 will race (we condition on this event), from the remaining Ht− 1 trustworthy agent a stochastic number Nt∼B(Ht− 1,p ) will race, as well as all the devious ones. Then select a market maker uniformly from agent 2 through H (we have conditioned on the ﬁrst agent to race as bandit). – If the choice of market maker is among the devious ones, nothing changes in the list of racing participants. – If the choice of market maker is one of the Ht−1 remaining trustworthy agents there are two possibilities. If the agent was already singled out for racing (prob = Nt/((Ht− 1))), nothing changes. If however, the agent was not planning on racing (prob = (Ht− 1−Nt)/(Ht− 1)), he will now do so and the number of racers is incremented by one to 1 +Nt +Hd + 1 = 2 +Nt +Hd. Combining these observations we get: ( Nt Ht− 1 )( 1 1 +Nt +Hd ) + (Ht− 1−Nt Ht− 1 )( 1 2 +Nt +Hd ) or again: 1 (Ht− 1) { Nt 1 +Nt +Hd + Ht− 1−Nt 2 +Nt +Hd } – P (M∈T ) = (Ht−1)/(H−1) the market maker is chosen among the remaining trustworthy – P (M∈D ) = Hd/(H− 1) Combining all these together we get the following alternative for eq.(52): To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 53 gtb(p) = ( 1 H− 1 ) E { Nt 1 +Nt +Hd + Ht− 1−Nt 2 +Nt +Hd } + ( Hd H− 1 ) E { 1 1 +Nt +Hd } = ( 1 H− 1 ) E { Nt 1 +Nt +Hd + Ht− 1−Nt 2 +Nt +Hd + Hd 1 +Nt +Hd } (76) where Nt∼Bin(Ht− 1,p ). This characterisation of gtb has the advantage that it involves only a single random variable, which makes sense whenever Ht ≥ 1. The original characterisation in eq. (52) — although conceptually simpler — involves two binomial random variables and requires Ht ≥ 2 to be well-deﬁned.. See: KPD_supplementary_material_2.ipynb I Change in mean utility due to deceptive agents We are now in a position to combine all these results and write down the equivalents for eqs. (25) and (30). More speciﬁcally, if a trustworthy agent acts as bandit, his utility is a linear function determined by the endpoints: Atb(p,Ht,Hd) = mβpgtb(p,Ht,Hd) Btb(p,Ht,Hd) = −α(γ− 1)βpgtb(p,Ht,Hd) Ctm(p,Ht,Hd) = − { qθ +β(mγ−µq)htm(p,Ht,Hd) } Dtm(p,Ht,Hd) = (1 + µ)−β{m +αqhtm(p,Ht,Hd)} (77) To evaluate for a given spread the expected utility ut(s) of a trustworthy HFT one simply needs to evaluate the expected utilities in both roles (bandit and market maker): utb(s) = Atb(1−s) +Btbs and utm(s) = Ctm(1−s) +Dtms which can then be combined (assuming that all agents advertise the same spread s and therefore have equal probability of being selected as market maker): ut(s) = 1 H utm(s) + H− 1 H utb(s) (78) See.KPD_supplementary_material_numeric.ipynb (section.6) J Probability distribution of unique utilities In general, there are only 9 unique utilities (see table 1). This is still the case in the presence of deceptive agents since even deceptive agents will publish the optimal spread. We can compute the probability with which these occur explicitly. Notice that there are three diﬀerent cases: 1. Utilities that occur only for MM ( −γ(2σ−s),s,−γ(σ−s), 2s,σ +s) 2. Utilities that occur only for bandit ( 2σ−s,−γs,σ−s) 3. Zero utility that occurs for both market maker and bandit Let’s do so for some concrete cases: 54 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels – Utility 2σ−s for successful sniper (example of utility that occurs only for bandit): this utility occurs twice (NG-NG and NB-NB + MM loses race to successful sniper). To compute the probability we need to multiply the probability of each row ( (1/2)αβ) with that of the column and add it all together. Since the column is the same for both events (let’s denote it as pcol we get: p{2σ−s} =αβ·pcol where pcol = P (agent get this utility | he’s bandit )P (he’s bandit ) +P (agent get this utility | he’s MM )P (he’s MM ) = P (agent get this utility | he’s bandit )((H− 1)/H) +0· (1/H) = (H− 1) H P (agent get this utility | he’s bandit ) The last probability can be expanded further: P (agent get this utility | he’s bandit ) = P (agent enters race and wins | he’s bandit ) = P (agent enters race | he’s bandit )·P (agent wins race | he’s bandit and enters race ) = pgtb(p) where we need to use gtb since we are only interested in the fate of trustworthy agents. Combining both results we see that P{2σ−s} =αβ· (H− 1 H ) pgtb(p) – Utility σ−s for successful sniper this utility occurs 4 times when there is NG-NO, NB-NO and MM loses the race,and NG-LB and NB-LA and bandit beneﬁts from the news arrival (MM loses the race in the news side) . In all cases, the probability that successful sniper (bandit) enters the race (H− 1)/H and win the race is pgtb(p) (As we explained in detail in the utility P{2σ−s}). In the case of NG-NO and NB-NO, the row probability is the same for both events.Combining with column probability (bandit is selected ( H−1 H ) and is the race winner pgtb(p)): probNG−No,NB−No =β· (1− 2(α +µ))· (H− 1 H ) pgtb(p) and the same for NG-LB, NB-LA: probNG−LB,NB−LA =β·µ· (H− 1 H ) pgtb(p) The total probability of getting the utility ( σ−s): P{σ−s} =β· (H− 1 H ) pgtb(p)· (1− 2α−µ) – Utility −γs for successful sniper The only two events that produces this utility are NG-NB and NB-NG for a successful sniper (event probability in each case αβ/2 ). In this case, the trustworthy agent acts as a bandit (prob: (H− 1)/H), he enters the race (prob: p) and wins (prob: gtb(p)). However, he doesn’t beneﬁt from it (make loss) as additional bad news decreases the intrinsic value. Combining all this yields: P{−γs} =αβ (H− 1 H ) pgtb(p) To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 55 – Utility s for market maker. This utility occurs on six occasions: NG-NB, NB-NG, LA- LA, LA-no, LB-LB and LB-no. For each of these cells in the table we can compute the probability by multiplying the probability of the row and the column. For the last four, the column probability is that of being market maker ( 1/H). Adding the probabilities of the rows yields: (1/2)(1−β)· 2· (µ + 1− 2(α +µ)) = (1−β)(1− 2α−µ) Hence the total probability of the last four cells equals: probLA−LA,LA−No,LB−LB,LB−No = 1 H (1−β)(1− 2α−µ) To complete the computation we need to compute the probability of the ﬁrst two cells. Only the probability of the column needs attention. It requires being selected as MM (prob = 1/H) but losing the race htm(p). Hence the combined total probability of these two cells equals: probNG−NB,NB−NG = 2· (1/2)αβ· ( 1 H ) htm(p) = ( 1 H ) αβhtm(p). Combining the two results we get the following total probability for the utility s: P{s} = ( 1 H ) [αβhtm(p) + (1−β)(1− 2α−µ)] – Utility −γ(σ−s) for market maker. This utility occurs when there is: NG-LA, NB-LB, LA-NG, LB-NB, NG-No, and NB-No. The column probability for all cases is that of being selected as a market maker ( 1/H). Adding the probabilities of events in the rows, we see : Probability for NG-LA and NB-LB: In these events, MM wins and loses the race, so this utility happens four times and htm cancels out!. probNG−LA = ( 1 H ) 2· β 2·µ·htm + ( 1 H ) 2· β 2·µ· (1−htm) Therefor : probNG−LA = ( 1 H ) · β 2·µ It is the same for NB-LB and combining two events: probNG−LA,NB−LB = ( 1 H ) ·β·µ Probability for NG-No and NB-No + MM loses the race with probability htm(p): In both events, MM loses the race as bandit hits the stale quote: probNG−No,NB−No = ( 1 H ) 2· β 2· (1− 2(α +µ))·htm(p) Probability for LA-NG and LB-NB (The utility in these events happens four times): probLA−NG,LB−NB = ( 1 H ) (1−β)·α Combining probabilities of six events: P{−γ(σ−s)} = ( 1 H ) {α(1−β) +βhtm(1− 2α− 2µ) +βµ} 56 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels – Utility s +σ for market maker. There are four corresponding events for this utility: NG-LB, NB-LA, LA-NB and LB-NG. To compute the probability: To compute row probabilities for the ﬁrst two events (NG-LB and NB-LA), we need to multiply the probability of each row: probNG−LB,NB−LA =µβ probLA−NB,LB−NG =α(1−β) Then, to compute the column probability, we need the probability of( 1 H ) MM being selected and ( 1−htm(p)) for winning the race (for NG-LB and NB-LA) hence the total probability for this utility equals : P{s +σ} = ( 1 H ) {βµ(1−htm(p)) +α(1−β)} – Utility 2s for market maker This utility befalls the market maker in four events : NG-LB, NB-LA, LA-LB and LB-LA. Row probability for NG-LB and NB-LA + MM loses the race: µβ Adding 1/H the probability of being selected as MM and losing the race htm yields: probNG−LB,NB−LA =µβ· ( 1 H ) ·htm Row probability for LA-LB and LB-LA: probLA−LB,LB−LA =µ(1−β)· ( 1 H ) Adding the probabilities of events in the rows, we see : P{2s} =µ ( 1 H ) (β·htm(p) + (1−β)) – Utility −γ(2σ−s) for market maker. this utility occurs in events: NG-NG and NB-NB. Adding row probability with column probability that is MM being selected ( 1/H ) and loses the race htm yields: P{−γ(2σ−s)} =αβ· ( 1 H ) ·htm – Zero utility P{0} for bandit This utility occurs in all events when the ﬁrst trigger event is the arrival of LT. In these events, bandit has no chance of winning the race. Also, this utility occurs whenever bandit loses the race, either MM wins the race or the arrival of LT. LA-LA, LA-LB, LB-LA, LB-LB: µ(1−β)(2) (H− 1 H ) LA-NG, LA-NB, LB-NG, LB-NB: α(1−β)(2) (H− 1 H ) LA-No and LB-No : (1− 2(α +µ))(1−β) (H− 1 H ) To snipe or not to snipe, that’s the question! 57 NG-LA, NB-LB (bandit lose and win the race) : bandit loses the race : PNG−LA =µβ (H− 1 H ) ·p(1−gtb) bandit wins the race : PNG−LA =µβ (H− 1 H ) ·p(gtb) Therefore: PNG−LA =µβ/2 (H− 1 H ) the same for NB-LB: PNB−LB =µβ/2 (H− 1 H ) combining four events: PNB−LB =µβ (H− 1 H ) When bandit loses the race in all other events if the ﬁrst trigger event is news. (events = NG-LB,NB-LA,NG-NG,NG-No,NB-No,NB-NG,NB-NB) Pevents = (H− 1 H ) β(1−pgtb)(1−µ) Total probability for P{0} is: P{0}bandit = (H− 1 H ) (1−β +βµ +β(1−pgtb)(1−µ)) This can further be simpliﬁed to: P{0}bandit = (H− 1 H ) (1−βpgtb(1−µ)) – Zero utility P{0} for MM e1 = NG-NG, NG-NB, NB-NG,NB-NB: Pe1 = ( 1 H ) 2βα(1−htm) e2 = NG-No, NB-No: Pe2 = ( 1 H ) β(1− 2(α +µ))(1−htm) Therefore : P{0}MM = ( 1 H ) β(1−htm)(1− 2µ) Alternative derivation PB{u = 0} := Prob that trustworthy bandit receives zero utility (u = 0) PB{u = 0} = PB(u = 0 | race)P (race) +PB(u = 0 | no race )P (no race ) = PB(u = 0 | race)·β + 1· (1−β) (79) PB(u = 0 | race) = PB(u = 0 | race and B enters race )P (B enters race | race) (80) 58 Kokabisaghi, Dorsman, Pauwels utility probability 0 1 H{β(1− 2µ)(1−htm(p))} + H−1 H {1−βpgtb(p)(1−µ)} −γ(2σ−s) αβ· ( 1 H ) ·htm s ( 1 H ) {αβhtm(p) + (1−β)(1− 2α−µ)} −γ(σ−s) ( 1 H ) {α(1−β) +βhtm(p)(1− 2(α +µ)) +βµ} s +σ ( 1 H ) {βµ(1−htm(p) +α(1−β)} 2s µ· ( 1 H ) {βhtm(p) + (1−β)} 2σ−s H−1 H {αβpgtb(p)} σ−s ( H−1 H ) ·βpgtb(p){1− 2α−µ} −γs ( H−1 H ) · β 2·αpgtb(p) Table 5 Overview of unique utilities and corresponding probabilities.