Malliavin-Mancino estimators implemented with non-uniform fast Fourier transforms Patrick Changa, Etienne Pienaar a, Tim Gebbie a aDepartment of Statistical Sciences, University of Cape Town, Rondebosch 7700, South Africa Abstract We implement and test kernel averaging Non-Uniform Fast Fourier Transform (NUFFT) methods to enhance the performance of correlation and covariance estimation on asynchronously sampled event-data using the Malliavin-Mancino Fourier estimator. The methods are benchmarked for Dirichlet and Fej´ er Fourier basis kernels. We consider test cases formed from Geometric Brownian motions to replicate synchronous and asynchronous data for benchmarking purposes. We consider three standard averaging kernels to convolve the event-data for synchronisation via over-sampling for use with the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT): the Gaussian kernel, the Kaiser-Bessel kernel, and the exponential of semi-circle kernel. First, this allows us to demonstrate the performance of the estimator with diﬀerent combinations of basis kernels and averaging kernels. Second, we investigate and compare the impact of the averaging scales explicit in each averaging kernel and its relationship between the time-scale averaging implicit in the Malliavin-Mancino estimator. Third, we demonstrate the relationship between time-scale averaging based on the number of Fourier coeﬃcients used in the estimator to a theoretical model of the Epps eﬀect. We brieﬂy demonstrate the methods on Trade-and-Quote (TAQ) data from the Johannesburg Stock Exchange to make an initial visualisation of the correlation dynamics for various time-scales under market microstructure. Keywords: Malliavin-Mancino estimator, non-uniform fast Fourier transform, Trade-and-Quote event-data, Epps eﬀect AMS subject classiﬁcations: 62G08, 65T04, 62P08 1. Introduction Data-informed approaches to modelling the relationships between fast asynchronous streaming event-data features re- quires eﬃcient algorithms to compute the dependency or sim- ilarity across data features. This can be useful to relate col- lections of similar features to similar but potentially useful in- formation on the appropriate decision time-scale. When the dependency structure can be approximated by an averaged realised correlation or covariance matrix then the problem of estimation from asynchronous event data can be signiﬁcantly simpliﬁed. Then the problem of correlation and covariance estimation over asynchronous event data can be addressed using the Malliavin-Mancino estimator [27, 28, 29]. This has several advantages over ad-hoc averaging and in- terpolation methods built on the underlying assumptions of continuity, such as the approach taken in the well under- stood Hayashi-Yoshida estimator [4]. However, the Malliavin- Mancino estimator is built on numerically evaluating Fourier transforms and their inverses. This has a computational cost. Quickly extracting realised correlations or covariances on a given time-scale for large feature sets of distinct asynchronous events without biased interpolation is key to avoiding spuri- ous correlations that can lead to ineﬀective decision making under uncertainty. Email addresses: chnpat005@myuct.ac.za (Patrick Chang), etienne.pienaar@uct.ac.za (Etienne Pienaar), tim.gebbie@uct.ac.za (Tim Gebbie) This paper directly addresses two key issues: First, that of performance as measured by computational speed. Second, the implicit dependence of time-scale in the estimation of realised covariances and correlations on asynchronous event data using the Malliavin-Mancino estimator. The key contri- bution is to mitigate the ﬁrst problem using non-uniform fast Fourier transforms to compute the Fourier coeﬃcients in the Malliavin-Mancino estimator, and to provide clarity into the second idea using insights from the non-uniform fast Fourier transform. Performance is a key requirement in two related use cases, namely simulation and real-time estimation. Being able to carry out large scale Monte-Carlo simulations over many fea- tures and many time-scales where one needs to iterate and recompute the correlation matrix over event data. In a real- time environment where decisions are being made on stream- ing event-data, the use of fast methods can reduce the time- scales of eﬀective data-sampling. For example, the minimum eﬀective sampling rate of correlation based state detection is bounded by the compute time of the correlation matrix. A speed improvement on the compute time of the realised covariance, or realised correlation matrix potentially allows more time for learning algorithm convergence and identiﬁ- cation. This can be of particular importance for learning algorithms that require many updates to identify a reliable optimal relationship between actions and system states given an objective, such as Q-learning based implementations of reinforcement learning for trading [18, 19, 21]. Concretely, we extend an approach to performance en- 1 arXiv:2003.02842v3 [q-fin.CP] 10 Nov 2020 hancement based on the fast Fourier transform [10] in the context of the Malliavin-Mancino estimator [27, 28] by using non-uniform fast Fourier transform methods [2, 12, 16]. This combines the performance advantage of fast Fourier trans- forms while providing intuition into the time-scale averaging. This follows from the basic idea behind the non-uniform fast Fourier transform: convolving the data onto a uniform grid (dependent on the number of Fourier coeﬃcients required) through a choice of averaging kernel. Furthermore, the av- eraging kernel has an explicit averaging scale which provides avenues for controlling speed and accuracy. We hope to follow Ren` o [38] and Precup and Iori [37] by us- ing the choice of the number of Fourier coeﬃcients N as the method of tuning the estimation to diﬀerent time-scales. To implement this with conﬁdence using NUFFT methods, we need to understand the relative dependencies between kernel averaging (proxied by the tolerances) and time-scale aver- aging (proxied by the number of Fourier coeﬃcients) under simulation to evaluate their impact on the estimated corre- lations. Moreover, we need to ensure the NUFFT estimates recover the same estimates as the original implementation. To explore this idea we consider three diﬀerent averaging kernels: (i) the Gaussian kernel [16] (see eq. (5)), (ii) the Kaiser-Bessel kernel [36] (see eqs. (7) and (8)), and (iii) the exponential of semi-circle kernel [2] (see eqs. (9) and (10)). In conjunction with these choices of averaging kernels, we consider two diﬀerent choices of Fourier basis kernels: (i) the Dirichlet, and (ii) the Fej´ er basis kernels. Combinations of these are compared with diﬀerent length and breadth data- sets and for diﬀerent numbers of Fourier coeﬃcients. This allows us to better understand the relative algorithm perfor- mance by comparing algorithm compute times with data-size and various tolerance levels (see Figures 4 and 5). These combinations of kernel choices are benchmarked against three vanilla algorithms that implement the Malliavin- Mancino estimator: (i) the benchmark “for-loop” implemen- tation ﬁrst provided by Mancino, Recchioni and Sanfelici [29], (ii) a vectorised implementation with speed enhancements as- suming real-valued data [19, 25, 26], and (iii) a zero-padded Fast Fourier implementation [20, 26] that allows the use of the fast Fourier transform on asynchronous data without the need to apply an averaging kernel, but using an underlying missing data approach to implement lossless interpolation. Here an important observation is that using the zero- padded FFT to compute the Malliavin-Mancino estimator can only work for uniformly sampled data that has missing data points and fails for truly asynchronous data (see Figure 6 and Section 2.2.4). This is the key motivation for the neces- sary requirement of using a non-uniform FFT in the setting of speeding up the compute time of the Malliavin-Mancino estimator using the fast Fourier transform method for asyn- chronous event data. The zero-padded FFT biases the data, while the non-uniform FFT does not if correctly used. It is for this reason that we promote the idea of using the NUFFT in conjunction with the Malliavin-Mancino estimator if the data is asynchronous, discrete and event driven. The paper is organised as follows: Section 2 we outline the various implementation methods for the Malliavin-Mancino estimator. Section 3 we benchmark the various algorithms to understand the factors impacting speed. Moreover, we deter- mine the conditions required for the NUFFT implementation to recover the correct estimates. Section 4 we demonstrate the link between the number of Fourier coeﬃcients and the implicit time-scale investigated along with its relation to a theoretical model of the Epps eﬀect. We then carry-out EDA on real world TAQ data to investigate the correlation dy- namics under market microstructure. We ﬁnally conclude in Section 5 to summarise our ﬁndings. 2. Algorithm Outline 2.1. Malliavin-Mancino estimators Malliavin and Mancino [27, 28] proposed an estimator that is constructed in the frequency domain. It expresses the Fourier coeﬃcients of the volatility process using the Fourier coeﬃcients of the price processpi(t) = ln(Si(t)), whereSi(t) is the generic asset price at time t. By re-scaling the trading times from [0,T ] to [0, 2π] (see algorithm 4) and using the Bohr convolution product (see Theorem 2.1 of [28]) we have that for all k∈ Z and N samples: F(Σij)(k) = lim N→∞ 2π 2N + 1 ∑ |s|≤N F(dpi)(s)F(dpj)(k−s). (1) HereF(∗)(⋆) is the⋆th Fourier coeﬃcient of the∗ process. Now using previous tick interpolation to avoid a downward bias in the estimator [3] and a simple function approxima- tion for the Fourier coeﬃcients (see [4, 25, 28]), we obtain the Dirichlet representation of the integrated volatility/co- volatility estimator:1 ˆΣij n,N = 1 2N + 1 ni−1,nj−1∑ |s|≤N h=1,𝓁=1 eis(tj 𝓁−ti h)δi(Ih)δj(I𝓁), (2) where (ti h)h=1,...,ni and (tj 𝓁)𝓁=1,...,nj are the observation times for asset i and j, and the price ﬂuctuations are: δi(Ih) =pi(ti h+1)−pi(ti h), δ j(I𝓁) =pj(tj 𝓁+1)−pj(tj 𝓁), for the ith and jth asset respectively. Note that ni is the sample dimension for price pi and nj that of the price pj, which a priori can be diﬀerent. An alternate version of the Fourier estimator is the Fej´ er representation: 1We try follow the notation of [27, 28, 29, 30] where i∈ C in the exponential deﬁning the Fourier transform is such that Re(i) = 0 and Im(i) = 1. It should not be confused with integer indices i, for example on the times ti h. 2 ˆΣij n,N = 1 N + 1 ni−1,nj−1∑ |s|≤N h=1,𝓁=1 ( 1−|s| N ) eis(tj 𝓁−ti h)δi(Ih)δj(I𝓁), (3) which is more stable under the presence of market microstruc- ture noise [28]. The various implementation methods follow the same gen- eral structure (outlined in algorithm 3). First, we re-scale the trading times from [0,T ] to [0, 2π] (see algorithm 4) and com- pute the Nyquist frequency 2 (see algorithm 2). Second, we compute the non-normalised Fourier coeﬃcients F(dpi)(k) k∈{− N,...,N } for all assets. Finally, we compute either the Dirichlet or Fej´ er representation of the estimator. The diﬀerence between the implementation methods are in the computation of the Fourier coeﬃcients. 2.2. Implementation methods The computationally intensive step in the Malliavin- Mancino estimator is the computation of the Fourier coef- ﬁcients for each asset deﬁned as: F(dpi)(k) = 1 2π ni−1∑ h=1 δi(Ih)e−ikti h, (4) for k∈{− N,...,N }, and i = 1,...,D features. We outline the various methods to evaluate eq. (4) along with the use- case,3 beneﬁts, pitfalls and general algorithm complexity. 4 2.2.1. Benchmark for-loop implementation The Mancino et al. implementation (see algorithm 5) is from the appendix of [29] and uses a for-loop construc- tion. The evaluation relies on looping through {−N,...,N } to compute the kth Fourier mode. The implementation does not rely on any techniques to improve performance and will act as a benchmark to compare against other methods. The method can be used for all synchronous and asynchronous cases. The complexity is O(n2), the same as Discrete Fourier Transforms (DFTs). 2.2.2. Vectorised implementation The legacy code implementation (see algorithm 6) is based on a MATLAB implementation [20, 26]. The dif- ference compared to the Mancino et al. implementation is that all the Fourier modes are evaluated in parallel by vec- torising the computation. Here we further improve upon the legacy code by exploiting techniques found in Mancino et al. [29]. Concretely, we exploit the Hermitian symmetry F(dpi)(k) = F(dpi)(−k) whereF denotes the conjugate 2Mancino et al. [29] picks N such that MSE is minimised. 3The use-case refers to the ability to evaluate synchronous or asyn- chronous time-series data. 4The complexity is given only for the synchronous case when n = n1 = ... = nD, N = n 2 , and ti h+1−ti h = ∆t,∀i = 1,...,D and ∀h = 1,...,n − 1. function ofF. This is possible because the source strengths δi(Ih) are all real-valued. Therefore, we only need to evalu- atek∈{ 1,...,N} and obtain the conjugates for these Fourier modes. Finally,F(dpi)(0) =∑ni−1 h=1 δi(Ih)/2π must be com- puted to complete the range of Fourier modes required for the convolution. The method can be used for all synchronous and asynchronous cases with a complexity of O(n2). The key concern with this method is the memory usage constraints that it can face. After inspecting algorithm 6 we see that a large matrix of size (n×N) is required for the vectorisation which can adversely aﬀect performance by either: (i) pre- maturely ending the computation due to insuﬃcient memory or heap-size constraints, or (ii) slow down performance due to an over-reliance on virtual-memory management. There- fore, memory management is crucial for eﬀective performance enhancements of large data-sets. 2.2.3. The fast Fourier transform The FFT implementation used here is the current state- of-the-art FFTW package [14] based on the Cooley-Tukey algorithm [10] to compute the Fourier modes. This imple- mentation also exploits the Hermitian symmetry, making this the fastest implementation known to the authors. This im- plementation has a well understood complexity of O(n logn). The key constraint of this method is its restriction to strictly synchronous data, so the evaluation becomes a simple DFT. 2.2.4. The zero-padded fast Fourier transform The Zero-padded FFT (ZFFT) implementation extends the FFT implementation by zero padding missing observations. Therefore, allowing the computation of the asynchronous case under a missing data representation (see algorithm 7). The implementation computes the minimum sampling inter- val ∆t and creates a new over-sampled grid with intervals ∆t. The observations are then placed at the nearest neighbour of the over-sampled grid. 5 The FFT algorithm is then applied to the new over-sampled grid. The implementation retains a complexity of O(n logn) but is slower than the FFT imple- mentation since it does not exploit the Hermitian symmetry and requires the additional step of creating an over-sampled grid. This is our benchmark asynchronous approach to the fast Fourier transform. Figure 1 demonstrates two points: (i) how the zero-padded implementation works, and (ii) why the implementation does not work for the asynchronous case using an arrival time rep- resentation. The original grid has equal spacing ∆t when asynchrony is induced using a missing data representation. Therefore, the over-sampled grid will be at the same time points as the original grid with a value of zero when there is a missing observation. Meaning that there is no shifting of 5It is also recommended that this be implement to preserve the ﬁl- tration structure of time-series events by moving to the nearest right neighbour so that information in the future is shifted, at worst, further into the future, but never into the past relative to a particular time to avoid temporal contamination. 3 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 Original Grid Up−sampled Grid Figure 1: A toy example to show how the zero-padding works for the zero-padded FFT implementation. Here the minimum sampling interval is ∆t = 1.5. A new uniform over-sampled grid is created and observa- tions are placed on the nearest neighbouring point of the over-sampled grid. time points, allowing the correct recovery of eq. (4). How- ever, the original grid does not have equal spacing ∆t when asynchrony is induced using an arrival time representation. Resulting in the time points being shifted (seen in the third arrow from the left in Figure 1) and the incorrect recovery of eq. (4). 2.2.5. Non-uniform fast Fourier transform The Non-Uniform FFT (NUFFT) implementation of the Malliavin-Mancino estimator is the main contribution of this paper. We want a fast algorithm to evaluate eq. (4) when (ti h)h=1,...,ni are non-uniformly spaced in [0, 2π]. This can be achieved by using the 1-dimensional “type 1” NUFFT [2, 16] (also known as the adjoint NUFFT [36]). We adopt the popular NUFFT algorithm [2, 16, 36]: (i) convolve the non- uniform source points onto an over-sampled uniform grid, (ii) apply the FFT on the uniform up-sampled grid, and (iii) deconvolve the eﬀects of the convolution in the Fourier space. The convolution is achieved with a kernel ϕ(x).6 We con- sider the three most popular kernels: the Gaussian kernel using the fast Gaussian gridding implementation from [16], the Kaiser-Bessel kernel using the implementation approach of [36], and the exponential of semi-circle used by the state- of-the-art FINUFFT package [2]. To set the theoretical scene: let M = 2N + 1 be the number of Fourier modes we want returned, σ be the over- sampling ratio (most studies have settled on σ = 2 [2]), ξ𝓁 be the 𝓁th location on the over-sampled grid with 𝓁 ∈ {0,...,M r− 1 =σM− 1} andω is the spreading width with Msp as the spreading in each direction. The Gaussian kernel and its Fourier transform is deﬁned as: ϕG(x) =e−x2/4τ and ˆϕG(k) = √ 2πe−k2τ. (5) Here τ is deﬁned as 6The choice of kernel has a fascinating history and has a signiﬁcant impact on the speed of NUFFTs. We refer the reader to [2] for further details. τ = 1 M2 π σ(σ− 0.5)Msp. (6) The Kaiser-Bessel pair is deﬁned as: ϕKB (x) = 1 π    sinh(b √ M 2sp−M 2rx2)√ M 2sp−M 2rx2 |x|≤ Msp Mr , sin(b √ M 2rx2−M 2sp)√ M 2rx2−M 2sp otherwise, (7) and ˆϕKB (k) = 1 Mr I0 ( m √ b2− (2πk/Mr)2 ) , (8) where b = π ( 2− 1 σ ) and I0(·) is the modiﬁed zero-order Bessel function [36]. Finally, the exponential of semicircle pair is deﬁned as: φES (x) = { eβ( √ 1−x2−1) |x|≤ 1, 0 otherwise, (9) and ˆφES (k) = ∫ ∞ −∞ φES (x)eikxdx, (10) where β = 2.3ω. The kernel is re-scaled to have support between [−α,α ] withα =πω/Mr. Thus the re-scaled kernel is then ϕES (x) = φES (x/α) and ˆϕES (k) = αˆφES (αk). The exponential of semicircle kernel has no known analytic Fourier transform; therefore, numerical integration is used to obtain ˆϕES (k). See [2] for more details on their implementation. We focus our attention on the implementation for the var- ious kernels which have diﬀerent periodicity. The Gaussian and exponential of semi-circle are 2π-periodic with domain on [0, 2π] [2, 16], while the Kaiser-Bessel kernel is 1-periodic with domain on [0, 1]. Therefore ξ𝓁,ti h∈ [0, 2π] for the Gaus- sian and exponential of semi-circle kernel, and ξ𝓁,ti h∈ [0, 1]7 for the Kaiser-Bessel kernel. Now let p be the periodicity, then its periodisation is ˜ϕ(x) = ∞∑ r=−∞ ϕ(x−rp). (11) Hence the source strength on the over-sampled grid is given by the periodic discrete convolution fϕ,dpi(ξ𝓁) = ni−1∑ h=1 δi(Ih) ˜ϕ(ξ𝓁−ti h), for𝓁 = 0,...,M r− 1. (12) The full derivation to obtain eq. (12) can be found in either [2, 16, 36]. The second step is to now evaluate the DFT of the over-sampled grid using the standard FFT 7Potts and Steidl [36] have domain on [− 1 2, 1 2 ], but we change it to [0, 1] for simpler implementation. The actual domain is not important provided the periodicity is correct, this is because all that matters for the convolution is the distances between ti h and ξ𝓁. 4 Fϕ(dpi)(k) = Mr−1∑ 𝓁=0 fϕ,dpi(ξ𝓁)e−2πik𝓁/Mr, fork =−Mr/2,...,M r/2− 1. (13) The ﬁnal step, as a consequence of the convolution theorem is to correct the eﬀects of the convolution and retain the M central frequencies [2] F (dpi)(k) =Fϕ(dpi)(k)/ ˆϕ(k), fork =−N,...,N. (14) The Fourier coeﬃcient F (dpi)(k) in eq. (14) is the evalu- ation ofF(dpi)(k) in eq. (4) using non-uniform fast Fourier techniques. The level of numerical accuracy between eq. (14) and eq. (4) can be measured as the relative 𝓁2-norm in the output vector deﬁned as: ϵ =‖F (dpi)− F(dpi)‖2 ‖F(dpi)‖2 . (15) Moreover, the desired level of accuracy can be controlled by the amount of spreading in each direction Msp (in terms of number of grid points). We found that set- ting Msp = ⌊− ln(ϵ)(σ−1/2) (π(σ−1)) + 1 2⌋ for the Gaussian kernel, Msp = ⌊ 1 2(⌈log10( 1 ϵ )⌉ + 2)⌋ for the Kaiser-Bessel kernel, and Msp =⌊ 1 2(⌈log10( 1 ϵ )⌉ + 2)⌋ + 2 for the exponential of semi-circle kernel allow us to achieve the desired relative error level.8 At ﬁrst glance, eq. (12) seems a lot more expensive than it actually is. This is based on two observations: ﬁrst, the kernels in equation eqs. (5), (7) and (9) are sharply peaked in a manner such that the contribution of δi(Ih) to grid points outside the kernel width is zero (the kernels have small nu- merical support). Second, the evaluation of ˜ϕ(·) is unneces- sary; we only need to evaluate ϕ(·) (see Figure 2). This is because the purpose of ˜ϕ(·) is to account for the periodic- ity when spreading near the end points of the over-sampled grid. Using these observations, we can eﬃciently implement eq. (12) by looping through the source points. Find the near- est up-sampled grid point ξ𝓁∗ that is less than or equal to ti h. Spread to the s∈{−Msp,..,M sp} nearest grid points ξ𝓁∗−s with δi(Ih)ϕ(ti h−ξ𝓁∗− sp Mr ), subject to the condition that when 𝓁∗−s< 0 the index becomes 𝓁∗−s +Mr, and when 𝓁∗−s≥Mr the index becomes 𝓁∗−s−Mr to account for the correct indices due to the periodicity. The method can be used for all synchronous and asynchronous cases and has a complexity of O (Mr logMr +n|log (ϵ)|) [2]. 8We tuned the Msp such that it always strictly achieves the desired error level. We note that our choice of Msp is stricter than that in the literature. Speciﬁcally, [2] set ω =⌈log10( 1 ϵ )⌉ + 1. NUFFT error is the test script to check that the desired relative 𝓁2 error is strictly achieved and can be found in the GitHub resource [5]. ξ5 ∗ ξ0 = 0 ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 ξ4 ξ5 2π Up−sampled Grid fj Figure 2: The ﬁgure is a toy example to show how the spreading works for a single source point ti h. The up-sampled grid is denoted by ξ𝓁, and the source strength is spread to the nearest grid points as δi(Ih)ϕ(ξ𝓁− ti h). The ﬁgure aims to show that we only need to evaluate ϕ(ξ𝓁−ti h) instead of ˜ϕ(ξ𝓁−ti h). The grid points ξ∗ 5 andξ5 (denoted by a red star) is the same point due to the periodicity, but the distance between ξ5−ti h is large resulting inϕ(ξ5−ti h)≈ 0. ˜ϕ(ξ5−ti h) ﬁxes this by accounting for the periodicity. We can reduce the unnecessary computation of eq. (11) by contributing δi(Ih) to fϕ,dpi(ξ5) with δi(Ih)ϕ(ξ∗ 5−ti h). 2.3. Insights from NUFFTs The use of non-uniform FFT methods presents not only a speed advantage, but provides insights in: (i) the im- plicit time-scale averaging (controlled by N) in the Malliavin- Mancino estimator, and (ii) interpolation of ﬁnancial data. First, the Malliavin-Mancino estimator aims to represent the Fourier coeﬃcients of the volatility process as a function of the Fourier coeﬃcients of the price process. Therefore, investigation into diﬀerent time scales of the volatility process is limited to the sampling rate of the price process. The highest sampling rate present in the data is N0, then the Nyquist frequency is 0.5N0 = N — the highest component frequency we can investigate without introducing aliasing. Meaning we are band-limited to frequencies ≤N. To reconstruct the volatility process at the Nyquist fre- quency, we require at least 2N samples. This condition is satisﬁed by construction of the Bohr convolution product with Fourier modes ranging from {−N,...,N } — resulting in a sampling frequency M = 2N + 1 samples. The relation between the number of Fourier modes and the sampling interval is simply T M = ∆t. Therefore, we can investigate diﬀerent time scales by investigating diﬀer- ent frequency ranges. This is due to a consequence of the sampling theorem — which in essence states that in order to perfectly reconstruct a certain frequency, one needs at least twice the amount of samples. By reducing the number of Fourier modes (investigating larger time scales), we are re- ducing the number of samples and thereby aliasing the larger frequencies. With this in mind, we are able to investigate diﬀerent time scales by perfectly reconstructing frequencies < 0.5M through the cost of aliasing frequencies ≥ 0.5M — a result used by [37, 38]. The insight of NUFFT methods is that the relation between N and the time scale is demonstrated more intuitively (see Figure 3). For ﬁxed Msp, when N is small Mr is also small. Therefore, the Mr grid points will be more spread out and each grid point will have contributions from multiple source strengths averaged based on the choice of kernel ϕ(·). While 5 0 2π Up−sampled Grid f1 f2 f3 f4 f5 Figure 3: A toy example is used to show how the choice of N has an impact on averaging and the time scale. For ﬁxed Msp = 6 , when N is small ( e.g. N = 5 ) Mr is also small ( Mr = 22 ). Meaning the Mr grid points will be more spaced out and each Mr grid point will have contributions from most of the source strengths δi(Ih); therefore, investigating smaller time scales by averaging. On the other hand, when N is large ( e.g. N = 40) Mr is also large ( Mr = 162). Meaning the Mr grid points will be more closely spaced and only some of the Mr grid points will have contributions from separate source points and majority of the Mr grid points will have no contributions. This illustrates the intuitive idea of how changing N allows one to investigate diﬀerent time scales using the ideas from NUFFTs. for the case when N is large Mr will also be large. Meaning the Mr grid points are more tightly packed and fewer grid points will have contributions from separate source strengths — essentially there is less averaging. Second, the interpolation is explicit in NUFFT methods. This is interesting because interpolation of ﬁnancial data can result in estimates being biased — such as linear interpolation [3] or interpolation based on underlying continuity assump- tions such as the Hayashi-Yoshida estimator [4]. We argue these methods are ﬂawed because they do not account for the eﬀects of interpolation — whereas NUFFT methods ac- count for this by deconvolving the interpolation eﬀects in the Fourier space. Before moving on, we highlight that one of the main char- acteristics of the Malliavin-Mancino estimators is that it does not require the manipulation of the original data in the com- putation of eq. (4). However, there is an explicit averaging step in the evaluation of the Fourier coeﬃcients using NUFFT methods. Therefore, we need to carefully examine if the use of eq. (14) rather than eq. (4) in eq. (1) will aﬀect the re- sulting estimates (see Section 3.2). 3. Algorithm Performance and Benchmarking The benchmarking is done using Monte Carlo simulations. 9 We compare the relative performance of the algorithms and investigate the various factors inﬂuencing speed and accu- racy. We use the Geometric Brownian Motion (GBM) which satisﬁes the following SDEs: dSi(t) Si(t) =µidt +σidWi(t), i = 1,...,D, (16) with Corr(dWi,dWj) = ρij. The GBM is simulated using the Euler–Maruyama scheme (which is strong order 0.5 in 9All the seeds for replication of the work are provided in the respective script ﬁles from our GitHub resource [5] the sense of [23]) with equal spacing ∆t between the obser- vations (see algorithm 1) and are at the same time across the features. This is known as the synchronous case. Asyn- chrony is then induced from the synchronous case using two approaches: (i) the missing data representation, and (ii) the arrival time representation. The missing data representation is achieved by randomly sampling and removing a certain percentage of observations. The arrival time representation is achieved by sampling the synchronous price path using an exponential inter-arrival time with rate λi. 3.1. Benchmark Timing The common factors aﬀecting the computation time for all the algorithms are: (i) the number of data points n1,...,n D, (ii) the number of Fourier coeﬃcients M = 2N + 1, and (iii) the number of features D. The parameter speciﬁc to the non-uniform FFT method is the tolerance ϵ which determines the spreading width ω. First, we investigate the common factors aﬀecting com- putation time for the various algorithms. 10 To this end, we investigate the computation time as a function of the number of data points for a synchronous GBM ( n =n1 =... =nD). The synchronous GBM is used because the Nyquist frequency isN =n/2 for the synchronous case. Therefore, the number of Fourier coeﬃcients scale linearly with the number of data points. Figure 4 we compare the following algorithms: the for- loop implementation (MRS), the vectorised implementation (CFT), the FFT implementation (FFT), the zero-padded FFT implementation (ZFFT) and the fast Gaussian gridding imple- mentation of the NUFFT (FGG) using the default ϵ = 10−12. The O(n) plots are plotted with compute time 11 on the log scale for better comparison, and include the Dirichlet and Fej´ er representation forD = 2, 10 and 100 features.12 Tak- ing a closer look at Figure 4 we notice several things. First, the for-loop and vectorised implementation take on the same general shape but the vectorised implementation is faster due to the exploitation of the Hermitian symmetry. Figures 4a and 4b demonstrate the limitation of the vectori- sation: memory usage. This is because each element in the complex matrix (of size n×N) requires 16 bytes to store the Complex 64-bit ﬂoating point number. For 5× 104 data points we require 20GB of memory, therefore demanding the use of virtual memory which results in a deterioration of per- formance. 10The benchmarking is done using a 2.5GHz base clock speed Quad- Core Intel i7-4870HQ with 16GB of 1600MHz DDR3L (CL=11) RAM on MacOS version 10.15.1 with JuliaPro version 1.2.0. GCC8 is used as a requirement for the Julia interface to FINUFFT provided by [22]. 11The compute time is the minimum estimate over 10 replications. As the minimum is a robust estimator for the location parameter of the time distribution [8]. 12The induced correlation matrix for D = 10 and 100 are created using a uniform random matrix and re-scaled appropriately. The func- tion can be found in gencovmatrix provided in our GitHub resources [5]. We use a uniform random matrix, such a choice will only produce posi- tive correlations but is computationally convenient and has no inﬂuence estimates of the compute times. 6 Figure 4: We investigate the algorithm complexity between traditional implementation methods against fast Fourier methods. We plot the logarithm of compute time (measured in seconds) as a function of the number of data points n for various implementation methods. The n is the number of price observations simulated using a Geometric Brownian Motion with algorithm 1. We investigate the synchronous case since the Nyquist cutoﬀ scales linearly with the number of data points when the data points are uniform in time. Furthermore, we obtain run times for the Dirichlet and Fej´ er kernel basis forD = 2, 10 and 100 features to investigate the impact breadth has on the run time. The traditional methods investigate are the vectorised implementation (CFT - blue dashes) and the “for-loop” implementation (MRS - orange dashes). The fast Fourier methods investigated are the FFT (FFT - green dots), zero-padded FFT (ZFFT - purple dash-dots) and the NUFFT implementation using the fast Gaussian gridding (FGG - dark green dash-dot-dots) with the default ϵ = 10−12. The ﬁgures demonstrate the eﬃcacy of fast Fourier methods in reducing compute time for both basis kernels of the Malliavin-Mancino estimator. The ﬁgures can be recovered using the Julia script ﬁles Dirichlet Timing and Fejer Timing on the GitHub resource [5]. 7 Method MRS KB ES FGG FINUFFT Time (s) 1176s 2.161s 0.190s 0.119s 0.0331s Table 1: The measured compute times are given in seconds for various algorithms using 2 features with 105 data points. The methods considered are: the “for-loop” implementation (MRS), the fast Gaussian gridding (FGG), Kaiser-Bessel (KB), exponential of semi-circle using our naive implementation (ES) and the implementation from FINUFFT (FINUFFT). The NUFFT methods are computed using the default ϵ = 10−12. The times are extracted from Figures 4 and 5. Dirichlet [sec] Fej´ er [sec] n1 n2 N 1/λ2 FGG MRS FGG MRS 319 336 48855 30 0.047676 3.83602 0.050635 3.93206 319 272 36164 40 0.027140 2.51448 0.032651 2.64331 319 214 7128 50 0.004719 0.40825 0.005266 0.44622 319 169 38917 60 0.021548 2.19374 0.028445 2.40181 319 168 25006 70 0.013686 1.39089 0.016143 1.50772 319 106 2281 80 0.000995 0.09976 0.001036 0.10474 319 119 3325 90 0.001844 0.14592 0.001923 0.15903 319 98 2227 100 0.000765 0.09277 0.000805 0.09451 Table 2: The Dirichlet and Fej´ er computation times (measured in seconds) are given for varying degree of asynchrony. Here a synchronous GBM with 104 data points is sampled with 1/λ1 = 30 for the ﬁrst feature, while 1/λ2 ranges from 30 to 100 in increments of 10 seconds. The table reports the exact ni and N from the sampling. The fast Gaussian gridding implementation of the NUFFT (FGG) outperforms the for-loop implementation (MRS); as 1/λ2 increases, n2 and N decrease, resulting in a faster compute time. However, increasing 1/λ2 does not guarantee that ∆t0 will be larger, which can lead to a larger N and therefore a longer compute time. Second, the diﬀerence in speed between the naive methods compared to the fast Fourier transform methods is signiﬁcant. Looking at Table 1 for 2 features with n = 105 data points, the for-loop implementation takes 1176 seconds while the fast Gaussian gridding takes 0.119 seconds — 10, 000 times faster than the naive for-loop compute time. Third, between the fast Fourier methods from fastest to slowest we have: FFT, zero-padded FFT, and FGG. This is because the FFT computes N Fourier modes, the zero- padded FFT computes M Fourier modes, and the FGG com- putes Mr Fourier modes. On top of that, the FFT requires no steps before performing the FFT whereas the zero-padded FFT needs to zero-pad missing data while the FGG requires the convolution and deconvolution step. Finally, the breadth of features D can impact computation time depending on the choice of N. The case when N is the same across all features is simple. We then only need to compute the M Fourier coeﬃcients for D features. This is presented in Figure 4. When N is the same across all fea- tures, we are presented with two advantages: (i) the time scale investigated will be the same for all the features, and (ii) if one uses the Fej´ er basis kernel we can guarantee positive semi-deﬁniteness in the covariance matrix [29, 30]. The case whenN changes for the diﬀerent features becomes more nu- anced. For example, diﬀerent features have diﬀerent Nyquist frequencies in the arrival time representation. Here we need to compute D(D−1) 2 pairwise estimates for each ˆΣij n,N entry. A potential problem arises when N is independently obtained to investigate the co-movement between events for each fea- ture pair [4], or when the Dirichlet basis kernel is used. We are not guaranteed a positive semi-deﬁnite matrix which can present challenges. For example, when an invertible covari- ance matrix is a necessary requirement such as in the case of portfolio optimisation. This can be ameliorated by transform- ing the non-positive semi-deﬁnite covariance matrix estimate to the closest positive semi-deﬁnite matrix under some appro- priate norm [24], or using extensions of these type of trans- formations [32]. However, doing so comes with an additional computational cost. Let us investigate the degree of asynchrony as a variable of study, speciﬁcally the aﬀect on computation time under the arrival time representation. Here we only consider the case when D = 2. Let 1/λ1 be the mean inter-arrival time used to sample the ﬁrst feature, and N1 be the corresponding Nyquist frequency 13 from the feature; similarly 1/λ2 and N2 for the second feature. Therefore, the N used in eqs. (1) to (3) is N = min{N1,N 2} to avoid aliasing. Table 2 reports the Dirichlet and Fej´ er computation time (minimum estimate over 10 replications and measured in sec- onds) for the for-loop implementation (MRS) and the fast Gaussian gridding implementation of the NUFFT (FGG) us- ing the default ϵ = 10−12. We simulate a GBM with n = 104 data points. This process is then sampled using an exponen- tial inter-arrival with rateλi. Here the ﬁrst feature is sampled with an average inter-arrival ( 1/λ1) of 30 seconds, while the second feature is sampled with an average inter-arrival (1/λ2) ranging from 30 to 100 seconds in increments of 10. The ex- act number of observed data points ni≈n/λi and Nyquist frequency N from the sampling is also reported. 14 Table 2 demonstrates two things: ﬁrst, the FGG is sig- niﬁcantly faster than the for-loop implementation. Second, 13The Nyquist frequency here is ⌊ T 2∆t0 ⌋ where ∆t0 is the smallest distance between two consecutive prices [29]. 14Using the Nyquist frequency under asynchrony will result in the estimate being biased. This is demonstrated in Section 3.2. 8 Figure 5: We investigate the algorithm complexity for various non-uniform fast Fourier transform methods by plotting the time (measured in seconds) as a function of the error tolerance ϵ which determines the spreading width ω for the various averaging kernels. The FFT (FFT - purple line) and zero-padded FFT (ZFFT - dark green line) is plotted as a baseline for comparison. We simulate a synchronous Geometric Brownian Motion using algorithm 1 with n = 105 data points for D = 2, 10 and 100 respectively. The run times are obtained for the two basis kernels: Dirichlet (Dir.) and Fej´ er (Fej.). The non-uniform FFT methods considered are the Gaussian kernel (FGG - blue dashes), the Kaiser-Bessel kernel (KB - orange dashes) and the exponential of semi-circle kernel with our naive implementation (ES - red dashes) and the implementation by FINUFFT (FINUFFT - green dots). The results are consistent with the results from [2], where the FINUFFT implementation is faster than the fast Gaussian gridding which is faster than the Kaiser-Bessel. The evaluations are all done “on-the-ﬂy” without any pre-computation. The ﬁgures can be recovered using the Julia script ﬁle Error Timing on the GitHub resource [5]. 9 as 1/λ2 increases we get a faster compute time (most of the time) because n2 and N decrease. However, this is not guaranteed because a larger 1/λ2 does not ensure ∆t0 (min- imum ∆t) will also be larger. Therefore, N does not always decrease which can lead to longer compute times. The last variable inﬂuencing compute time to investigate is the impact of tolerance ϵ. This is explored by plotting the computation time as a function of ϵ. Here we use the synchronous case (n = n1 = ... = nD) with n = 105 data points. Figure 5 we compare the following algorithms: the FFT implementation (FFT) and the zero-padded FFT implemen- tation (ZFFT) as a baseline for comparison. The NUFFT methods include the fast Gaussian gridding with the Gaussian kernel (FGG), the Kaiser-Bessel kernel (KB), the exponential of semi-circle using our naive implementation (ES) and the FINUFFT package (FINUFFT). The O(n) plots are plotted on the log scale as the minimum compute time estimate over 10 replications. The ﬁgures include the Dirichlet and Fej´ er representation for D = 2, 10 and 100 features. Looking more closely, we see that the zero-padded FFT implementation needs to assign n data points to the over- sampled grid, and the NUFFT methods need to assign ωn points to the over-sampled grid. Furthermore, the zero- padded FFT requires no evaluations whereas the NUFFT methods require ωn evaluations of δi(Ih)ϕ(·). The key diﬀerences between the NUFFT algorithms is in how they reduce the number of evaluations required. The technique used in the fast Gaussian gridding is to reduce the number of exponential evaluations forϕG(·). This is achieved by separating the exponential into three components: e−(xj−2πm/Mr)2/4τ = [ e−x2 j/4τ ][ exjπ/Mrτ ]m[ e−(πm/Mr)2/τ ] . (17) By splitting the exponential this way, we only need two expo- nential evaluations per source point instead of ω exponential evaluations for each source point. Reducing the number of exponential evaluations from ωn to ω + 2n. The advantage with using the Kaiser-Bessel kernel is that it is both smooth and has narrow support [2]. This can be exploited to cut the number of kernel evaluations by reducing ω while maintaining a comparable level of accuracy. For example, the Gaussian kernel requires ω = 24 for roughly 12 digit accuracy while the Kaiser-Bessel kernel requires ω = 13 for the same 12 digit accuracy [2]. Finally, the exponential of semi-circle has narrow support similar to that of the Kaiser-Bessel kernel but is simpler and faster to evaluate. The downfall is that there is no known analytic Fourier transform, thus incurring the additional cost of numerical integration to evaluate eq. (10). Our implementation of the exponential of semi-circle is naive compared to [2]. We do not exploit the piecewise polynomial kernel approximation to accelerate the evaluation of eq. (9). Furthermore, we use naive numerical integra- tion to compute eq. (10) using the adaptive Gauss-Kronrod quadrature QuadGK rather than the Gauss-Legendre quadra- ture with “phase winding” [2]. The naive implementation of the exponential of semi-circle serves two purposes: (i) allow- ing the like-for-like comparison between the various kernels and their algorithms based on our implementation, and (ii) illustrating the importance of the implementation techniques used by [2]. This is seen in Figure 5 where the exponential of semi-circle is signiﬁcantly slower than the Gaussian or Kaiser- Bessel kernel without the implementation techniques due to the numerical integration required for eq. (10). However, [2] are able to reduce the compute time of the exponential of semi-circle to a similar time as our zero-padded FFT with the appropriate implementation techniques in place. The results in Figure 5 are consistent with that of [2]. Between the non-uniform FFT methods considered: the FIN- UFFT implementation of the exponential of semi-circle is the fastest, followed by the fast Gaussian gridding, the Kaiser- Bessel kernel evaluated “on-the-ﬂy”, 15 and lastly the expo- nential of semi-circle using the naive implementation. 3.2. Benchmark Accuracy We have demonstrated the merit of fast Fourier techniques in terms of speed. We now investigate the accuracy of the fast Fourier methods and conditions when they fail. Moreover, we need to ﬁnd out what level of numerical accuracy is required to ensure that the Fourier coeﬃcients evaluated using NUFFT techniques eq. (14) can recover the same estimates eqs. (2) and (3) using the direct evaluation of eq. (4). This is done by testing the fast Fourier methods on the synchronous case, the missing data representation, and the arrival time representa- tion. We then look at the inter-relation between two types of averaging: (i) kernel averaging—the convolution step in the NUFFT algorithms, and (ii) time-scale averaging—the choice of N in the Malliavin-Mancino estimator. Ensuring that the NUFFT methods can correctly recover estimates for diﬀerent choices of N allows us to quickly and accurately investigate various time scales. Finally, we compare the MSE and bias of the estimator under asynchronous sampling using the direct evaluation of eq. (4) against NUFFT methods of evaluating the Fourier coeﬃcients eq. (14). The setting for the following two experiments are as fol- lows: a bivariate Geometric Brownian Motion with n = 104 is simulated using algorithm 1. The daily parameters for the GBM are: µ1 = 0.01, µ2 = 0.01, σ2 1 = 0.1, σ2 2 = 0.2 and ρ12 = 0.35. We set ∆t = 1 86400 , therefore each unit interval can be thought of as a second in Calendar time. From the synchronous case we create the missing data representation by randomly removing 40% of data points from each path. The arrival time representation is achieved by sampling each price path with an exponential inter-arrival time with mean 30 and 45 for the ﬁrst and second price paths respectively. We measure accuracy as the diﬀerence between the esti- mates from the fast Fourier methods and the estimates from the vectorised implementation averaged over 100 replications. This allows us to directly see if the estimates obtained using the fast Fourier methods recover the same estimates using the direct evaluation. 15Without any pre-computations, preventing large RAM overhead. 10 Figure 6: We investigate the accuracy of various fast Fourier methods as a function of the error tolerance ϵ for various simulation settings. Accuracy is measured as the diﬀerence between the estimates of the various fast Fourier methods ρ∗ and the estimate using the vectorised implementation (CFT) ρv averaged over the 100 replications. The average correlation estimate from the vectorised implementation is provided as an inset in each ﬁgure. The base-line price process is the synchronous Geometric Brownian Motion with 104 data points simulated using algorithm 1. The three simulation cases are: the synchronous case (a) and (b), the missing data representation (c) and (d), and the arrival time representation (e) and (f). The missing data representation is down-sampled by 40% while the arrival time representation is sampled with an exponential inter-arrival time (Rand. Exp.) with mean 30 and 45 for the ﬁrst and second price path respectively. The fast Fourier methods investigated are: the fast Gaussian gridding (FGG - blue line), the Kaiser-Bessel kernel (KB - orange dashes), the exponential of semi-circle with our naive implementation (ES - red dash-dots) and the FINUFFT implementation (FINUFFT - green dots) and ﬁnally, the zero-padded FFT (ZFFT - purple dash-dot-dot). The accuracy is tested for the two basis kernels: Dirichlet (Dir.) and Fej´ er (Fej.). Furthermore, the Nyquist frequency (Nyq.) is used for all the correlation estimate, therefore it must be noted that for the arrival time representation, N changes for each replication. We see ﬁrstly, provided the tolerance ϵ <10−4, the NUFFT methods can accurately recover the estimates, secondly, the divergence from the CFT implementation when ϵ≥ 10−4 may simply be an artefact of random errors from the lack of precision requested, and ﬁnally, the zero-padded FFT fails for arrival time representation. The ﬁgures can be recovered using the Julia script ﬁle AccSynDS and AccRE on the GitHub resource [5]. 11 Figure 7: We investigate the inter-play between kernel averaging and time-scale averaging. We plot the accuracy of various fast Fourier methods as a function of the error tolerance ϵ for various choices of N. Accuracy is measured as the diﬀerence between the estimates of the various fast Fourier methods ρ∗ and the estimate using the vectorised implementation (CFT) ρv averaged over the 100 replications. The average correlation estimate from the vectorised implementation is provided as an inset in each ﬁgure. The base-line price process is the synchronous Geometric Brownian Motion with 104 data points simulated using algorithm 1. The synchronous price paths are then sampled with an exponential inter-arrival time (Rand. Exp.) with mean 30 and 45 for the ﬁrst and second price path respectively to create the arrival time representation of asynchrony. The fast Fourier methods investigated are: the fast Gaussian gridding (FGG - blue line), the Kaiser-Bessel kernel (KB - orange dashes), the exponential of semi-circle with our naive implementation (ES - red dash-dots) and the FINUFFT implementation (FINUFFT - green dots). The accuracy is tested for the two basis kernels: Dirichlet (Dir.) and Fej´ er (Fej.). We see that there is no clear relation between the two types of averaging, rather the divergence for higher tolerance levels seems be an artefact of errors arising from the lack of precision requested. The ﬁgures can be recovered using the Julia script ﬁle AccRE on the GitHub resource [5]. 12 Figure 6 investigates the accuracy for three scenarios: the synchronous case, the missing data representation, and the arrival time representation. The fast Fourier methods inves- tigated are: the zero-padded FFT (ZFFT), the fast Gaussian gridding (FGG), the Kaiser-Bessel kernel (KB), the exponen- tial of semi-circle with our naive implementation (ES) and the FINUFFT implementation (FINUFFT). First, the NUFFT methods can accurately recover the estimates provided the tolerance ϵ< 10−4. Furthermore, we see that the ES kernel (red dashes) recover the correct estimates for ϵ = 10−1. This is not a property of the exponential of semi-circle kernel as the FINUFFT implementation diverges from ϵ = 10−4 (due to their more lenient choice of ω). Rather, this is a result of our choice of Msp for the ES implementation to ensure the requested tolerance is always strictly met. Concretely, this means each source point must be spread in each direction for a minimum of Msp = 4 grid points for the Gaussian ker- nel, Msp = 3 grid points for the Kaiser-Bessel kernel, and Msp = 3 grid points for the exponential of semi-circle to recover the vectorised estimate. 16 Second, the non-uniform FFT methods diverge away from the vectorised implementa- tion when tolerance ϵ≥ 10−4. There is no clear pattern in the divergence for the various kernels, therefore it seems the errors are a simple artefact arising from the lack of precision requested in F (dpi). Finally, the zero-padded FFT recovers the correct estimate for the synchronous case and missing data representation. More importantly, it fails for the arrival time representation because of the shifting of time points (see Figure 1). Non-uniform FFT methods overcome this through a convolution and deconvolution step to correct the eﬀects of shifting the points to a uniform grid by trying to preserve the power spectrum. Previously in Figure 6, the arrival time representation had N changing for each replication. Figure 7 we ﬁx three cases of N and measure the accuracy using the arrival time rep- resentation (with the same parameters as before) to bet- ter understand the relationship between the kernel averag- ing and the time-scale averaging. The ﬁrst N is computed as the minimum Nyquist frequency across the 100 replica- tions resulting in N = 18, 021. The second N is computed based on the smallest average sampling interval resulting in N =⌊ 10,000 30×2⌋ = 166 . Finally, the last N is chosen to be arbitrarily small subject to the condition that the correspond- ing Mr is larger than ω for ϵ = 10−14.17 We pick N = 15 for the ﬁnal case. The zero-padded FFT is excluded because the implementation only computes the case when N is the Nyquist frequency. We see that there is no clear relation be- tween the two types of averaging. For any choice of N, we can recover the vectorised estimate provided the tolerance ϵ< 10−4. There is no clear pattern in the divergence for the various kernels and the lack of accuracy in the estimates are due to the lack of precision requested in F (dpi). 16The Msp requirement is calculated based on ϵ = 10 −4 for the Gaussian and Kaiser-Bessel kernel and ϵ = 10−1 for the ES kernel. 17This is to ensure the up-sampled grid is larger than the total spread- ing width. Figure 8 compares the MSE and bias of the integrated co- variance as a function of the number of Fourier coeﬃcients for the vectorised implementation and the NUFFT methods (with default ϵ = 10−12). A bivariate GBM with n = 100 is simulated with the same parameters as before (except ∆t = 1/n). Asynchrony is induced using a special case of the missing data representation: the regular non-synchronous trading used by [29]. Here the second asset is observed at every second trade of asset one. The methods investigated are: the vectorised implementation (CFT), the fast Gaussian gridding (FGG), the Kaiser-Bessel kernel (KB), the exponen- tial of semi-circle with our naive implementation (ES) and the FINUFFT implementation (FINUFFT). We see that the NUFFT methods recover the same bias and MSE results as the vectorised implementation. When asynchrony is intro- duced the integrated volatility ˆΣ11 n,N (see eqs. (2) and (3)) does not present a bias for all values of N, but the MSE is still large for small values of N due to the variance of the es- timator [29]. However, we have an increase in bias for larger N (smaller time-scales) with co-volatility ˆΣ12 n,N . This is a result of the Epps eﬀect (the decay in corrections as time- scales decrease). To remove this eﬀect, a smaller N (larger time-scales) must be chosen. Mancino et al. [29] suggest picking N by minimizing the MSE for an optimal bias and variance tradeoﬀ. 18 The speed of convergence with respect to the degree of asynchrony of the Malliavin-Mancino estimator was then investigated with the MSE criterion in mind [9, 29, 35]. Picking N to minimise the MSE could be seen as inadvertently assuming that there is some latent model generating the data with some appropri- ate limiting properties, and that we need only be concerned about an estimators deviation from this implied latent model. This can potentially lead one to inadvertently average away empirically important sources of the Epps eﬀect. Allowing N to be chosen to isolate a particular time-scale by its implied choice of ∆t is weaker but it can allow us to disentangle gen- uine and statistical sources of the Epps eﬀect (see Section 4.1 for further details). 4. Correlations and time-scale averaging 4.1. Simulated data We now consider the relationship between the time-scales and the Epps eﬀect [13]. Concretely, we demonstrate how diﬀerent time-scales can be investigated with the Malliavin- Mancino estimator through the choice of N. Speciﬁcally, by using ∆t = T 2N+1 (see Section 2.3). This follows the insights introduced by Ren` o [38], and Precup and Iori [37] to investigate the Epps eﬀect. Precup and Iori were able to demonstrate that the higher the level of asynchrony, the larger the drop in correlation for the Epps eﬀect. This is 18We also performed a sensitivity analysis conﬁrming that the NUFFT methods and vectorised implementation correctly recover the integrated covariance. This is conﬁrmed through the linear relationship by plotting the estimate against the true integrated covariance for a range of values (see Figure B.12). 13 20 30 40 50-1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 CFT FGG KB ES FINUFFT 20 30 40 50-1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 CFT FGG KB ES FINUFFT 20 30 40 500.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 CFT FGG KB ES FINUFFT 20 30 40 500.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 CFT FGG KB ES FINUFFT Figure 8: Here we show the bias and MSE of the integrated covariance as a function of the number of Fourier coeﬃcients using the Dirichlet representation (the Fej´ er can be found in Figure A.11). The base-line price process is a synchronous GBM with n = 100 data points. The missing data representation is induced here using the regular non-synchronous trading [29], where the second asset is observed at every second trade of asset one. The methods investigated are: the vectorised implementation (CFT - black dashes), the fast Gaussian gridding (FGG - blue dash-dot-dot), the Kaiser-Bessel kernel (KB - orange dashes), the exponential of semi-circle with our naive implementation (ES - red dash-dots) and the FINUFFT implementation (FINUFFT - green dots). The NUFFT methods are computed using the default ϵ = 10−12. We see that the fast Fourier methods recover the same bias and MSE results as the vectorised implementation and are consistent with the results obtained by [29]. The ﬁgures can be recovered using the Julia script ﬁle MSEBias on the GitHub resource [5]. demonstrated in Figure 6 with the average correlation pro- vided as insets for varying level of asynchrony. Additionally, Ren` o was able to demonstrate the Epps eﬀect as a function of sampling frequency under the arrival time representation of asynchrony. Demonstrated here in Figure 7 with the average correlation provided as insets for various N. Following the work of [37, 38], T´ oth and Kert´ esz [41] and Mastromatteo et al. [31] were able to analytically quantify the Epps eﬀect arising from asynchrony under an arrival time representation as: ˜ρij ∆t =c ( 1 + 1 λ∆t ( e−λ∆t− 1 )) . (18) Here c is the induced correlation and the sampling intensity isλ; the same for the price paths [31]. This will serve as our base-line theoretical Epps eﬀect. We compare the relationship between the time-scale av- eraging in the Malliavin-Mancino estimator used by [37, 38] to the analytic formula characterising the Epps eﬀect arising from Poissonian sampling in eq. (18). This is done by sim- ulating T data points from a bivariate Geometric Brownian Motion with the same parameters as Section 3.2. We consider one hour, one trading day and one trading weeks’ worth of simulated data with a price realisation sampled each second. Thus, assuming that each trading day is 8 hours in Calendar time, we haveT = 3600, 28800 and 144000 synchronous data points for the various cases. The synchronous price paths are then sampled using an exponential inter-arrival time with the same rate λ to create the arrival time representation of the asynchronous price paths. Figure 9 plots eq. (18) as a function of ∆t (MMZ) rang- ing from 1 to 100 seconds and compared against the esti- mated correlations. The corresponding N 19 for the Malliavin- 19We note that eq. (19) may not always be a perfect conversion due to the range of Fourier modes in eq. (1). 14 Figure 9: Here we demonstrate the relationship between the time-scale averaging in the Malliavin-Mancino estimator (as determined by the number of Fourier coeﬃcients) and the analytic formula characterising the Epps eﬀect arising from Poissonian sampling using eq. (18). The conversion from ∆t to N in the estimators is given by eq. (19). The arrival time representation samples T synchronous data points (each point representing a second in a day) with an inter-arrival time with rates λ = 1 5 and λ = 1 20 for the ﬁrst and second columns respectively. The induced correlation across the replications is 0.35. Here the green dashes (“MMZ”) is the plot of eq. (18). The Malliavin-Mancino estimates for each ∆t are obtained using the Dirichlet and Fej´ er basis kernels; these are respectively the blue line (“MM Dirichlet”) and red line (“MM Fej´ er”). Here we repeat this process 100 times to obtain 100 arrival time representation paths, based on 100 diﬀerent GBM paths to obtain 100 estimates for each ∆t. The average correlation estimate at each ∆t is then plotted with error bars (computed using a t-distribution with 99 degrees of freedom and the sample standard deviation) representing 68% of the variability between the estimated paths. The Dirichlet basis kernel (plausibly) recovers the Epps eﬀect given by eq. (18), while the Fej´ er basis kernel is biased upwards with respect to the Dirichlet basis kernel (and the theoretical Epps eﬀect) because there is induced averaging. For the same reason the estimate curves using the Dirichlet basis kernel are more volatile than those estimated using Fej´ er kernel basis (see Figure C.13). The ﬁgures can be recovered using the Julia script ﬁle MMZandMM on the GitHub resource [5]. 15 Mancino estimator is given by: N = ⌊1 2 ( T ∆t− 1 )⌋ . (19) The Malliavin-Mancino correlation estimates are computed using the fast Gaussian gridding implementation of the non- uniform fast Fourier transform with ϵ = 10−12 for the various choices of ∆t. This is done for the Dirichlet basis kernel (MM Dirichlet) and the Fej´ er basis kernel (MM Fej´ er). Further- more, this process is repeated 100 times so that the variabil- ity between the measured estimates can be investigated for variousni with i = 1, 2 and N. Here, ni≈T/λ on average based on the Poissonian sampling. Figure 9 plots the average correlation estimates over the various replications with the error bars representing 68% of the variability between the estimated paths. 20 First, the pre- cision of the estimates improves as ni andN increase i.e. for decreasing time-scales. The exact contributions of ni andN leading to the increased precision for larger T is unclear, as largerT implies larger ni and N. However, for a ﬁxed T we see the eﬀect that larger N has on the precision (ignoring the variability from ni changing from the replications). Second, the Dirichlet kernel can plausibly recover the theoretical Epps curve; while the Fej´ er is biased upwards with respect to the Dirichlet basis and the theoretical Epps eﬀect. This is because the Fej´ er kernel places more weight on the lower frequencies and less weight on the higher frequencies, which makes it more stable under microstructure noise [30]. Furthermore, due to the weighting of frequencies in the Fej´ er kernel we get smoother estimates compared to the Dirichlet kernel (see Figure C.13 for indication of individual realisations). Deciding which basis kernel to use depends on how one wants to treat the Epps eﬀect. The Epps eﬀect is well known and has many factors contributing to it [31, 34, 33, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41]. The eﬀects include statistical causes that require correction such as asynchrony [33, 37, 38, 41] and tick-size [34, 33], but also genuine eﬀects such as lead-lag [31, 38] and sampling interval dependent correlations [1]. Therefore, the Dirichlet kernel will be more appropriate if one is interested in recovering the empirical nature of correlation dynamics at various time-scales as it (plausibly) recovers the theoretical Epps eﬀect. However, the Fej´ er kernel is more eﬀective if one is interested in correcting the Epps eﬀect as more weight is placed on lower order frequencies to avoid market microstruc- ture noise. Furthermore, the Fej´ er kernel can be coupled with N which minimises the MSE. There have been many methods proposed to correct the Epps eﬀect arising from asynchrony, such as the estimator proposed by Hayashi and Yoshida [17], a correction based on the distortion caused by asynchrony [33], or picking a smaller N with the Malliavin-Mancino estimator [29]. The implication of pickingN to minimise MSE is that control over the time-scale of interest is relinquished (as with the Hayashi- Yoshida estimator). It is clear in Figure 9 that in order for 20We use the sample standard deviation and a t-distribution with 99 degrees of freedom for 100 replications. MSE to be minimised N must be small, meaning that larger time intervals are investigated (which is a simple method to remove the Epps eﬀect). This can be problematic if one is interested in disentangling the genuine causes of the Epps eﬀect from the statistical causes at various time-scales [31]. The better approach here would be to measure the observed correlation dynamics (the Malliavin-Mancino estimator using NUFFTs provides a quick method to so) then correct for the statistical causes [7, 33] so that genuine causes in the decay of correlations at various time-scales can be investigated. 4.2. Real-world data The estimated correlations at various high-frequency time- scales for 10 equity assets listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) are given as a real-world example. The correlations are estimated using Trade and Quote (TAQ) event data for the 10 equities extracted from Bloomberg Pro and processed to remove repeated time stamps by ag- gregating trades with the same time stamp using a vol- ume weighted average. The processed TAQ data can be found in [6]. The 10 equities considered are: FirstRand Limited (FSR), Shoprite Holdings Ltd (SHP), Absa Group Ltd (ABG), Nedbank Group Ltd (NED), Standard Bank Group Ltd (SBK), Sasol Ltd (SOL), Mondi Plc (MNP), An- glo American Plc (AGL), Naspers Ltd (NPN) and British American Tobacco Plc (BTI). The period considered is the week from 24/06/2019 to 28/06/2019. The data is for a 5 day period with equities trading 8 hours a day. This yields T = 5× 28, 800 = 144, 000 seconds in the period of con- sideration. The TAQ data is discrete and asynchronous with diﬀerent rates of trading for diﬀerent stocks. Tickers Vol. Traded Unique Trades 1/ˆλ [sec] BTI 3143263 7893 17.83 ± 0.64 NPN 2791054 12378 11.38 ± 0.32 AGL 5751811 9091 15.49 ± 0.50 MNP 1701907 6562 21.43 ± 0.93 SOL 6048773 10343 13.62 ± 0.43 SBK 9427755 7441 18.93 ± 0.65 NED 4518354 7090 19.85 ± 0.69 ABG 6607644 6572 21.36 ± 0.78 SHP 3758655 5549 25.35 ± 1.01 FSR 38493240 10412 13.53 ± 0.39 Table 3: The table provides a summary of the 10 equities considered for the week from 24/06/2019 to 28/06/2019. The table indicates the vol- ume traded, the number of unique trades and the mean inter-arrival time between trades measured in seconds with the 95% conﬁdence interval provided. Table 3 provides the volume traded, the number of unique trades, and the mean inter-arrival times between the trades for the 10 equities used in the analysis. 21 It is important to notice that the measured intensities ˆλ’s22 are not the 21Here measured in seconds with a 95% conﬁdence interval provided computed using a t-distribution and the standard errors. 22The ˆλ’s are indicative, estimated from the TAQ data. 16 Figure 10: The two most interesting correlation pairs from the 10 available equity data is shown by plotting the correlation as a function of the sampling interval ∆t measured in seconds (the complete set is in Figure C.13 of Appendix C). The conversion between ∆t and N is given by eq. (19) assuming T = 144, 000. The correlation pairs considered are FSR/SBK (blue) and FSR/AGL (red). Here the lines with error bars are the mean estimates and 95% variability between the paths obtained from block bootstrap, while the dashes are the measured estimates from the complete time series. Furthermore, we plot a simple theoretical Epps eﬀect arising from asynchrony for the FSR/SBK (green dashes) pair (see eq. (18)). This is done by assuming the inter-arrival time of trades follow an exponential distribution with the same rate ˆλ = 1/13.5. We found that c = 0.621 provided a relatively good ﬁt. The theoretical Epps is not plotted for the FSR/AGL pair because the correlation dynamics do not exhibit the Epps eﬀect. The empirical reality of curves such as the upper blue curve for the FSR/SBK pair suggest that current theoretical Epps eﬀect models can plausibly model the correlation dynamics for some asset pairs; while curves such as the lower red curve for the FSR/AGL pair suggest that the current theoretical explanations for the Epps eﬀect are possibly insuﬃcient. The ﬁgures can be recovered using the Julia script ﬁle Empirical on the GitHub resource [5]. same across the assets. In order to use eq. (18), we make the simplifying assumption that the ˆλ’s are approximately the same and take on the larger intensity of the two i.e. ˆλ = max(ˆλi, ˆλj). We highlight that an extension of eq. (18) to model diﬀerent intensities and lead-lags is provided by Mastromatteo et al. [31]. They considered multiple intensi- ties λi⁄= λj in order to decouple eﬀects from asynchronous sampling and the eﬀects from lead-lag. We are interested in the general concave shape of the theoretical model (see [31, 41] and the plots therein) and do not use the extended model for the theoretical Epps eﬀect. However, we point out that not all of the measured Epps curves conform to the shape of the known theoretical models; irrespective of whether one can conﬂate the lead-lag formulation for some lag τ with the asynchronous versions with diﬀerent intensities λi⁄=λj. Before comparing the theoretical Epps eﬀect against the measured Epps eﬀect, we perform some Exploratory Data Analysis to identify the interesting correlation pairs out of the 45 available pairs. We investigate the 45 correlation pairs as a function of the sampling interval ∆t for the Dirichlet and Fej´ er basis kernel (see Figure C.13). The conversion for ∆t to N is given by eq. (19), assuming T = 144, 000. The correlation estimates are estimated using the fast Gaus- sian gridding implementation of the non-uniform fast Fourier transform withϵ = 10−12. We obtain correlation matrices for 100 ∆t’s ranging from 1 to 100. The compute time for 100 diﬀerentN’s took a total of 7.28 seconds using the Dirichlet basis and 9.10 seconds using the Fej´ er basis — demonstrat- ing the eﬃcacy of our fast Fourier method. 23 Snapshots of the correlations structures are then plotted as heat-maps for ∆t = 1, 30, 60 and 100 seconds for easier identiﬁcation of the pairs (see Figure C.14). From considering all the corre- lation pairs as a function of the sampling intervals and the reduced heat maps (see Figures C.13 and C.14), we were able to make two initial observations. First, the Fej´ er kernel pro- duces smoother estimates compared to the Dirichlet kernel. Second, nearly all the correlations pairs exhibit the Epps ef- fect where the correlations rise as ∆t increases and conform- ing to the theoretical models in the literature [31, 40, 41]. However, there are exceptions where correlation pairs do not exhibit the behaviours easily accounted for by the prevailing models such as the FSR/AGL pair. Rather, it seems that the correlation drops as ∆t increases to the point where the sign of the correlation switches. Figure 10 investigates this in more detail by plotting the correlation as a function of ∆t for two particular asset pairs. The indicative sample error bars are obtained through block bootstrap quoted to indicate 95% of the variability between the estimates for each ∆t.24 The ﬁrst pair FSR/SBK (blue 23In this instance both the Dirichlet and Fej´ er kernel produced positive semi-deﬁnite covariance matrices. 24This is achieved by splitting the data into 100 calendar time blocks and estimating correlations at various ∆t’s with 1 block removed each time. T remains the same across the various replications, so the missing block is treated as missing data. Standard deviations are obtained from the block bootstrap and error-bars computed using a t-distribution with 99 degrees of freedoms. The errors are overlaid on the mean estimates 17 line/dashes) is a clear demonstration of the Epps eﬀect. Thus, a simple theoretical Epps eﬀect arising from Poisso- nian sampling is plotted for the pair (green dashes). This is done by assuming the inter-arrival time of trades fol- low an exponential distribution with larger of the two rates: max(ˆλF SR, ˆλSBK ) = ˆλ≈ 1/13.5. We found that c = 0.621 produced a relatively good ﬁt for the measured correlations using the Dirichlet basis. The second pair FSR/AGL (red line/dashes) does not behave in accordance to the Epps ef- fect, so no theoretical Epps curve is plotted for the pair as the correlation dynamics do not meaningfully ﬁt the functional form of the model under estimation. One could possibly try argue that this is because there are stocks in the set with low relative correlations with respect to other stocks (see Ap- pendix D for a simple simulated 3-asset example) where the sample error can generate measured sign changes. However, we argue that this is insuﬃcient as it does not recover the pathological behaviour seen in the FSR/AGL pair. Figure 10 illustrates a case where the Epps eﬀect can be plausibly modelled and a case where it cannot be easily mod- elled. The majority of the correlation pairs ﬁt into the more notable Epps eﬀect models [31, 33, 40, 41] which account for a drop in magnitude with a concave decay in correlations (see Figure C.13). However, Mastromatteo et al. caution that a signiﬁcant portion of the measured Epps eﬀect cannot be completely accounted for by current models of the Epps eﬀect. Meaning there are other factors which can aﬀect the dynamics of the observed correlation [31]. The FSR/AGL pair is one such example. This suggests that either: (i) cur- rent theoretical explanations for the Epps eﬀect are possibly insuﬃcient, or (ii) the correlation dynamics under market- microstructure cannot be explained with only the Epps eﬀect [4]. 5. Conclusions We provide a fast novel implementation of the Malliavin- Mancino Fourier estimators using non-uniform fast Fourier transforms and promote the use of fast Gaussian gridding with the Fej´ er basis function as our preferred implementation. First, we compared three averaging kernels: the Gaussian, Kaiser-Bessel, and exponential of semi-circle kernel. Based on the like-for-like algorithmic comparison, the fast Gaus- sian gridding is the fastest out of the three non-uniform fast Fourier methods. However, with appropriate low-level im- plementation techniques the exponential of semi-circle kernel can be made to be faster than the fast Gaussian gridding [2]. All three non-uniform fast Fourier method signiﬁcantly out- perform the naive implementations of the Malliavin-Mancino estimators. Second, we demonstrate the requirement for using the non- uniform fast Fourier methods as motivated by the failure of the zero-padded fast Fourier transform using the arrival time representation of asynchrony. from the block bootstrap. Third, we demonstrate that there is no adverse interplay between the kernel averaging and the time-scale averaging (arising from the choice of N); provided there is suﬃcient spreading to enough nearby grid points. Concretely, the re- quested tolerance ϵ must be less than 10−4 under our choice ofMsp. We show when this is the case, the non-uniform fast Fourier methods can recover the estimates of eqs. (2) and (3) to machine precision. Moreover, we show that the NUFFT methods recover the same bias and MSE results as the di- rect evaluation of eq. (4) and correctly recover the target integrated covariance. Fourth, we provide the link between the work done by Ren` o [38] and Precup and Iori [37] with the work from T´ oth and Kert´ esz [41] and Mastromatteo, Marsili and Zoi [31]. More- over, we argue the Dirichlet kernel is the better choice if one wants to recover the empirical nature of correlation dynamics at various time-scales while the Fej´ er kernel is more appropri- ate if one wants to correct the Epps eﬀect (with appropriate choice of N). Finally, we demonstrate the eﬃcacy of our non-uniform fast Fourier methods with one week of Trade and Quote data from the JSE. We argue that the current theoretical explanations for the Epps eﬀect are possibly insuﬃcient in explaining the entirety of the empirical correlation dynamics under speciﬁc market microstructures. Future work aims to expand our empirical understanding of correlation dynamics on various streaming event-data sources using this convenient estimation tool and to incorporate the estimators NUFFT implementation with an extension that makes the estimate robust to samples that explicitly incorpo- rate jumps [11]. Acknowledgements We would like to thank Melusi Mavuso and Roger Bukuru for comments. We would also like to thank the reviewers for helpful critique and suggestions. The data was sourced from Bloomberg Professional via the University of Cape Town Library service. Patrick Chang would like to acknowledge the support of the Manuel & Luby Washkansky Scholarship and the South African Statistical Association [grant number 127931]. References [1] Bacry, E., Delattre, S., Hoﬀmann, M., Muzy, J.F., 2013. Modelling microstructure noise with mutually exciting point processes. Quan- titative Finance 13, 65–77. doi: 10.1080/14697688.2011.647054. [2] Barnett, A.H., Magland, J.F., af Klinteberg, L., 2018. A parallel non-uniform fast fourier transform library based on an ”exponential of semicircle” kernel. SIAM J. Scientiﬁc Computing 41, C479– C504. doi: 10.1137/18m120885x. [3] Barucci, E., Ren` o, R., 2002. On measuring volatility and the garch forecasting performance. Journal of International Finan- cial Markets, Institutions and Money 12, 183–200. doi: 10.1016/ S1042-4431(02)00002-1 . [4] Chang, P., Bukuru, R., Gebbie, T., 2019. Revisiting the Epps eﬀect using volume time averaging: An exercise in R. arXiv:1912.02416. 18 [5] Chang, P., Pienaar, E., Gebbie, T., 2020a. Julia code: Malliavin-mancino estimators implemented with the non-uniform fast fourier transform. URL: https://github.com/CHNPAT005/ PCEPTG-MM-NUFFT , doi: 10.25375/uct.11929290. [6] Chang, P., Pienaar, E., Gebbie, T., 2020b. Malliavin-Mancino esti- mators implemented with the non-uniform fast Fourier transform: Dataset. doi: 10.25375/uct.11903442. [7] Chang, P., Pienaar, E., Gebbie, T., 2020c. Using the Epps eﬀect to detect discrete data generating processes. arXiv:2005.10568. [8] Chen, J., Revels, J., 2016. Robust benchmarking in noisy environ- ments. arXiv:1608.04295. [9] Chen, R.Y., 2019. The Fourier transform method for volatility func- tional inference by asynchronous observations. arXiv:1911.02205. [10] Cooley, J., Tukey, J., 1965. An Algorithm for the Machine Cal- culation of Complex Fourier Series. Mathematics of Computation 19, 297–301. doi: 10.1090/S0025-5718-1965-0178586-1 . [11] Cuchiero, C., Teichmann, J., 2015. Fourier transform methods for pathwise covariance estimation in the presence of jumps. Stochas- tic Processes and their Applications 125, 116 – 160. doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.spa.2014.07.023. [12] Dutt, A., Rokhlin, V., 1993. Fast fourier transforms for nonequis- paced data. SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc Computing 14, 1368–1393. doi:10.1137/0914081. [13] Epps, T.W., 1979. Comovements in stock prices in the very short run. Journal of the American Statistical Association 74, 291–298. [14] Frigo, M., Johnson, S.G., 2005. The design and implementation of FFTW3. Proceedings of the IEEE 93, 216–231. doi: 10.1109/ JPROC.2004.840301. special issue on “Program Generation, Opti- mization, and Platform Adaptation”. [15] Glasserman, P., 2004. Monte Carlo methods in ﬁnancial engineer- ing. Springer, New York. [16] Greengard, L., Lee, J.Y., 2004. Accelerating the nonuniform fast Fourier transform. SIAM Review 46, 443–454. doi: 10.1137/ S003614450343200X. [17] Hayashi, T., Yoshida, N., 2005. On covariance estimation of non- synchronously observed diﬀusion processes. Bernoulli 11, 359–379. doi:10.3150/bj/1116340299. [18] Hendricks, D., 2017. Using real-time cluster conﬁgurations of streaming asynchronous features as online state descriptors in ﬁ- nancial markets. Pattern Recognition Letters 97, 21 – 28. [19] Hendricks, D., Gebbie, T., Wilcox, D., 2016. Detecting intraday ﬁnancial market states using temporal clustering. Quantitative Fi- nance 16, 1657–1678. [20] Hendricks, D., Gebbie, T., Wilcox, D., 2017. High-speed fourier method estimation of covariances from asynchronous data. Work- ing paper. [21] Hendricks, D., Wilcox, D., 2014. A reinforcement learning exten- sion to the almgren-chriss framework for optimal trade execution. 2014 IEEE Conference on Computational Intelligence for Financial Engineering & Economics (CIFEr) , 457–464. [22] af Klinteberg, L., 2018. Julia interface to ﬁnuﬀt. URL: https: //github.com/ludvigak/FINUFFT.jl. [23] Kloeden, P.E., Platen, E., 2013. Numerical solution of stochastic diﬀerential equations. volume 23. Springer Science & Business Media. [24] Lindskog, F., 2001. Linear correlation estimation. RiskLab Report, ETH Zurich. [25] Malherbe, C., 2007. Fourier method for the measurement of uni- variate and multivariate volatility in the presence of high frequency data. MSc. Dissertation. University of Cape Town. [26] Malherbe, C., Hendricks, D., Gebbie, T., Wilcox, D., 2005. Matlab functions ftcorrgpu.m and fftcorrgpu.m. [27] Malliavin, P., Mancino, M.E., 2002. Fourier series method for measurement of multivariate volatilities. Finance and Stochastics 6, 49–61. doi: 10.1007/s780-002-8400-6 . [28] Malliavin, P., Mancino, M.E., 2009. A Fourier transform method for nonparametric estimation of multivariate volatility. Ann. Statist. 37, 1983–2010. doi: 10.1214/08-AOS633. [29] Mancino, M., Recchioni, M., Sanfelici, S., 2017. Fourier-Malliavin Volatility Estimation Theory and Practice. Springer International Publishing. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-50969-3 . [30] Mancino, M.E., Sanfelici, S., 2011. Estimating Covariance via Fourier Method in the Presence of Asynchronous Trading and Mi- crostructure Noise. Journal of Financial Econometrics 9, 367–408. doi:10.1093/jjfinec/nbq031. [31] Mastromatteo, I., Marsili, M., Zoi, P., 2011. Financial corre- lations at ultra-high frequency: theoretical models and empiri- cal estimation. The European Physical Journal B 80, 243–253. doi:10.1140/epjb/e2011-10865-y . [32] Matoti, L., 2009. Building a statistical linear factor model and a global minimum variance portfolio using estimated covariance matrices. MSc. Dissertation. University of Cape Town. [33] M¨ unnix, M.C., Sch¨ afer, R., Guhr, T., 2011. Statistical causes for the epps eﬀect in microstructure noise. International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance 14, 1231–1246. doi: 10.1142/ S0219024911006838. [34] M¨ unnix, M.C., Sch¨ afer, R., Guhr, T., 2010. Impact of the tick- size on ﬁnancial returns and correlations. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 389, 4828 – 4843. doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2010.06.037. [35] Park, S., Hong, S.Y., Linton, O., 2016. Estimating the quadratic covariation matrix for asynchronously observed high frequency stock returns corrupted by additive measurement error. Journal of Econometrics 191, 325 – 347. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jeconom.2015.12.005. innovations in Measurement in Economics and Econometrics. [36] Potts, D., Steidl, G., 2003. Fast Summation at Nonequispaced Knots by NFFT. SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc Computing 24, 2013– 2037. doi: 10.1137/S1064827502400984. [37] Precup, O.V., Iori, G., 2007. Cross-correlation measures in the high-frequency domain. The European Journal of Finance 13, 319– 331. doi: 10.1080/13518470600813565. [38] Ren` o, R., 2003. A closer look at the Epps eﬀect. International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance 06, 87–102. doi: 10. 1142/S0219024903001839. [39] Saichev, A., Sornette, D., 2014. A simple microstructure return model explaining microstructure noise and epps eﬀects. Interna- tional Journal of Modern Physics C 25, 1450012. doi: 10.1142/ S0129183114500120. [40] T´ oth, B., Kert´ esz, J., 2009. The Epps eﬀect revisited. Quantitative Finance 9, 793–802. doi: 10.1080/14697680802595668. [41] T´ oth, B., Kert´ esz, J., 2007. Modeling the Epps eﬀect of cross correlations in asset prices, in: Kert´ esz, J., Bornholdt, S., Man- tegna, R.N. (Eds.), Noise and Stochastics in Complex Systems and Finance, International Society for Optics and Photonics. SPIE. pp. 89 – 97. URL: https://doi.org/10.1117/12.727127, doi:10.1117/12.727127. 19 Appendix A. Additional ﬁgure sets 20 30 40 50-1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 CFT FGG KB ES FINUFFT 20 30 40 50-1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 CFT FGG KB ES FINUFFT 20 30 40 500.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 CFT FGG KB ES FINUFFT 20 30 40 500.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 CFT FGG KB ES FINUFFT Figure A.11: The ﬁgures investigate the bias and MSE of the integrated covariance as a function of the number of Fourier coeﬃcients using the Fej´ er representation. The base-line price process is a synchronous GBM with n = 100 data points. The missing data representation is induced here using the regular non-synchronous trading [29], where the second asset is observed at every second trade of asset one. The methods investigated are: the vectorised implementation (CFT - black dashes), the fast Gaussian gridding (FGG - blue dash-dot-dot), the Kaiser-Bessel kernel (KB - orange dashes), the exponential of semi-circle with our naive implementation (ES - red dash-dots) and the FINUFFT implementation (FINUFFT - green dots). The NUFFT methods are computed using the default ϵ = 10 −12. We see that the fast Fourier methods recover the same bias and MSE results as the vectorised implementation and behave similarly to ﬁg. 8. The ﬁgures can be recovered using the Julia script ﬁle MSEBias on the GitHub resource [5]. Appendix B. Sensitivity test We perform a sensitivity analysis to ensure that the NUFFT implementation can correctly recover the target integrated covariance, not depending on the parameters chosen in the main document. Here we simulate a synchronous bivariate GBM withn =n1 =n2 = 104 data points with discretisation size ∆t = 1/n. Figures B.12a and B.12b is the Dirichlet representation, while Figures B.12c and B.12d is the Fej´ er representation. For the case of the integrated variance ∫T 0 Σ11(t)dt the true value ranges from 0.1 to 0.3, while for the case of the integrated covariance ∫T 0 Σ12(t)dt the true value ranges from -0.1 to 0.1. Figure B.12 plots the estimated integrated covariance as a function of the true integrated covariance. The methods investigated are: the vectorised implementation (CFT), the fast Gaussian gridding (FGG), the Kaiser-Bessel kernel (KB), the exponential of semi-circle with our naive implementation (ES) and the FINUFFT implementation (FINUFFT). The NUFFT methods are computed using the default ϵ = 10−12. We see a linear relationship between the estimated integrated covariance and the true integrated covariance. This conﬁrms that the NUFFT methods can correctly recover the target estimates. Moreover, the estimates for the various methods are exactly the same as each other. This conﬁrms that the NUFFT methods can recover the same estimates as the traditional implementation of the estimator. 20 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 True CFT FGG KB ES FINUFFT -0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 -0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 True CFT FGG KB ES FINUFFT 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 True CFT FGG KB ES FINUFFT -0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 -0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 True CFT FGG KB ES FINUFFT Figure B.12: The ﬁgures investigate if the NUFFT methods an correctly recover the target integrated covariance, independent of the speciﬁc parameters chosen. This is achieved by simulating a synchronous bivariate GBM with n = 10 4 data points with the true value of ∫T 0 Σ11(t)dt ranging from 0.1 to 0.3 and the true value of ∫T 0 Σ12(t)dt ranging from -0.1 to 0.1. The methods investigated are: the vectorised implementation (CFT - purple line), the fast Gaussian gridding (FGG - blue dash-dot-dot), the Kaiser-Bessel kernel (KB - orange dashes), the exponential of semi-circle with our naive implementation (ES - red dash-dots) and the FINUFFT implementation (FINUFFT - green dots). The NUFFT methods are computed using the default ϵ = 10−12. The estimates recover a linear relationship between the estimated integrated covariance and the true integrated covariance, conﬁrming that the NUFFT methods can correctly recover the target estimates. The ﬁgures can be recovered using the Julia script ﬁle Sensitivity on the GitHub resource [5]. Appendix C. Epps eﬀect EDA for 10 JSE stocks Here we consider the 10 stocks as described in Table 3 and provide the correlation heat-maps in Figure C.14 and Epps eﬀect plots in Figure C.13. 21 Figure C.13: We investigate the Epps eﬀect on the JSE by plotting the correlation estimate from the Malliavin-Mancino estimator as a function of the sampling interval ∆t. The conversion between ∆t andN is given by (19), assuming T = 144, 000 seconds in the 5 day period. The correlation pairs are plotted for all 10 equities. Sub-ﬁgure (a) is the estimates using the Dirichlet basis kernel and (b) the Fej´ er basis kernel. It is clear that the Fej´ er kernel produces smoother estimates compared to the Dirichlet kernel due to the induced averaging. Finally, we see that most of the equity pairs produce the Epps eﬀect demonstrated in Figure 9, but more interesting is that there is an equity pair where the correlation switches signs for diﬀerent ∆t. The ﬁgures can be recovered using the Julia script ﬁle Empirical on the GitHub resource [5]. Figure C.14: We investigate the Epps eﬀect on the JSE by plotting correlation structure as heat-maps for snapshots from Figure C.13. The snapshots are taken for ∆t = 1, 30, 60 and 100 seconds for (a) to (d) and (e) to (h) respectively. (a) to (d) plots the correlation structure using the Dirichlet basis and (e) to (h) the Fej´ er basis. We see that the correlations at short time scales are generally positively correlated - with the top right quadrant being the most positively correlated as they are from the banking sector. More interestingly, we see that the correlation pair FSR/AGL goes from positively correlated to negatively correlated as ∆t increases. The ﬁgures can be recovered using the Julia script ﬁle Empirical on the GitHub resource [5]. 22 Appendix D. Simulated 3-asset case Here we consider 3 simulated correlated stocks to demonstrate the interplay of the combination of negative and positive correlations in Figure D.15. The change of scale can lead to spurious negative and positive correlations when there is insuﬃcient data. Figure D.15: We investigate whether the interplay from correlation combinations or estimation uncertainty can explain the correlation dynamics found in FSR/AGL from Figure 10. We simulate T = 28800 data points for a three feature Geometric Brownian Motion with induced correlation choices ρ12 =−0.5 (blue line), ρ13 = 0.7 (red line) and ρ23 = 0.01 (green line) for (a) and ρ12 = 0.5 (blue line), ρ13 = 0.7 (red line) and ρ23 = 0.01 (green line) for (b). The synchronous case is then sampled with an exponential inter-arrival process with rate λ = 1/5. The Dirichlet estimates are obtained for ∆t ranging from 1 to 100 with the conversion to N given in eq. (19). This process is repeated 100 times and the average correlation estimate at each ∆t is then plotted with error bars (computed using a t-distribution with 99 degrees of freedom and the sample standard deviation) representing 68% of the variability between the estimation paths. We see that for ρ≈ 0, when n and N is not large enough, estimation uncertainty arises, explaining the switching of signs; but it does not account for the correlation magnitude dropping as ∆t increases. The ﬁgures can be recovered using the Julia script ﬁle 3Asset on the GitHub resource [5]. Appendix E. Algorithms Algorithm outline for the various implementation methods. Algorithm 1 GBM Algorithm Require: 1. n: number of price points to simulate. 2. µ: (D x 1) vector of drift parameters. 3. Σ: (D x D) covariance matrix. 4. start price: (D x 1) vector of S(0). Procedure for the ith feature: 1. Generate: Z∼N D(0, IDxD). 2. Set: Si(tk+1) =Si(tk) exp [(µi− 1 2σ2 i )(tk+1−tk) +√tk+1−tk ∑d k=1AikZk]. return (S) Table E.4: The Geometric Brownian Motion (GBM) Algorithm (see algorithm 1) simulates a correlated multivariate GBM using the Euler–Maruyama scheme. It is subject to the initial condition S(0) = start price. A is the Cholesky decomposition of Σ. The Julia implementation can be found at GBM in the GitHub resource [5] and was provided by [15]. 23 Algorithm 2 Nyquist Frequency Require: 1. ˜t: (n x D) of re-scaled sampled times. Non-trade times are represented using NaNs or NAs. Set: ∆ti 0 = minimum distance between sampled times for asset i. Set: Ni 0 = 2π ∆ti 0 . Set: Ni =⌊N i 0 2⌋, where⌊x⌋ denotes the ﬂoor of x. Set: N = mini{Ni}. return (N) Table E.5: The Nyquist frequency Algorithm (see algorithm 2) computes the Nyquist cutoﬀ. The Julia implementation can be found in any of the Dirichlet or Fej´ er implementations in the GitHub resource [5] and is an auxiliary function based on the MATLAB implementation from [26, 20]. Algorithm 3 Malliavin-Mancino Estimators Require: 1. P: (n x D) matrix of sampled prices. Non-trade times are represented using NaNs or NAs. 2. T: (n x D) matrix of sampled times. Non-trade times are represented using NaNs or NAs. 3. N (Optional): cutoﬀ frequency (Integer) used in the convolution. Default is set to be the Nyquist cutoﬀ. 4. tol (Optional): error tolerance for NUFFTs. Determines the number of grid points to spread. Default is set to 10−12. Step I. Initialisation. I.1. Re-scale the sampled times ( T ) (see algorithm 4). I.2. Compute the Nyquist cutoﬀ ( N) — unless speciﬁed otherwise through input parameter (see algorithm 2). Step F: Compute the Fourier coeﬃcients, k∈{−N,...,N }. fori = 1 to D do F.1. Extract the re-scaled sampled times for the ith object: ˜ti = T(i), excluding any NaNs or NAs. F.2. Extract and compute the logarithm of the sampled prices for the ith object: ˜ pi = ln ( pi (˜ti)) , excluding any NaNs or NAs. F.3. Compute the returns: δi(Ih) = ˜pi(˜ti h+1)− ˜pi(˜ti h) F.4. Compute the Fourier coeﬃcients: c+ k (i) = ni−1∑ h=1 eik˜ti hδi(Ih); c− k (i) = ni−1∑ h=1 e−ik˜ti hδi(Ih) end for Step C: Convolution. C.1. The Dirichlet implementation: ˆΣij = 1 2N + 1 N∑ k=−N [c+ k (i)c− k (j)] C.2. The Fej´ er implementation: ˆΣij = 1 N + 1 N∑ k=−N ( 1−|k| N ) [c+ k (i)c− k (j)] Correlation: Rij = Σij√Σii √ Σjj return (Σ, R) Table E.6: The Malliavin-Mancino estimators (see algorithm 3) computes the Dirichlet or Fej´ er implementation of the Malliavin-Mancino estimator [27, 28] using a complex exponential formulation of the Fourier transform. The algorithm is a mere sketch provided by [20] and is based on their MATLAB implementation [26]. 24 Algorithm 4 Time-rescaling Algorithm Require: 1. T: (n x D) matrix of sampled times. Non-trade times are represented using NaNs or NAs. Set: tmin = minimum value of T Set: tmax = maximum value of T fori = 1 to D do forh = 1 to ni do ˜ti h = 2π(ti h−tmin) tmax−tmin end for end for return (˜t) Table E.7: The Time-rescaling Algorithm (see algorithm 4) re-scales the trading times from [0,T ] to [0, 2π]. The Julia implementation can be found in any of the Dirichlet or Fej´ er implementations in the GitHub resource [5] and is an auxiliary function based on the MATLAB implementation from [26, 20]. Algorithm 5 “for-loop” implementation Require: 1. δi = (δi(Ih))ni−1 h=1 : vector of source strengths for asset i. 2. ˜ti = (˜ti h)ni−1 h=1 : vector of re-scaled sample times for asset i. 3. N: the cutoﬀ frequency. fors =1 to 2N + 1 do k =s−N− 1 c+ s = ni−1∑ h=1 eik˜ti hδi(Ih) c− s = ni−1∑ h=1 e−ik˜ti hδi(Ih) end for return (c+ k,c− k ) Table E.8: The for-loop implementation [29] (see algorithm 5) computes the Fourier coeﬃcients using for-loops. The Julia implementation can be found in MScorrDK or MScorrFK on the GitHub resource [5] and correspond to the Dirichlet and Fej´ er representation respectively. The implementation is based on the MATLAB implementation from [29]. 25 Algorithm 6 Vectorised code implementation Require: 1. δi = (δi(Ih))ni−1 h=1 : vector of source strengths for asset i. 2. ˜ti = (˜ti h)ni−1 h=1 : vector of re-scaled sample times for asset i. 3. N: the cutoﬀ frequency. Set: k = (1, 2,...,N )T a column vector 1 to N. Compute: c1:N =δ⊺ i exp(−i ˜ti k⊺) Compute: c0 =∑ni−1 h=1 δi(Ih) Piece c1:N , c1:N and c0 together to obtain c+ k and c− k return (c+ k,c− k ) Table E.9: The vectorised code implementation [20, 26] (see algorithm 6) replaces for-loops to vectorise the computation of the Fourier coeﬃcients and exploits the Hermitian symmetry of the real source strengths. The Julia implementation can be found in CFTcorrDK or CFTcorrFK on the GitHub resource [5] and correspond to the Dirichlet and Fej´ er representation respectively. Algorithm 7 Zero-padded FFT implementation Require: 1. δi = (δi(Ih))ni−1 h=1 : vector of source strengths for asset i. 2. ˜ti = (˜ti h)ni−1 h=1 : vector of re-scaled sample times for asset i (˜ti h∈ [0, 2π]). 3. N∗ =⌊ 2π ∆t⌉, where⌊x⌉ denotes rounding x to the nearest Integer and ∆t is the minimum distance between sampled times from algorithm 2. Initialise: ( ˜f𝓁)N ∗ 𝓁=1 = 0, a zero vector of length N∗. forh = 1 to ni− 1 do 𝓁 =⌊ ˜ti hN ∗ 2π ⌉ + 1 ˜f𝓁 =δi(Ih) end for return ( ˜f𝓁 for FFT computation) Table E.10: The zero-padded FFT implementation (see algorithm 7) creates a uniform grid and shifts the non-uniform source points to the nearest grid point on an up-sampled uniform grid. The Julia implementation can be found in FFTZPcorrDK or FFTZPcorrFK on the GitHub resource [5] and correspond to the Dirichlet and Fej´ er representation respectively. Note that the index 𝓁 is set for languages with array indices starting from 1. 26 Algorithm 8 Fast Gaussian Gridding NUFFT implementation Require: 1. δi = (δi(Ih))ni−1 h=1 : vector of source strengths for asset i. 2. ˜ti = (˜ti h)ni−1 h=1 : vector of re-scaled sample times for asset i (˜ti h∈ [0, 2π]). 3. M = 2N + 1: the number of Fourier modes computed. 4. ϵ: error tolerance. Step I. Initialisation: I.1. Set: σ = 2. I.2. Set: Mr =σM ; Msp =⌊− ln(ϵ)(σ−1/2) (π(σ−1)) + 1 2⌋. I.3. Set: λ = σ2Msp σ(σ−0.5) ; hx = 2π Mr ; t1 = π λ . I.4. Set: τ = πλ M 2r . I.5. Initialise: ( ˜f𝓁)Mr 𝓁=1 = 0, a zero vector of length Mr. fork = 1 to Msp do E3,k = exp(−t1k2) end for Step C: Convolution (see eq. (12)). forh = 1 to ni− 1 do b0 =⌊ ˜ti h hx ⌋, index of nearest up-sampled grid ξb0≤ ˜ti h. d = ˜ti h hx −b0. E0 = 0, a zero vector of length 2Msp. E1 =e−t1d2 ; E0,Msp =E1; E2 =e2t1d. fork = 1 to Msp do E0,Msp+k =E3,kE1Ek 2 . end for fork = 1 to Msp− 1 do E0,Msp−k =E3,kE1E−k 2 . end for bd = min(Msp− 1,b 0); bu = min(Msp,Mr−b0− 1). fork =−Msp + 1 to−bd− 1 do ˜fb0+k+Mr+1 = ˜fb0+k+Mr+1 +δi(Ih)E0,Msp+k. end for fork =−bd to bu do ˜fb0+k+1 = ˜fb0+k+1 +δi(Ih)E0,Msp+k. end for fork = bu + 1 to Msp do ˜fb0+k−Mr+1 = ˜fb0+k−Mr+1 +δi(Ih)E0,Msp+k. end for end for Step F: Compute FFT on over-sampled grid (see eq. (13)). F.1. Find Fourier coeﬃcients FG(dpi)(k) via FFT on the grid ˜f𝓁. Step D: Deconvolution (see eq. (14)). D.1. Compute: F (dpi)(k) =√π τek2τFG(dpi)(k) 1 Mr . return (F (dpi)(k),k∈{−N,...,N }) Table E.11: The non-uniform FFT implementation (see algorithm 8) creates an up-sampled uniform grid and convolves the non-uniform source points onto the uniform grid, applies the FFT on the up-sampled grid and deconvolves the convolution eﬀects in the Fourier space. Algorithm 8 is speciﬁc for the Gaussian kernel as it uses the fast Gaussian gridding implementation by [16] to reduce the number of exponential evaluations. The Julia implementation can be found in NUFFT-FGG on the GitHub resource [5]. The Algorithm is a replication of the FORTRAN source code from [16], but adjusted for languages with array indices starting from 1. 27 Algorithm 9 Kaiser-Bessel NUFFT implementation Require: 1. δi = (δi(Ih))ni−1 h=1 : vector of source strengths for asset i. 2. ˜ti = (˜ti h)ni−1 h=1 : vector of re-scaled sample times for asset i (˜ti h∈ [0, 1]). 3. M = 2N + 1: the number of Fourier modes computed. 4. ϵ: error tolerance. Step I. Initialisation: I.1. Set: σ = 2. I.2. Set: Mr =σM ; Msp =⌊ 1 2(⌈log10( 1 ϵ )⌉ + 2)⌋. I.3. Initialise: ( ˜f𝓁)Mr 𝓁=1 = 0, a zero vector of length Mr. Step C: Convolution (see eq. (12)). forh = 1 to ni− 1 do b0 =⌊˜ti hMr⌋, index of nearest up-sampled grid ξb0≤ ˜ti h. d = ˜ti h− b0 Mr . bd = min(Msp− 1,b 0); bu = min(Msp,Mr−b0− 1). fork =−Msp to−bd− 1 do ˜fb0+k+Mr+1 = ˜fb0+k+Mr+1 +δi(Ih)ϕKB (d− k Mr ). end for fork =−bd to bu do ˜fb0+k+1 = ˜fb0+k+1 +δi(Ih)ϕKB (d− k Mr ). end for fork = bu + 1 to Msp do ˜fb0+k−Mr+1 = ˜fb0+k−Mr+1 +δi(Ih)ϕKB (d− k Mr ). end for end for Step F: Compute FFT on over-sampled grid (see eq. (13)). F.1. Find Fourier coeﬃcients FKB(dpi)(k) via FFT on the grid ˜f𝓁. Step D: Deconvolution (see eq. (14)). D.1. Compute: F (dpi)(k) = 1 Mr FKB(dpi)(k)/ ˆϕKB (k). return (F (dpi)(k),k∈{−N,...,N }) Table E.12: The non-uniform FFT implementation (see algorithm 9) creates an up-sampled uniform grid and convolves the non-uniform source points onto the uniform grid, applies the FFT on the up-sampled grid and deconvolves the convolution eﬀects in the Fourier space. Algorithm 9 uses the Kaiser-Bessel kernel here, but the algorithm can be applied to any kernel that is 1-periodic. The algorithm is structured without the pre-computation step used in [36] and evaluates the algorithm “on-the-ﬂy”. The Julia implementation can be found in NUFFT-KB on the GitHub resource [5]. The algorithm is set for languages with array indices starting from 1. 28 Algorithm 10 Exponential of semi-circle NUFFT implementation Require: 1. δi = (δi(Ih))ni−1 h=1 : vector of source strengths for asset i. 2. ˜ti = (˜ti h)ni−1 h=1 : vector of re-scaled sample times for asset i (˜ti h∈ [0, 2π]). 3. M = 2N + 1: the number of Fourier modes computed. 4. ϵ: error tolerance. Step I. Initialisation: I.1. Set: σ = 2. I.2. Set: Mr =σM ; Msp =⌊ 1 2(⌈log10( 1 ϵ )⌉ + 2)⌋ + 2. I.3. Initialise: ( ˜f𝓁)Mr 𝓁=1 = 0, a zero vector of length Mr. Step C: Convolution (see eq. (12)). forh = 1 to ni− 1 do b0 =⌊˜ti hMr⌋, index of nearest up-sampled grid ξb0≤ ˜ti h. d = ˜ti h− b0 Mr . bd = min(Msp− 1,b 0); bu = min(Msp,Mr−b0− 1). fork =−Msp to−bd− 1 do ˜fb0+k+Mr+1 = ˜fb0+k+Mr+1 +δi(Ih)ϕES (d− 2πk Mr ). end for fork =−bd to bu do ˜fb0+k+1 = ˜fb0+k+1 +δi(Ih)ϕES (d− 2πk Mr ). end for fork = bu + 1 to Msp do ˜fb0+k−Mr+1 = ˜fb0+k−Mr+1 +δi(Ih)ϕES (d− 2πk Mr ). end for end for Step F: Compute FFT on over-sampled grid (see eq. (13)). F.1. Find Fourier coeﬃcients FES(dpi)(k) via FFT on the grid ˜f𝓁. Step D: Deconvolution (see eq. (14)). D.1. Compute: ˆϕES (k) =α ∫∞ −∞φES (x)eiαkxdx using numerical integration. D.2. Compute: F (dpi)(k) = 2π Mr FES(dpi)(k)/ ˆϕES (k). return (F (dpi)(k),k∈{−N,...,N }) Table E.13: The non-uniform FFT implementation (see algorithm 10) creates an up-sampled uniform grid and convolves the non-uniform source points onto the uniform grid, applies the FFT on the up-sampled grid and deconvolves the convolution eﬀects in the Fourier space. Algorithm 10 uses the exponential of semi-circle kernel. The algorithm is a naive implementation based on the steps provided in [2] and does not exploit the piecewise polynomial kernel approximation nor the Gauss-Legendre quadrature for implementation acceleration used in FINUFFT [2]. The implementation relies on the QuadGK package to perform the numerical integration using adaptive Gauss-Kronrod quadrature. The Julia implementation can be found in NUFFT-ES on the GitHub resource [5]. The Algorithm is set for languages with array indices starting from 1. 29