Extending Deep Reinforcement Learning Frameworks in Cryptocurrency Market Making Jonathan Sadighian ∗ SESAMm jonathan.m.sadighian@gmail.com April 16, 2020 Abstract There has been a recent surge in interest in the application of artiﬁcial intelligence to automated trading. Reinforcement learning has been applied to single- and multi-instrument use cases, such as market making or portfolio management. This paper proposes a new approach to framing cryptocurrency market making as a reinforcement learning challenge by introducing an event-based environment wherein an event is deﬁned as a change in price greater or less than a given threshold, as opposed to by tick or time-based events (e.g., every minute, hour, day, etc.). Two policy-based agents are trained to learn a market making trading strategy using eight days of training data and evaluate their performance using 30 days of testing data. Limit order book data recorded from Bitmex is used to validate this approach, which demonstrates improved proﬁt and stability compared to a time-based approach for both agents when using a simple multi-layer perceptron neural network for function approximation and seven diﬀerent reward functions. Keywords: reinforcement learning, limit order book, market making, cryptocurrencies 1 Introduction Applying quantitative methods to market making is a longstanding interest of the quantitative ﬁnance community. Over the past decade, researchers have applied stochastic, statistical and machine learning techniques to automate market making. These approaches often use limit order book (LOB) data to train a model to make a prediction about future price movements, generally for the purpose of maintaining the optimal inventory and quotes (i.e., posted bid and ask orders at the exchange) for the market maker. These models are typically trained using the most granular form of event-driven data, level II/III tick data, where anevent is deﬁned as an incoming order received by the exchange (e.g., new, cancel, or modify). Alternatively, an event can be deﬁned as a time interval (e.g., everyn seconds, minutes, hours, etc.). Every time an event occurs, these models have the opportunity to react (e.g., adjust their quotes), thereby indirectly managing inventory by increasing or decreasing the likelihood of posted order execution. Tick-based approaches make assumptions about latency and executions, which may impact the capability of a model to translate simulated results into real-world performance. Researchers attempt to address this challenge in diﬀerent ways, such as creating simulation rules around market impact, execution rates, and priority of LOB queues [1–5]. We propose an alternative approach to address this challenge: Fundamentally change the mindset of strategy creation for automated market making from latency-sensitive to intelligent strategies using deep reinforcement learning (DRL) with time- and price-based event environments. This paper applies DRL to create anintelligent market making strategy, extending the DRL Market Making (DRLMM) framework set forth in our previous work [6], which used time-based event environments. The reinforcement learning framework follows a Markov Decision Process (MDP), where an agent interacts ∗Completed while associated with SESAMm. The views presented in this paper are of the author and do not necessarily represent the views of SESAMm. 1 arXiv:2004.06985v1 [q-fin.TR] 15 Apr 2020 with an environmentE over discrete time stepst, observes a state spacest, takes an actionat guided by a policyπ, and receives a rewardrt. The policyπ is a probability distribution mapping state spaces st∈S to action spacesat∈A. The agent’s interactions with the environment continues until a terminal state is reached. The returnRt = ∑∞ k=0γkrt+k is the total accumulated return from time stept with discount factorγ∈ (0, 1]. The goal of the agent is to maximize the expected return from each statest [7]. Although reinforcement learning has seen many recent successes across various domains [8–10], the success of its application in automated trading is highly dependent on the reward function (i.e., feedback signal) [11–13]. Previous research [6] proposed a framework for deep reinforcement learning as applied to cryptocurrency market making (DRLMM) and demonstrated its capability to generalize across diﬀerent currency pairs. The focus of this paper is to extend the research of previous work by evaluating how seven diﬀerent reward functions impact the agent’s trading strategy, and to introduce a new framework for DRLMM using price-based events. This paper is structured as follows: section 1, introduction; section 2, related research; section 3, contributions in this paper; section 4, overview of the seven reward functions; section 5, overview of time- and price-based event-driven environments; section 6, our experiment design and methodology; section 7 results and analysis; and section 8, conclusion and future work. 2 Related Work The earliest approaches of applying model-free reinforcement learning to automated trading consist of training an agent to learn a directional single-instrument trading strategy using low-resolution price data and policy methods [11–14]. These approaches ﬁnd risk-based reward functions, such as Downside Deviation Ratio or Diﬀerential Sharpe Ratio, generate more stable out-of-sample results than using actual proﬁt and loss. More recently, researchers have applied reinforcement learning methods to market making. [3] created a framework using value-based model-free methods with high-resolution LOB data from equity markets. Under this framework, an agent takes a step through the environment every time a new tick event occurs. They proposed a novel reward function, which dampens the change in unrealized proﬁt and loss asymmetrically, discouraging the agent from speculation. Although their agent demonstrates stable out-of-sample results, assumptions about latency and executions in the simulator make it unclear how eﬀectively the trained agent would perform in live trading environments. [15] proposed a hierarchical reinforcement learning architecture, where amacro agent views low-resolution data and generates trade signals, and amicro agent accesses the LOB and is responsible for order execution. Under this approach, the macro agent takes a step through the environment with time-based events using one-minute time intervals; the micro agent interacts with its environment in ten-second intervals. Although the agent outperformed their baseline, the lack of inventory constraints on the agent makes the results uncertain for live trading. Previous work [6] proposed a new framework for applying deep reinforcement learning to cryptocurrency market making. The approach consists of using a time-based event approach with one-second snapshots of LOB data (including derived statistics from order and trade ﬂow imbalances and indicators) to train policy-based model-free actor-critic algorithms. The performance of two reward functions were compared on Bitcoin, Ether and Litecoin data from Coinbase exchange. The framework’s ability to generalize was demonstrated by applying trained agents to make markets in diﬀerent currency pairs proﬁtably. This paper extends previous work through comparing ﬁve additional reward functions, and introduce a new approach for the DRLMM framework using price-based events. 3 Contributions The main contributions of this paper are as follows: 1. Analysis of seven reward functions: We extend previous work, apply the DRLMM framework to more reward functions and evaluate the impact on the agent’s market making strategy. The reward function deﬁnitions are explained in section 4. 2 2. Price-based event environment: We propose a new approach to deﬁning an event in the agent’s environment and compare this approach to our original time-based environment framework. The price-based event approach is explained in section 5. 4 Reward Functions The reward function serves as a feedback signal to the agent and therefore directly impacts the agent’s trading strategy in a signiﬁcant way. There are seven reward functions described in this section, which are categorized as proﬁt-and-loss (PnL), goal-oriented, and risk-based approaches. These seven reward functions provide a wide range of feedback signals to the agent, from frequent to sparse. When calculating realized PnL, orders are netted in FIFO order and presented in percentage terms, opposed to dollar value, to ensure compatibility if applied to diﬀerent instruments (all simulation rules are set forth in section 6.3.3). 4.1 PnL-based Rewards Unrealized PnL The agent’s unrealized PnLUPnL provides the agent with a continuous feedback signal (assuming the agent is trading actively and maintains inventory). This reward function is calculated by multiplying the agent’s inventory countInv by the percentage change in midpoint price∆m for time step t. Note, inventory countInv is an integer, because the agent trades with equally sized orders (see section 6.3.3 for the comprehensive list of trading rules in our environment). UPnLt =Invt∆mt (1) where ∆m = mt mt−1 − 1 and Invt = ∑IM n=0Exn t is the total count of executed ordersEx held in inventory and IM is the maximum permitted inventory. In our experiment, we setIM = 10, meaning the agent can execute and hold 10 trades (of equal quantity). Unrealized PnL with Realized Fills The unrealized PnL with realized ﬁllsUPnLwF reward function (referred to aspositional PnLin our previous work) is similar toUPnL , but includes any realized gains or lossesRPnLstep obtained between time stepst and t− 1. This reward function provides the agent with a continuous feedback signal, as well as larger sparse rewards (assuming the agent is trading actively and maintains inventory). UPnLwF t =UPnLt +RPnLstep t (2) where RPnLstep t = [ ExE,short t ExX,cover t − 1 ] + [ ExX,sell t ExE,long t − 1 ] and ExE,long,short t is the average entry price and ExX,sell,cover is the average exit price of the executed order(s) between time stepst and t− 1 for long or short sides. AsymmetricalUnrealizedPnLwithRealizedFills TheasymmetricalunrealizedPnLwithrealized ﬁllsAsym reward function is similar toUPnLwF , but removes any upside unrealized PnL to discourage price speculation and adds a small rebate (i.e., half the spread) whenever an open order is executed to promote the use of limit orders. This reward function is provides both immediate and sparse feedback to the agent (assuming the agent is trading actively and maintains inventory). Our implementation is similar to [3]’s asymmetrically dampened PnL function, but includes the realized gainsRPnLstep t from the current time stept, which improved our agent’s performance in volatile cryptocurrency markets. Asymt =min(0,ηUPnL t) +RPnLstep t +ψt (3) where ψ =Exn t [ mt pbid t − 1] is the numbern of matched (i.e., executed) ordersEx multiplied by half the spread mt pbid t − 1 in percentage terms, andη is a constant value used for dampening. In our experiment, we set η to 0.35. 3 Asymmetrical Unrealized PnL with Realized Fills and CeilingThe asymmetrical unrealized PnL with realized ﬁlls and gains ceilingAsymC reward function can be though of as an extension of Asym, where we add a capκ on the realized upside gainsRPnLstep t and remove the half-spread rebateψt on executed limit orders. The intended eﬀect is thatAsymC is discouraged from long inventory holding periods and price speculation due to the ceiling and asymmetrical dampening. LikeAsym, this reward function provides both immediate and sparse feedback to the agent. AsymCt =min(0,ηUPnL t) +min(RPnLstep t ,κ ) (4) where κ is the eﬀective ceiling on time step realized gains. In our experiment, we setκ to twice the market order transaction fee. Realized PnL Change The change in realized PnL∆RPnL provides the agent with a sparse feedback signal since values are only generated at the end of a round-trip trade. The reward is calculated by taking the diﬀerence in realized PnLRPnL values between time stept and t− 1. ∆RPnLt =RPnLt−RPnLt−1 (5) where RPnL is the agent’s realized PnL at time stept and previous time stept− 1. 4.2 Goal-based Rewards Trade Completion The trade completionTC reward function provides a goal-oriented feedback signal, where a rewardrt∈ [−1, 1] is generated if a objective is obtained or missed. Moreover, if the realized PnL RPnLstep is greater (or less) than a predeﬁned thresholdϖ, the rewardrt is 1 (or -1) otherwise, if RPnLstep is in between the thresholds, the actual realized PnL in percentage terms is the reward. Using this approach, the agent is encouraged to open and close positions with a targeted proﬁt-to-loss ratio, and is not rewarded for longer term price speculation. TCt =    1, if RPnLstep t ≥ϵϖ −1, if RPnLstep t ≤−ϖ RPnLstep t , otherwise (6) whereϵ is a constant used for the multiplier andϖ is a constant used for the threshold. In our experiment, we setϵ to 2 andϖ to the market order transaction fee. 4.3 Risk-based Rewards Diﬀerential Sharpe RatioThe diﬀerential sharpe ratioDSR provides the agent with a risk adjusted continuous feedback signal (assuming the agent is trading actively and maintains inventory). Originally proposed [11] more than 20 years ago, this reward function is the online version of the well known Sharpe Ratio, but can be calculated cheaply with O(1) time complexity, thereby making it the more practical choice for training agents using high-resolution data sets. DSRt = Bt−1∆At− 1 2At−1∆Bt (Bt−1−A2 t−1)3/2 (7) whereAt =At−1 +η(Rt−At−1) andBt =Bt−1 +η(R2 t−Bt−1) and ∆A =R−At−1 and ∆B =R2−Bt−1 and η is a constant value. In our experiment, we useUPnL (as described in section 4.1) forR and setη to 0.01. 5 Event-driven Environments When applying reinforcement learning to ﬁnancial time series, the typical approach to framing the MDP is to have the agent take a step through the environment using a time-based interval. Depending on the 4 trading strategy, the interval of time can be anywhere from seconds to days. For market making, the typical approach is to usetick events (e.g., new, cancel or modify order) as the catalyst for an agent to interact with its environment. The tick-based approach diﬀers from a time-based approach in that the events are irregularly spaced in time, and occur in much greater frequency (more than a magnitude). Although tick-based strategies can yield very impressive results in research, external factors (e.g., partial executions, latency, risk checks, etc.) could limit their practicality in live trading environments. We address the challenge by proposing the use ofprice-based events for market making trading strategies, which partially removes the dependency on these assumptions, enabling the deep reinforcement algorithms to learn non-linear market dynamics across multiple time steps (i.e., not latency-sensitive). 5.1 Time-based Events The time-based approach to event-driven environments consists of sampling the data at periodic intervals evenly spaced in time (e.g., every second, minute, day, etc.). This approach is the most intuitive for trading strategies, since market data is easily available in this format. This experiment takes snapshots of the LOB (and other inputs in our feature space) using one-second time intervals to reduce the number of events in one trading day from millions to 86,400 (the number of seconds in a 24-hour trading day), resulting in less clock time required to train our agent. 5.2 Price-based Events The price-based approach to event-driven environments consists of anevent being deﬁned as a change in midpoint pricem greater or less than a thresholdβ. Following this approach, our data set is further down-sampled from its original form of one-second time intervals into signiﬁcantly fewer price change events that are irregularly spaced in time, thereby decreasing the amount of time required to train the agent per episode (i.e., one trading day). In this experiment, the minimum thresholdβ is set to one basis point (i.e., 0.01%) and use the one-second LOB snapshot data (as described in section 5.1) as the underlying data set. Algorithm 1:Deriving price-based events from high-resolution data sets. Result: Observation and accumulated reward at time t+n β← 0.01% n← 0 mt← pask t +pbid t 2 upper←mt(1 +β) lower←mt(1−β) step←True while step do if upper≤mt+n≤lower then n←n + 1 else step←False end end 6 Experiment In this section, the design and methodology aspects of the experiment are set forth. 6.1 Environment Design 6.1.1 Observation Space The agent’s observation space is represented by a combination of LOB data from the ﬁrst 20 rows, order and trade ﬂow imbalances, indicators, and other hand-crafted indicators. For each observation, we include 5 Action ID 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Bid 0 0 0 4 4 4 4 9 9 9 9 14 14 14 14 Ask 4 9 14 0 4 9 14 0 4 9 14 0 4 9 14 Action 1 No action Action 17 Market order M with sizeInv Table 1: The agent action space with 17 possible actions. The numbers in theBid andAsk rows represent the price level at which the agent’s orders are set to for a given action and are indexed at zero. For example, action 2 indicates the agent open orders are skewed so that its bid is at level zero (i.e., best bid) and its ask is at level ﬁve. 100 window lags. The observation space implementation speciﬁcations are detailed in the appendix (section A.2). It is worth noting that in previous work [6], the non-stationary featureprice level distances to midpoint is included in the agent’s observation space; however, this feature does not inform the agent when using Bitmex data. This is likely due to the tick size at Bitmex being relatively large (0.50) compared to Coinbase exchange (0.01). As a result, the distances of price levels to the midpoint remain unchanged for 99.99% of the time at Bitmex. 6.1.2 Action Space The agent action space consists of 17 possible actions. The idea is that the agent can take four general actions: no action, symmetrically quote prices, asymmetrically skew quoted prices, or ﬂatten the entire inventory. The action space is outlined in Table 1. 6.1.3 Function Approximator The function approximator is a multilayer perceptron (MLP), which is a forward feed artiﬁcial neural network. The architecture of our implementation consists of 3-layer network with a single shared layer for feature extraction, followed by separate actor and critic networks. ReLu activations are used in every hidden layer. Figure 1: Architecture of actor-critic MLP neural network used in the experiments.Gray represents shared layers.Blue represents non-shared layers. The window sizew is 100 and the feature count varies depending on the feature set, as described in table 2. 6.1.4 Reward Functions We implement seven diﬀerent reward functions, as outlined in section 4. 6.2 Agents Two advanced policy-based model-free algorithms are used as market making agents: Advantage Actor- Critic (A2C) and Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO). We use the Stable Baselines [16] implementation for the algorithms. Since both algorithms run on multiple processes, they require nearly the same amount of clock time to train. The same policy network architectures (ﬁgure 1) are used across all experiments, and parameter settings are listed in the appendix (section A.1). 6 6.2.1 Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C) The A2C is an on-policy model-free actor-critic algorithm that is part of policy-based class of RL algorithms. It interacts with the environment asynchronously while maintaining a policyπ(at|st;θ) and estimate of the value functionV (st;θv), and synchronously updates parameters using a GPU, opposed to its oﬀ-policy asynchronous update counterpart A3C [17]. A2C learns good and bad actions through calculating the advantageA(st|at) of a particular action for a given state. The advantage is the diﬀerence between the action-valueQ(st|at) and state valueV (st). The A2C algorithm also uses k-step returns to update both policy and value-function, which results in more stable learning than a vanilla policy gradient, which uses 1-step returns. These features, asynchronous training and k-step returns, make A2C a strong ﬁt for its application to market making, which relies on noisy high-resolution LOB data. The A2C update is calculated as ∇θJ(θ) =∇θ′logπ(at|st;θ′)A(st,at;θ,θυ) (8) whereA(st,at;θ,θυ)istheestimateoftheadvantagefunctiongivenby ∑k−1 i=0 =γirt+i+γkV (st+k,θυ)− V (st,θυ), wherek can vary by an upper boundtmax [17]. 6.2.2 Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) The PPO is an on-policy model-free actor-critic algorithm is part of policy-based class of RL algorithms, even though the policy is indirectly updated through a surrogate function. Like the A2C algorithm, it interacts with the environment asynchronously, makes synchronous parameter updatesθ, and uses k-step returns. However, unlike A2C, PPO uses Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) to reduce the bias of advantages [18] and indirectly optimizes the policyπθ(at|st) through a clipped surrogate function LCLIP that represents the diﬀerence between the new policy after the most recent updateπθ(a|s) and the old policy before the most recent updateπθk(a|s) [19]. This surrogate function removes the incentive for a new policy to depart from the old policy, thereby increasing learning stability. These features, asynchronous training, k-step returns, and surrogate function, make PPO a strong ﬁt for its application to market making, which relies on noisy high-resolution LOB data. The PPO Clip update is calculated as L(s,a,θ k,θ ) = min ( πθ(at|st) πθk (at|st)Aπθk (st,at), clip ( πθ(at|st) πθk (at|st), 1−ϵ, 1 +ϵ ) Aπθk (st,at) ) (9) where ϵ is a hyperparameter constant [19]. 6.3 Methodology 6.3.1 Data Collection LOB data for cryptocurrencies is free to access via WebSocket, but not readily downloadable from exchanges, and therefore requires recording. The data set for this experiment was recorded using Level II tick and trade data from Bitmex exchange1 and persisted into an Arctic TickStore2 for storage. Unlike previous work, where we replayed recorded data to reconstruct the data set, in this experiment we recorded the LOB snapshots in real-time using one-second time intervals. This approach has two main advantages over replaying tick data. First, the computational burden is signiﬁcantly reduced (millions of tick events per trading day) in setting up the experiment, since the LOB no longer needs to be reconstructed to create LOB snapshot data. Second, the data feed is more reﬂective of a production trading system. However, this approach introduced a small amount of latency into the snapshot intervals (less than 1 millisecond), resulting in approximately 86,390 snapshots per a 24 hour trading day, opposed to the actual number of seconds (86,400). We export the recorded data to compressed CSV ﬁles, segregated by trading date using UTC timezone; each ﬁle is approximately 160Mb in size before compression. 1https://www.bitmex.com/ 2https://github.com/man-group/arctic 7 6.3.2 Data Processing Since LOB data cannot be used for machine learning without preprocessing, it is necessary to apply a normalization technique to the raw data set. In this experiment, the data set was normalized using the approach described by [6,20], which transforms the LOB from non-stationary into a stationary feature set, then uses the previous three trading days to ﬁt andz-score normalize the current trading day’s values, and in which data pointzx is σ standard deviations from the mean¯x. After normalizing the data set, outliers (values less than -10 or greater than 10) are clipped. zx = x− ¯x σ (10) 6.3.3 Simulation Rules The environment follows a set of rules to ensure the simulation as realistic as possible. Episode An episode is deﬁned as a 24-hour trading day, using coordinated universal time (UTC) to segregate trading days. At the end of an episode, the agent is required to ﬂatten its entire inventory as a risk control. Transaction Fees Transaction fees for orders are included and are deducted from the realized proﬁt and loss when an order is completed. We use a maker rebate of 0.025% and taker fee of 0.075%, which corresponds to Bitmex’s fee schedule at the time of the experiment. The maker-taker fee structure is crucial to the success of our agent’s market making trading strategy. Risk Limits The agent is permitted to open one order per side (e.g., bid and ask) at a given moment, and can hold up to ten executed orders (i.e., inventory maximumIM = 10) in its inventoryInv. All orders placed by the agent are equal in sizeSz. There are no stop losses imposed on agents. Position Netting If the agent has an open long (short) position and ﬁlls an open short (long) order, the existing long (short) position is netted, and the position’s realized proﬁt and loss is calculated in FIFO order. PnL is calculated in percentage terms. Executions Each time a new order is opened by the agent, the dollar value (e.g., price× quantity) of the order’s price-leveli at the time stept is captured by our simulator, and only reduced when there are buy (sell) transactions at or above (below) the ask (bid). Only after the LOB price-level queue is depleted, can the agent’s order begin to be executed. This environment rule is necessary to help simulate more realistic results. Additionally, the agent can modify an existing open order, even if it is partially ﬁlled, to a new price and reset its priority in the price-level queue. Once the order is ﬁlled completely, the average execution priceExAvg is used for proﬁt and loss calculations and the agent must wait until the next environmentstep to select an actionat (such as replenishing the ﬁlled order in the order book). Slippage If the agent selects decides to ﬂatten its inventory, we account for market impact by applying a ﬁxed slippage percentageξ to each transactionn individually and recursively (e.g.,pslippage n =pslippage n−1 ±ξ), where ξ is 0.01% and± is linked to order direction. We noticed adding slippage to theﬂatten allaction encouraged the agent to use limit orders more frequently. 6.3.4 Training and Testing The market-making agents (A2C and PPO) are trained on 8 days of data (December 27th, 2019 to January 3rd, 2020) and tested on 30 days of data (January 4th to February 3rd, 2020) using perpetual Bitcoin data (instrument: XBTUSD). Each trading day consists of≈86,390 snapshots, which reﬂects roughly one snapshot per second in a 24-hour market (slightly less due to latency in our Python implementation, as noted in section 6.3.1). Each agent’s performance is evaluated on daily and cumulative returns. 8 Feature Sets Combination LOB Quantity Order Flow LOB Imbalances Indicators Set 1 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Set 2 ✓ ✓ Set 3 ✓ ✓ ✓ Set 4 ✓ ✓ Set 5 ✓ ✓ ✓ Set 6 ✓ ✓ Table 2: Combination of features which make up the observation space in diﬀerent experiments. For example, Set 1 uses all available features, whereasSet 2 uses only LOB Imbalances and indicators to represent the environment’s state space. Implementation details for features are outlined in section A.2.1. In each experiment, agents are trained for one million environment steps and episodes restart at a random step in the environment to prevent deterministic learning. The time-based environment takes advantage of action repeats, enabling agents to accelerate learning; we use ﬁve action repeats in our experiment, which results in up to approximately 17,000 agent interactions with the environment per episode. The price-based environment does not use action repeats, since the number of interactions with the environment is already reduced to approximately 5,000 instances per episode. It is important to note that during action repeats or between price events, the agent’s action is only performed once and not repeated; all subsequent repeats in the environment consist of taking “no action,” thereby avoid performing illogical repetitive actions multiple times in a row, such as ﬂattening the entire inventory, or re-posting orders to the same price and losing LOB queue priority. All the experiment parameters are outlined in the appendix (section A.1). 7 Results In this section, the performance of each agent (PPO and A2C) are compared using the cumulative return (in percentage) including transaction costs from the out-of-sample tests. Our benchmark is a simple buy-and-hold strategy, where we assume Bitcoin is purchased on the ﬁrst day of the out-of-sample data and sold on the last day, for a total holding period of 303 consecutive trading days. Although the train-test split of data sets was selected based on data availability and not empirically, the out-of-sample data set coincidentally captures a volatile upward month long trend in January 2020, which enables the benchmark to generate a 16.25%3 return during this period. The best result obtained from our agents is a 17.61%3 return over this same period, using reward function Trade CompletionTC, A2C algorithm, and feature combinationSet 3 for the observation space. Although the A2C algorithm outperformed the PPO agent in terms of greatest return and number of proﬁtable experiments, it is interesting that no clear trends emerged for the best observation space combination, or reward function (other than what does not work). It is worth noting that on January 19, 2020, the price of Bitcoin sold oﬀ more than 5% in less than 200 seconds, and all experiments (agents, reward functions, and observation space combinations) incurred signiﬁcant losses ranging between 5% and 10% as a result of the rapid price drop; if this trading day were excluded, many more experiments would have yielded positive results. All experiment results are outlined in tables 3 and 4. 7.1 Reward Functions We evaluated seven diﬀerent reward functions across a combination of features in the observation space, A2C and PPO reinforcement learning algorithms, and time- and price-based event environments. Each reward function resulted in the agent learning a diﬀerent approach to trading and maintaining its inventory. 3 Not including January 14th, 2020 due to a dropped WebSocket connection 9 7.1.1 PnL-based rewards Reward functions where realized gains are not incorporated in the function’s feedback signal tended to result in nearsighted trading behavior. For example, the unrealized proﬁt-and-loss functionUPnL encouraged the agent to use market orders (e.g., action 17 - ﬂatten inventory) often and executed many trades with short holding periods, resulting in consistent losses due to transaction costs. Reward functions where the feedback signal is sparse tended to result in speculative trading behavior. For example, the change in realized proﬁt function∆RPnL encouraged the agent to hold positions for an extended period, regardless if the agent had large unrealized gains or drawdown. Reward functions where the feedback signal is dampened asymmetrically tended to result in tactical trading while failing to exploit large price movements. For example, the asymmetrical unrealized PnL with realized ﬁlls functionAsym discouraged the agent holding a position for an extended period of time into a price jump, either resulting in closing out a position too early and foregoing proﬁts, or closing out a position during a transitory drawdown period. These types of reward functions are very sensitive to the dampening factorη, and the value 0.35 yielded the most stable out-of-sample performance through a grid search. 7.1.2 Goal-oriented rewards The Trade CompletionTC reward function tended to result in more active trading and inventory management. For example, agent does not hold positions for speculation and quickly closes positions as they approach the upper and lower boundaries of the reward function curve. 7.1.3 Risk-based rewards The Diﬀerential Sharpe RatioDSR reward function produced inconsistent results, and appears to be very sensitive to experiment settings. For example, in some experiments the agents learned very stable trading strategies, while unable to learn at all in other experiments (even with diﬀerent random seeds). Additionally, in certain market conditions the agents were able to learn how to exploit price jumps, while making nonsensical decisions in other market regimes. It is possible that this reward function could have better performance with a thorough parameter grid search. Figure 2: Plots of agent episode performance.Green and red dots represent buy and sell executions, respectively. Left: Example of price-based PPO agent making nearsighted decisions and frequent use of market orders with reward functionUPnL on February 3, 2020.Right: Example of time-based PPO agent trading tactically while failing to exploit price jumps with reward functionAsymC on January 6, 2020. 10 Figure 3: Plots of agent episode performance.Green and red dots represent buy and sell executions, respectively. Left: Example of time-based A2C agent eﬀectively scaling into positions with goal-oriented reward functionTC on January 4, 2020.Right: Example of price-based A2C agent actively trading and exploiting a price jump with reward functionDSR on January 30, 2020. Time-event: Proﬁt-and-Loss (%) 3 A2C PPO Reward Function Set 1 Set 2 Set 3 Set 4 Set 5 Set 6 Set 1 Set 2 Set 3 Set 4 Set 5 Set 6 UPnL (-12.05) (-11.67) (-12.06) (-24.00) (-35.30) (-14.83) (-18.58) (-29.57) (-25.62) (-43.95) (-32.12) (-56.52) UPnLwF 4.53 (-32.97) 11.04 (-4.73) 5.12 (-22.56) (-5.44) (-20.34) 1.56 (-28.20) (-17.37) (-12.68) Asym (-13.09) (-39.02) (-35.41) (-6.96) 2.82 8.28 (-14.00) (-16.61) (-13.00) (-17.97) (-11.57) (-4.69) AsymC 9.30 5.78 3.91 1.24 (-15.92) (-24.71) (-18.04) (-15.49) (-20.5) 2.13 (-13.32) (-38.37) ∆ RPnL (-10.57) (-36.18) (-19.41) (-21.71) (-33.18) (-26.42) (-31.16) (-39.70) (-13.90) (-8.19) (-19.50) (-30.56) TC (-7.22) (-32.49) 17.61 (-7.83) (-0.82) 3.45 (-24.88) (-2.42) (-18.55) (-13.28) (-24.53) (-19.34) DSR (-16.55) (-23.33) (-0.66) 0.18 9.98 (-2.99) (-7.55) (-18.71) (-6.11) (-19.96) (-28.43) (-38.10) Table 3: Total return (in percentage) for out-of-sample data set (January 4, 2020 to March 3, 2020) using the time-based event environment. 7.2 Time-based Events The time-based environments were more diﬃcult for the agents to learn; 15 out of 84 experiments led to proﬁtable outcomes. This is likely due to the training methodology, where agents may beneﬁt from training for more than one million steps. That said, the time-based environment was able to achieve the highest return out of all experiments due to quicker reactions to adverse price movements with the goal-based reward functionTC. 7.3 Price-based Events The price-based environments were easier to learn for the agents; 23 out of 84 experiments led to proﬁtable outcomes. This is likely due to the nature of having the agent take steps in the environment only when the price changes, therefore avoiding some noise in the LOB data. Although this environment approach did not yield the highest score, in general the agent trading patterns appeared to be more stable and less erratic during large price jumps. Price-event: Proﬁt-and-Loss (%) 3 A2C PPO Reward Function Set 1 Set 2 Set 3 Set 4 Set 5 Set 6 Set 1 Set 2 Set 3 Set 4 Set 5 Set 6 UPnL (-31.42) (-28.65) (-38.74) (-0.95) (-0.91) (-43.58) (-31.74) (-25.89) (-21.37) (-46.12) (-16.72) (-32.32) UPnLwF 8.80 (-11.85) (-18.37) (-21.66) (-8.98) (-20.24) (-4.61) (-23.18) 3.92 (-9.92) 3.50 (-23.28) Asym (-27.21) (-2.00) (-1.66) (-0.86) (-14.82) (-8.16) (-16.04) (-12.76) (-15.32) (-6.10) (-15.78) (-10.73) AsymC (-7.12) (-11.58) (-12.24) 11.88 (-14.98) (-14.12) (-19.58) (-15.92) (-2.08) (-12.57) (-8.21) (-15.42) ∆ RPnL 2.65 (-1.62) 6.70 8.74 6.97 6.71 (-6.29) (-6.28) (-13.76) 3.60 (-11.47) (-28.35) TC 6.28 10.66 10.19 6.91 13.43 9.57 5.72 (-23.71) (-29.99) 2.73 11.38 (-16.25) DSR (-27.35) 2.80 12.23 (-1.80) 9.73 (-28.14) (-14.23) (-13.96) (-19.67) (-24.19) 5.74 (-33.25) Table 4: Total return (in percentage) for out-of-sample data set (January 4, 2020 to March 3, 2020) using the price-based event environment. 11 8 Conclusion In this paper, two advanced policy-based model-free reinforcement learning algorithms were trained to learn automated market making for Bitcoin using high resolution Level II tick data from Bitmex exchange. The agents learned diﬀerent trading strategies from seven diﬀerent reward functions and six diﬀerent combinations of features for the agent’s observation space. Additionally, this paper proposes a price-based approach to deﬁning an event in which the agent steps through the environment and demonstrates its eﬀectiveness to solve the automated market making challenge, extending the DRLMM framework [6]. All agents were trained for one million steps across eight days of data and evaluated on 30 out-of-sample days. The A2C algorithm outperformed PPO in terms of cumulative return and number of proﬁtable experiments. An A2C agent with goal-basedTC reward function generated the greatest return for both time- and price-based environments. Several observations made during the execution of this experiment could lead to fruitful future research avenues. First, a formalized methodology for training model-free reinforcement learning in context of ﬁnancial time-series problem. More speciﬁcally, it would be worthwhile to explore the eﬀects of a framework for scoring and selecting which trading days to include in the training data set (e.g., volatility, daily volume, number of price jumps, etc.). Second, with the demonstrated success of more advanced neural network architectures in the supervised learning domain [1,21], it would be interesting to see if convolution, attention, and recurrent neural networks help the agents learn to better exploit price jumps. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Thank you to Toussaint Behaghel for reviewing the paper and providing helpful feedback and Florian Labat for suggesting the use of price-based events in reinforcement learning. Thank you to Mathieu Beucher, Sakina Ouisrani, and Badr Ghazlane for helping execute experiments and collate results. References [1] Zihao Zhang, Stefan Zohren, and Stephen Roberts. Deeplob: Deep convolutional neural networks for limit order books.IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 67(11):3001–3012, Jun 2019. [2] Baron Law and Frederi Viens. Market making under a weakly consistent limit order book model. 2019. [3] Thomas Spooner, John Fearnley, Rahul Savani, and Andreas Koukorinis. Market making via reinforcement learning, 2018. [4] Maxime Morariu-Patrichi and Mikko S. Pakkanen. State-dependent hawkes processes and their application to limit order book modelling, 2018. [5] E. Bacry and J. F Muzy. Hawkes model for price and trades high-frequency dynamics, 2013. [6] Jonathan Sadighian. Deep reinforcement learning in cryptocurrency market making, 2019. [7] Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto.Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The MIT Press, second edition, 2018. [8] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K. Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen, Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wierstra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533, February 2015. [9] David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driessche, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap, Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search.Nature, 529(7587):484–489, jan 2016. 12 [10] OpenAI, :, Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemysław Dębiak, Christy Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, Rafal Józefowicz, Scott Gray, Catherine Olsson, Jakub Pachocki, Michael Petrov, Henrique Pondé de Oliveira Pinto, Jonathan Raiman, Tim Salimans, Jeremy Schlatter, Jonas Schneider, Szymon Sidor, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang, Filip Wolski, and Susan Zhang. Dota 2 with large scale deep reinforcement learning, 2019. [11] Rakesh Agrawal, Paul E. Stolorz, and Gregory Piatetsky-Shapiro, editors.Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD-98), New York City, New York, USA, August 27-31, 1998. AAAI Press, 1998. [12] John Moody and Matthew Saﬀell. Reinforcement learning for trading. InProceedings of the 1998 Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems II, pages 917–923, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1999. MIT Press. [13] John E. Moody and Matthew Saﬀell. Learning to trade via direct reinforcement.IEEE Trans. Neural Networks, 12(4):875–889, 2001. [14] Carl Gold. Fx trading via recurrent reinforcement learning.2003 IEEE International Conference on Computational Intelligence for Financial Engineering, 2003. Proceedings., pages 363–370, 2003. [15] Yagna Patel. Optimizing market making using multi-agent reinforcement learning, 2018. [16] Ashley Hill, Antonin Raﬃn, Maximilian Ernestus, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Rene Traore, Prafulla Dhariwal, Christopher Hesse, Oleg Klimov, Alex Nichol, Matthias Plappert, Alec Radford, John Schulman, Szymon Sidor, and Yuhuai Wu. Stable baselines.https://github.com/hill-a/ stable-baselines, 2018. [17] Volodymyr Mnih, Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Tim Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning, 2016. [18] John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael I. Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High- dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation.CoRR, abs/1506.02438, 2015. [19] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms, 2017. [20] Avraam Tsantekidis, Nikolaos Passalis, Anastasios Tefas, Juho Kanniainen, Moncef Gabbouj, and Alexandros Iosiﬁdis. Using deep learning for price prediction by exploiting stationary limit order book features, 2018. [21] James Wallbridge. Transformers for limit order books, 2020. 13 A Appendix A.1 Agent Conﬁgurations The parameters used to train agents in all experiments. # Parameter Value 1 Action repeats 5 2 Window size 100 3 Transaction fees Limit -0.025% / Market 0.075% 4 Max positions 10 5 Gamma γ 0.99 6 Learning rate α 3e-4 7 No. of LOB levels 20 8 K-steps 256 (PPO) / 40 (A2C) 9 Training steps 1,000,000 10 Action space 17 11 Dampening 0.35 12 GAE λ 0.97 13 Price-event threshold 0.01% 14 Optimizer Adam (both A2C and PPO) Table 5: Parameters for experiments. A.2 Observation Space As set forth in our previous work [6], the agent’s observation space is a combination of three sub-spaces: the environment state space, consisting of LOB, trade and order ﬂow snapshots with a window sizew; the agent state space, consisting of handcrafted risk and position indicators; and the agent action space, consisting of a one-hot vector of the agent’s latest action. In this experiment,w is set to 100. A.2.1 Environment State Space LOB Quantity The dollar value of each price level in the LOB, whereχ is the dollar value at LOB leveli at timet, applied to bothbid and ask sides. Since we use the ﬁrst 20 price levels of the LOB, this feature is represented by a vector of 40 values. χbid,ask t,i = I−1∑ i=0 pbid,ask t,i ×qbid,ask t,i (11) where pbid,ask is the price andqbid,ask is the quantity at LOB leveli for bid and ask sides, respectively. LOB Imbalances The order imbalancesι∈ [−1, 1] are represented by the cumulative dollar value for each price leveli in the LOB. Since we use the ﬁrst 20 price levels of the LOB, this feature is represented by a vector of 20 values. ιt,i = χask,q t,i −χbid,q t,i χask,q t,i +χbid,q t,i (12) Order Flow The sum of dollar values for cancelC, limitL, and marketM orders is captured between each LOB snapshot. Since we use the ﬁrst 20 price levels of the LOB, this feature is represented by a 14 vector of 120 values, 60 per each side of the LOB. Cbid,ask t,i =pbid,ask t,i ×qbid,ask t,i (13) Lbid,ask t,i =pbid,ask t,i ×qbid,ask t,i (14) Mbid,ask t,i =pbid,ask t,i ×qbid,ask t,i (15) where q is the number of units available at pricep at LOB leveli. Trade Flow Imbalances The Trade Flow ImbalancesTFI ∈ [−1, 1] indicator measures the magnitude of buyer initiatedBI and and seller initiatedSI transactions over a given windoww. Since we use 3 diﬀerent windowsw (5, 15, and 30 minutes), this feature is represented by a vector of 3 values. TFI t = UPt−DWNt UPt +DWNt (16) where UPt = ∑w n=0BIn and DWNt = ∑w n=0SIn. Custom RSI The relative strength index indicator (RSI) measures the magnitude of prices changes over a given windoww. This custom implementationCRSI∈ [−1, 1] scales the data so that it does not require normalization, even though we do use the scaled z-score values in our experiment. Since we use 3 diﬀerent windowsw (5, 15, and 30 minutes), this feature is represented by a vector of 3 values. CRSIt = gaint−|losst| gaint +|losst| (17) where gaint = ∑w n=0 ∆mn if ∆mn > 0 else 0 and losst = ∑w n=0 ∆mn if ∆mn < 0 else 0 and ∆mt = mt mt−1 − 1. Spread The spreadςt is the diﬀerence between the best bidpbid and best askpask. This feature is represented as a scalar. ςt =pbid t −pask t (18) Change in Midpoint The change in midpointδmt is the log diﬀerence in midpoint prices between time stept and t− 1. This feature is represented as a scalar. δmt = logmt− logmt−1 (19) Reward The rewardr from the environment, as described in section 4. A.2.2 Agent State Space Net Inventory Ratio The agent’s net inventory ratioυ∈ [−1, 1] is the inventory countInv represented as a percentage of the maximum inventoryIM. This feature is represented as a scalar. υt = Invlong−Invshort IM (20) Realized PnL The agent’s realized proﬁt-and-lossRPnL is the sum of realized and unrealized proﬁt and losses. In this experiment, theRPnL is scaled by a scalar valueρ, which represents the daily PnL target. 15 Unrealized PnL The agent’s current unrealized PnLUPnLt is the unrealized PnL across all open positions. The unrealized PnL feature is represented as a scalar, containing the net oflong and short positions. UPnLt = [ pAvg,short t mt − 1 ] + [ mt pAvg,long t − 1 ] (21) where pAvg is the average price of the agent’slong or short position andm is the midpoint price at time t. Open Order Distance to MidpointThe agent’s open limit order distance to midpoint is the distance ζ of the agent’s openbid and ask limit ordersL to the midpoint pricem at timet. The feature is represented as a vector with 2 values. ζlong,short t = Lbid,ask t mt − 1 (22) Order Completion Ratio Order completionη∈ [−1, 1] is a custom indicator that incorporates an order’s relative position in the LOB queueκ and partial executionsEx relative to the order sizeSz. The feature is represented as a vector with 2 value, one perlong and short sides. ηlong,short t = Exlong,short t −κlong,short t κlong,short t +Szlong,short t (23) Agent Action Space The agent’s action space is included in the agent state space. It is represented by a one-hot vector over the action space outlined in table 1. 16