arXiv:2005.06610v2 [cs.CY] 2 Sep 2024 Pump and Dumps in the Bitcoin Era: Real Time Detection of Cryptocurrency Market Manipulations Massimo La Morgia, Alessandro Mei, Francesco Sassi, and Jul inda Stefa Department of Computer Science, Sapienza University of Rom e, Italy Email: {lamorgia, mei, sassi, stefa }@di.uniroma1.it If you cite this paper, please use the International Confere nce on Computer Communications and Networks (ICCCN) refere nce: Massimo La Morgia, Alessandro Mei, Francesco Sassi, and Jul inda Stefa. 2020. Pump and Dumps in the Bitcoin Era: Real Time Detection of Cryptocurrency Market Manipulations. In 2020 29th International Conference on Computer Communic ations and Networks (ICCCN) . 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCCN49398.2020.9209660 Abstract—In the last years, cryptocurrencies are increasingly popular . Even people who are not experts have started to inve st in these securities and nowadays cryptocurrency exchanges pr ocess transactions for over 100 billion US dollars per month. Howe ver , many cryptocurrencies have low liquidity and therefore the y are highly prone to market manipulation schemes. In this paper , we perform an in-depth analysis of pump and dump schemes organized by communities over the Internet. We observe how these communities are organized and how they car ry out the fraud. Then, we report on two case studies related to pump and dump groups. Lastly, we introduce an approach to detect the fraud in real time that outperforms the current st ate of the art, so to help investors stay out of the market when a pump and dump scheme is in action. Index Terms—Cryptocurrencies, Fraud Detection I. I NTRODUCTION Pump and dump is a market manipulation fraud that consists in artiﬁcially inﬂating the price of an owned security and th en selling it at a much higher price to other investors [1], [2]. This fraud is as old as the stock market. One of the most famous pump and dumps of Wall Street history happened in the late ’20. The security was the RCA Corporation, the manufacturer of the ﬁrst all electric phonograph. At that time, one of the hottest pieces of technology. The fraud was organized by the ”Radio Pool”, a group of investors that artiﬁcially pumped RCA to the incredible price of $549, and then dumped the shares making the price plummet to under $10. A large number of investors lost all of their savings in this operati on. Communication was done through the radio, tabloids, and word of mouth. In the Bitcoin era, pump and dumps are more vital than ever. Indeed, communication is done through the Internet and the Web, and the targets are the hectic and almos t non-regulated markets of cryptocurrencies. The most common way to buy cryptocurrencies is through a cryptocurrency exchange. Exchanges convert ﬁat currenci es into cryptocurrencies, and cryptocurrencies between them - selves. A cryptocurrency exchange works exactly like the tradi- tional stock exchange. There are now hundreds of cryptocur- rencies, the market is not strictly regulated, and prices ar e easy to manipulate. So, pump and dumps on these securities are incredibly common, with public groups in the Internet, rules, and precise and complex organization. One of the ﬁrst cases known to the public involves cryptocurrency prophet John McAfee, who is one of the defendant in a complicated case of alleged pump and dump [3]. The suit is linked to an investigation of the US SEC, a US ﬁnancial regulator. Now, pump and dumps are led by a large number of self-organized groups over the Internet, and the phenomenon is viral though still not very well known. In this work we describe the pump and dump phenomenon in the cryptocurrency ecosystem. We present two relevant ca se studies. In the ﬁrst, we perform a longitudinal analysis of the gathered pump and dumps on 4 different exchanges. In the second, we focus on Big Pump Signal, the biggest group we found in our research. Big Pump Signal is a group that works on Binance, able to generate a volume of transactions of 5, 176 BTC in a single operation, higher than the 534 BTC volume generated together by all the pump and dumps scheme arranged on Cryptopia, Y oBit and Bittrex according to [4]. Lastly, we introduce a novel detection algorithm tha t works in real-time. The algorithm is not just based on the detection of the abrupt rise of the price. The fundamental id ea is to leverage the abnormal growth of so-called market buy orders, buy orders that are used when the investor wants to buy extremely quickly, whatever the price is. Just like the coll uding members of a pump and dump group when the pump starts. We show that our real-time detector outperforms the current state of the art [5] in a signiﬁcant way, improving the expect ed speed of the detection from 30 minutes to 25 seconds and, at the same time, the F1-score from 60.5% to 92%. II. P UMP AND DUMP GROUPS Pump and dumps are performed by self-organized groups of people over the Internet. These groups arrange the frauds ou t in the open on the Telegram [6] instant messaging platform or Discord server [7], thus everyone can join the groups withou t prior authorization. During our longitudinal research, fr om July 2017 to January 2019, we joined and daily followed all the activities performed by more than 100 groups. Being member of the groups allowed us to retrieve and collect one of a kind information such as internal group organization, t he phases of pump and dump arrangement and how the groups attract outside investors inside the market. Table I shows some metrics and characteristics of 8 representative groups we joined. In the following section, we report on the ﬁndings we discovered about these communities. TABLE I METRICS OF PUMP AND DUMP GROUPS Group name Telegram Users Discord Users Hierarchy Main Exch ange PnD (#) avg. V olume ($) Big Pump Signal 72, 097 104,830 afﬁliation Binance 32 7,245,437 Trading Crypto Guide 91, 725 — vip Binance 17 2,442,923 Crypto Coin B 166, 689 — vip Binance 6 5,733,637 Crypto4Pumps 11, 716 — vip Bittrex 47 491,395 Pump King Community 7, 771 — vip Bittrex 18 931,960 Crypto Family Pumps 4, 449 5,299 free Cryptopia 28 23,800 Luxurious pumps 6, 020 — free Y oBit 16 4,997 AltTheWay 7, 333 — free Y oBit 89 700 Fig. 1. Screenshot of a Discord Info room, where it is explain ed how the afﬁliation system works. A. Group organization Pump and dumps groups have leaders (or admins) that administrate the group, and a hierarchy of members. If a member is higher in the hierarchy, he gets the message that starts the pump by revealing the target cryptocurrency a few moments earlier than lower ranked members. This way, the member has higher probability to buy at a lower price and make more money out of the pump and dump operation. The advantage in terms of time of being at a higher level is usuall y between 0.5 and 1 second with respect to the next level, and the maximum advantage is in the interval between 3 and 8 seconds. Most groups are organized as an afﬁliation system —climbing the hierarchy is possible by bringing new people to the group. The larger is the number of new members brought to the group, the higher the ranking. Fig. 1 shows the afﬁliat ion system of Big Pump Signal group and the rank’s beneﬁts. Some groups have a simpler hierarchy with only two levels: Common members and VIP members. In these groups, to become a VIP the user has to pay a fee, usually in Bitcoins, in the range of 0.01 to 0.1 Bitcoins (from approximately 71 to 710 USD at current exchange rates 1). In the pump and dump groups, the admins are the only people that take decisions. W e saw only in rare cases the admins running polls to agree on the hour of the pump or the exchange to use, and never to decide the target cryptocurrency. B. Group communication To communicate and organize the pump, the groups typ- ically use Discord servers and Telegram channels. Telegram 1Data retrieved on January 10, 2020 is an instant messaging service, and a Telegram channel is a special kind of a chat in which only the owner of the channel can broadcast public messages to all the members. Discord is a V oIP and text chat service. It was originally designed for video gaming communities, but nowadays it is widely used by other communities as well. Discord offers the possibility to create macro sections and host multiple chat rooms. Each section has its own topic. In o ur analysis we have found that all the pump and dump Discord servers are organized in roughly the same fashion, with the following sections: • Info & How-T os : These two sections are like an elec- tronic bulletin board with pinned messages. Both sections are composed of several rooms that contain only one or very few messages. The rooms of the Info section usually contain the rules of the group, the news about the group, how the afﬁliation system works (Fig. 1), and the F.A.Q.. The rooms of the How-Tos section contain manuals related to the cryptocurrency world or the best practices to participate in a pump and dump operation. • Invite: This section contains rooms where the bots of the server live. Here, the users can query the bots in order to generate invite links to bring new members or to know the number of people that joined the server by using their invite links. • Signal: This is the core section of the group, in which only the admins can write. Inside this section there are usually two rooms: The pump-signal, and the trading- signal. In the ﬁrst room, the admins share info about the next pump and dump operation. In the second, they share trading advices. • Discussion: in this section, there are rooms covering different topics where the group members can freely chat. Usually, the messages written in the news and in the pump- signal rooms are broadcasted to the Telegram channel as well . C. Organization of the pump and dump operations The levels of activity of the many pump and dump groups in the Internet differ considerably. The most active ones perf orm roughly one pump and dump operation a day. Less active groups perform one operation a week. Other groups perform operations only when they believe the market conditions are good. The steps during the operation are typically as follow s: Fig. 2. Messages that indicate the start of a pump and dump ope ration on the Streamr DA TAcoin (on the left) and the NevaCoin (on the ri ght). • A few days or hours before the operation the admins announce that the pump and dump will happen and communicate which is the exchange that will be used, the exact starting time of the operation, and whether the operation will be FFA (Free for All—everybody gets the message at the same time) or Ranked (VIPs and members of higher levels in the hierarchy get the starting message before the other members). • The announce is repeated several times, more frequently as the starting time of the operation gets closer. • When the pump starts, the target cryptocurrency is re- vealed to the members of the group. The exact time depends on the position in the hierarchy. Usually, the name of the cryptocurrency is contained in an image that is obfuscated in a way that only humans can read it quickly. Fig. 2 shows an example, a message that instructs to start a pump and dump operation on the NevaCoin. The idea behind the obfuscation is to make it hard for bots to parse the message with OCR techniques and start the market operations faster than humans. • Lastly, a few seconds after the start of the pump, the admins share a tweet or a news and invite all the members of the group to spread the information that the price of the cryptocurrency is rising. This is done in dedicated chat boxes, forums, and Twitter. The goal of this activity is to create so-called FOMO (Fear of Missing Out) of a good opportunity of investment and attract investors from outside the group. III. C ASE STUDY A. The groups, the pump and dumps, and the exchanges In this section, we describe an in-depth investigation on th e cryptocurrencies and the exchanges used for the pump and dumps. We do so in a period of time that goes from July 2017 to January 2019. In this period, we found more than 100 groups, by keyword search (e.g.: ”Pump”, ”Dump”, ”Signal”) on Telegram, Twitter, Reddit, BitcoinTalk [8], or manually extracting information from CoinDetect [9] or the P ADL [10] Android app. From this set, we select 19 different groups, since the other are no longer active, only broadcast event from oth er groups, or the number of users was quite small. Reading the Telegram channel history of these groups, we found 343 pump and dump operations carried out on 4 exchanges. For all the pump and dumps collected, we retrieved the historical tradi ng data, as much detailed as we can, scraping the exchanges’ website or via APIs. Analyzing our data, we found that the scheme involved 194 different cryptocurrencies, only 143 of which are still listed by the Coinmarketcap site. It is quite common that coins disappear from the cryptocurrency world. Indeed, by analyzing the volumes in the last 24 hours of the cryptocurrencies that are still active, we found out that 112 of them moved less than $1 million in total in all the exchanges in which they are listed. Actually, 46 of them moved less than $10, 000. Also, 100 of the coins used for pump and dumps are below 20 million dollars of market capitalization, with 34 of them being below 1 million. The ﬁrst asset with less than 20 million dollars is at the 220th position of the cryptocurrency ranking by market capitalization. So, the targets of pump and dumps have a very low net worth value and a huge amount of circulating supply. Lastly, we ﬁnd that 99 cryptocurrencies out of 141 are priced below 0.4 dollars. As such, with a relatively small investment, pump and dump groups can buy huge amounts of shares and easily increase their price in the pump phase of the fraud. Y oBit is the exchange where most of pump and dump op- erations happen, while Binance is the most popular exchange among all groups. Each pump and dump group tends to use the same exchange. Indeed, if the groups jumped from one exchange to the other, the members would be forced to move their assets accordingly and pay the related fees. The pump and dumps on currencies with higher market capitalization are typically carried out on Binance, the ones with lower market capitalization on Cryptopia. In particular, the med ian market capitalization of the cryptocurrencies for exchang e is $25, 574, 192 for Binance, $2, 619, 703 for Y oBit,$2, 512, 627 for BitTrex, and $144, 373 for Cryptopia. Finally, we notice that pump and dump schemes do not affect only the target exchange. Indeed, the cryptocurrenc y markets, like the real stock exchange markets, are constant ly under monitoring of arbitrage bots that look for proﬁtable t rad- ing. Arbitrage is a practice that consists of taking advanta ge of the price difference between two markets by buying in one market and selling in another market at a higher price. Some seconds after a pump and dump starts, the price of the coin under attack quickly increases its price. The price spi ke triggers the arbitrage bots that start to buy and sell the cur rency on a different market or other trading pairs. Table II report s the values during the pump and dump carried out on the Streamr DA TAcoin (DA TA) of the 29th of September 2018 for different exchanges. As we can see, the biggest transaction volumes and the highest prices are reached on Binance. Indeed, it was the exchange used for the operation. However, also the other exchanges record a rise of the price in the same time range. TABLE II EFFECT OF ARBITRAGE . Trading pair Exchange V olume ($) Open ($) Max($) DA TA/BTC Binance 5, 732, 909 0 .0354 0 .0916 DA TA/ETH Binance 568, 722 0 .0353 0 .0924 DA TA/BTC Bitﬁnex 103, 318 0 .0353 0 .0564 DA TA/ETH Bitﬁnex 62, 640 0 .0333 0 .0552 DA TA/USD Bitﬁnex 175, 274 0 .0349 0 .0551 DA TA/BTC HitBTC 27, 502 0 .0359 0 .0564 DA TA/ETH HitBTC 5, 084 0 .0330 0 .0735 DA TA/USDT Gateio 31, 357 0 .0347 0 .0600 B. The Big Pump Signal group With more than 104, 000 members on Discord and more than 72, 0002 members on Telegram, Big Pump Signal (BPS) started in December 2017 over Telegram and is arguably the largest pump and dump public community in the Internet. Reading the pump announcements on the Telegram channel of Big Pump Signal, we found 32 pumps, 27 of which carried out on Binance (see Figure 3) and 5 on Cryptopia. Throughout all their pump and dump operations, the group moved 82, 369, 542 USD globally, if we count the ﬁrst 6 minutes of every pump, and 267, 482, 773 USD globally, if we count the whole coin oscillation due to the pump. Their most successfully pump and dump was organized on May 10, 2018, when they targeted the SingularDTV (SNGLS) alt- coin. In this operation, the value of the SNGLS coins sharply oscillated for more than 9 hours and recorded a volume of trades of 5, 176 Bitcoin ( 36, 750, 000 USDs). BPS has an afﬁliation hierarchy, the highest level of which is achieva ble after inviting 250 new members. In ranked pump and dump operations, the afﬁliation guarantees the members to recei ve the signal 3 seconds before the unranked members. The Big Pump Signalers have, since the beginning, promoted the grou p in many ways: Advertisement on main social networks like Twitter and Quora, through the afﬁliation systems, and, by organizing lotteries inside the groups with prizes in Bitco in or Ethereum. Thanks to the aggressive marketing campaigns and the hype on the cryptocurrencies in late 2017, the Big Pump Signal group has grown extremely fast reaching around 200, 000 members in January 2018. 1) Organization of the BPS operations: The organization of the BPS pump and dumps steadily improved with time. In the beginning, they operated on a single coin, while double trad ing on the Bitcoin and Ethereum target pairs. The target coin was revealed to the members in plain text. They were also given a target price with the goal of pushing the pump up to the target so to attract external investors and, afterwards, pr oﬁt by selling to them. However, this strategy was the opposite of being optimal for the admins: They noticed that greedy group members started to sell below the target price value, forbidding the pump and dump operation to reach the highest peaks. So, they stopped indicating the target price and carr ied 2Data retrieved on January 2019 Fig. 3. Big Pump Signal pump and dumps the purchasing power in a single trading pair to get maximum gain. Successively, the admins discovered the presence of bots inside the channel. The bots were very fast at buying, much faster than the group members. To mitigate their effect, the admins changed the pump and dump signal–from a text, to an obfuscated image–so that it was extremely difﬁcult for bots to read. As the group grew bigger, the admins started targeting also cryptocurrencies with medium market capitalization. The admins claim that the choice of the coin is typically based on technical analysis. They also claim to re-pump the cryp- tocurrencies by collaborating with a small investment ﬁrm. The investment ﬁrm is thought to be frequently involved in or to organize pump and dumps on her own. An example are the pump and dumps of the Monetha coin (MTH) and the WePower (WPR) coin on the Binance platform on September 17, 2018. Our analysis shows that BPS typically chooses cryp- tocurrencies that have had a steady price and news coverage in the recent past. They exploit the news coverage to generat e interest and attract external investors. An example are the retweets of news from the fake twitter account of John McAfee (@oﬁciallmcafee, and the still reachable @TheJohnMcafee) belonging to the admins of the group. 2) Analysis of the pump phase: The BPS group moves large volumes of Bitcoins in each operation. We analyse one of these operations to investigate in depth the pump phase, the most interesting step of a pump and dump operation. Figure. 4 depicts a second by second zoomed image on the very ﬁrst 30 seconds of the pump on the OAX cryptocurrency. The upper (blue line) in the ﬁgure represents the buy volume, whi le the (lower) orange one the sell volume. We observe that the volume of the buys and sells in the ﬁrst seconds is very close t o zero. Then, there are two buy peaks (blue line in Figure 4) of approximately 65 Bitcoins (sec. 19) and 26 Bitcoins (sec. 21) respectively. The two peaks correspond to the actions of VIP s and the common members—a normal behavior, considering that the group has a ranked policy. We also observe a peak on the sell volumes (orange line in Figure 4) of almost 10 Fig. 4. Pump on the OAX Bitcoins on the moment of the ﬁrst buy peak, the 19th second. Considering that group members are still buying and that the reaction time for outsiders is too short, this sudden big sel l volume is abnormal. In fact, there can be only two possible actors to sell their shares: the bots and the admins. In order to discern among the two we need to investigate the single transactions. Our analysis shows that, as the price rises, t here are many small sell operations at incremental values, proba bly by the arbitrage bots. Then, we observe a last single shot transaction for over 4 Bitcoins when the OAX coin reaches the trading value of 0.00012 Bitcoins, probably done by the admins of the group. We believe they have operated through a sell limit trade order—a conditional order triggered when the price of a trading pair reaches/out-tops a given value. O f course, the same order could have been placed also by an outside investor. However, we believe that a sell limit for t hat amount and that overcomes the initial price of the 41% is most likely by an insider. IV. P UMP AND DUMP DETECTION A. The idea As we know, standard investors are the victims of pump and dump schemes. When they see that the price of a cryp- tocurrency rise, they can believe it can be a good investment opportunity. This is not the case when a pump and dump scheme is in action—the rise does not have economical grounds, it is just market manipulation. To protect investo rs, it is important to understand if a pump and dump scheme can be detected, and how fast it can be done. This is the goal of this section. To better understand how pump and dumps can be detected, it is important to have some basic notions. The pending order s for a cryptocurrency, like any other security, are listed in the order book for that cryptocurrency. The book is a sorted double list of sell (ask) and buy (bid) orders not yet ﬁlled. The asks are sorted from the lowest price to the highest, the bids are sorted from the highest to the lowest. The fastest way to buy on the market is through a buy market order . A buy market order looks up the order book and ﬁlls all the pending asks until the requested amount of currency is reached. Although a market order is completed almost instantly, the price diffe rence between the ﬁrst and the last ask needed to ﬁll the order can be very high, especially in markets with low liquidity, and s o the price can rise considerably. A more careful investor wou ld use limit buy orders , orders to buy a security at no more than a speciﬁc price. Buy market orders are not frequent in normal transactions and are typically used by investors that need a fast execution. Just like the members of pump and dump groups in action. Our idea is to use this pattern, along with other information about volume and price, to detect when a pump and dump scheme starts. B. The data As highlighted by Kamps et al. [5], it does not exist a dataset of conﬁrmed pump and dumps in the literature. So we need to build one for the purpose of this work. Starting from the 19 groups we joined, we select only the pump and dump schemes carried out on Binance. We made this choice for two main reasons: The ﬁrst one is that Binance exposes APIs [11] that allow to retrieve every single transaction in the whole hist ory of a trading pair, differently from other exchanges that all ow to retrieve data with a transaction granularity only for few ho urs back. The second is that pump and dumps on other exchanges are usually carried out by groups with few active members and economic resource, consequently they are forced to targ et alt-coin that have almost no volume of transactions for days before the scheme. Thus, we believe that pump and dumps carried out on Binance are the most interesting and challeng ing to detect. From the initial set of pump and dumps, we select all the events that were carried out on Binance. At the end we get 104 pump and dump events, arranged by 12 different groups. Doing so, we retrieve the historical trading data fo r 7 days before and after the event, for a total of 14 days. Some pump and dumps were carried out a few days apart on the same alt-coin, so we discarded duplicate days. In the end, we have about 900 days of trading. The data are a list of trade records: V olume, price, operation type (buy or sell), and th e UNIX timestamps. The trades are provided by Binance in a compressed way, this means that a record belonging to the same order at the same price have aggregated quantities, and a single order that is ﬁlled at different prices is splitted i nto more records. Unfortunately, the Binance APIs do not tell the kind of order (e.g.: Market, Limit, Stop Loss ) placed by the buyer, so we need to infer this information. To do this, we can use the fact that these kind of orders are ﬁlled in a single shot, and so we can aggregate the trades ﬁlled at the same millisecond as a single one. Since we do not know the original nature of these orders we deﬁne them as rush orders . A problem of this inference method is that it misses the orders that are completely ﬁlled by the ﬁrst ask of the order book. Still, we believe that we have a good witness on the abrupt rise of market orders even with this approximation. As a contributi on to the community we will publicly release this dataset. C. Features and classiﬁers To detect the start of the fraudulent scheme, we analyze several kinds of features and use them to feed two different classiﬁers: Random Forest and Logistic Regression. A Ran- dom Forest [12] is an ensemble learning method consisting of a collection of decision tree classiﬁers such that each tr ee depends on the values of a random vector sampled indepen- dently, each tree casts a vote, and the prediction is the most popular class among all the votes. Logistic regression [13] is a type of regression analysis used to calculate the outcome of dependent variables based on one or more independent variables estimating the parameters of a logistic model, wh ere the value of the predictor variable is between 0 and 1. We built our features upon the idea of [14] for the detection of Denial of Service attacks through an adaptive threshold. Since in o ur case we do not want to ﬁnd a threshold, we restyle their idea in this way: We split our data in chunks of s seconds, and we deﬁne a moving window of size w hours. We conduct several experiments with different sets of fea- tures and settings regarding the window and the chunk sizes. Since our goal was to build a classiﬁer able to detect a pump and dump scheme as quickly as possible from the moment it starts, it is crucial that the chunk size is reasonably sho rt. At the end of our study, we found that the best conﬁguration, in terms of F1-score, was achieved with a chunk size of 25 seconds and a window size of 7 hours, while the fastest one with a chunk size of 5 seconds and a windows size of 50 minutes. Following are reported the ﬁnal features we used: • StdRushOrders and A vgRushOrders: Moving standard deviation and average of volume of rush orders in each chunk of the moving window. • StdTrades: Moving stardard deviation of the number of trades, both buy and sell. • StdV olumes and A vgV olumes: Moving standard devia- tion and average of volume of trades in each chunk of the moving window. • StdPrice and A vgPrice: Moving standard deviation and average of closing price. • A vgPriceMax and A vgPriceMin: Moving average of maximal and minimum price in each chunk. Once a pump is detected we pause our classiﬁer for 30 minutes to avoid multiple alerts for the same event. D. The importance of rush orders In this section, we explore how the rush orders are important to detect the start of a pump and dump operation. Fig. 6 shows the number of rush orders during a pump and dump scheme on the VIBE cryptocurrency on September 9th, 2018. As we can see, rush orders are rare during the hours before the pump and suddenly grow just at the start of the scheme. The goal of this experiment is to understand if the rush orders are an effective feature to detect the start of a pump and dump scheme and ﬁnd a threshold beyond which classify the growth as anomalous. To learn the threshold, we proceed as follows: We compute the StdRushOrder feature as described Fig. 5. Precision recall curve for train and test sets. Fig. 6. Rush orders during a pump and dump scheme. in Section IV -C, then we label each chunk as True if the timestamp of the pump and dump signal falls into the chunk time range, False otherwise. We randomly split our dataset i nto the train ( 50%) and test ( 50%) sets, we compute the precision- recall curve for the train set, and we pick a threshold that is a tradeoff between the precision and the recall. Then we evalu ate the same metrics at the picked threshold for the test set. The result of this experiment is shown in Fig. 5. We choose as valu e for the threshold (the black dashed line in the ﬁgure) 30.32 that provides a precision of 91.1% and a recall of 89.9% on the train set (the blue line). As we can see, the same threshol d value provides a very similar score on the test set too (the re d dashed line). Given these good results, we can assume that th e rush orders feature is an extremely good parameter to evalua te the start of a pump and dump. E. The results Although we retrieved 2 weeks of data for each pump and dump scheme, initially we use only 3 days—the day of the fraud, the day before, and the day after—since in this timeframe we can assume that no other frauds are present in the dataset. We noticed that, among the market manipulation s we collected, different groups arrange schemes on the same alt-coin a few days apart. Moreover, we are aware that some groups delete the pump and dump signal from the chat history and that there do exist groups that we are not able to monitor TABLE III CLASSIFIERS PERFORMANCE . Classiﬁer Chunk size Precision Recall F1 Kamps (Initial) 1 Hour 15.6% 96.7% 26.8% Kamps (Balanced) 1 Hour 38.4% 93.5% 54.4% Kamps (Strict) 1 Hour 50.1% 75.0% 60.5% RF ( 5 Folds) 5 Sec 92.4% 78 .4% 84 .0% RF ( 10 Folds) 5 Sec 92.2% 77 .5% 82 .7% RF ( 5 Folds) 15 Sec 91.3% 84 .4% 87 .7% RF ( 10 Folds) 15 Sec 91.1% 83 .3% 87 .0% RF ( 5 Folds) 25 Sec 93.7% 91 .3% 91 .8% RF ( 10 Folds) 25 Sec 93.1% 91 .4% 92 .0% TABLE IV FEATURE IMPORTANCE . Feature Importance StdRushOrders 0.401 StdTrades 0.202 AvgRushOrders 0.153 AvgV olumes 0.097 StdV olumes 0.076 StdPrice 0.026 AvgPrice 0.014 AvgPriceMax 0.014 AvgPriceMin 0.011 such as groups that communicate in Chinese or Russian or in private groups. Since our dataset consists of 104 pump and dumps, we do not split the dataset into the standard train tes t sets, but we performed a 5 and 10 folds cross-validation, in order to get a more reliable evaluation of the performance. For the Random Forest classiﬁer we use a forest of 200 trees, each leaf node must have at least 6 samples, and a maximum depth of 4 for each tree. For the Logistic Regression classiﬁer, we used the BFGS solver with a regularization strength of C equals to 1. Since we notice that the classiﬁers based on the Random Forest algorithm perform slightly better than the on es based on the Logistic Regression in all the chunk size, for the Logistic Regression model we report in Tab III only the results with a chunk size of 25 seconds. Moreover, from the results of the Random Forest classiﬁer, it is possible to not e the relationship between the chunk size and the performance of the classiﬁers. Indeed, while the precision is pretty sta ble in all the time frames, the recall increases as we increase th e chunk size dimension. In Tab IV we list the importance, computed with the Gini Impurity, of each feature used with the Random Forest classi - ﬁer. As we can see, the best features are the ones based on the rush orders and the number of trades. Once our methodology has been ﬁnalized, we trained a 25 second detector classiﬁer with the 3 day dataset and used the remaining part as test looking for other suspect events. After the evaluation, we g ot 29 events that we are not able to link to evidence. We believe that virtually all of them are pump and dumps, whose evidence has been deleted or organized by groups that may not be Fig. 7. DLT candlestick chart public. Fig. 7, for example, shows the candlestick chart for the Agrello coin (DLT), from May 8 to 13. The event in the center is a pump and dump for which we have evidence, the other two are suspects detected by the algorithm. As you can see, the behavior is almost the same, including the fact that the currency goes back to the normal price quickly (the dump). Our classiﬁer, based on the detection of the abnormal presen ce of rush orders and not just on the price of the security, does a good job in detecting pump and dumps and suspect events that, anyways, the mindful investor wants to stay away from. The classiﬁer is also very fast—in all the cases the pump and dump is detected within a timeframe of 5 seconds and, in some cases, even before the start of the pump when there is pre-pump activity in action. F . Comparison with other pump and dump detectors After validating our classiﬁer, to better understand the performance of our solutions we introduce the pump and dump detector of Kamps et al. [5] as the baseline. In their work, they simulate a real-time detector using as input candlesti cks of 1 hour to detect pump and dumps. So, detection time can be up to 1 hour, with an expectation of 30 minutes. To detect pump and dumps their methodology exploit two anomaly thresholds one for transactions volume and the othe r for the coin price. They compute the values of the thresholds using average windows on the recent history of the candlesti ck under observation. Hence, if both the price and the volume are higher than the computed thresholds they mark the point as pump and dump event. Finally, Kamps et al. provide 3 different parameter conﬁgurations to compute the threshol d: Initial, Balanced, and Strict. The Basic conﬁguration maxi mize the recall, the Strict the precision, while the Balanced is a trade off between the previous two. In their work they only mention the number of alleged pump and dumps that their classiﬁer detects, unfortunately they are not able to provide scores i n terms of precision and recall since their dataset lacks of gr ound truth. To use the Kamps et al. detector as the baseline for our task, we start replicating their classiﬁer and testing it on their dataset, detecting the same number of the pump and dumps they declare in their work. Then, we apply their methodology on our dataset; results are shown in Table III. As we can see, all our classiﬁers outperform in terms of F1-score the Kamps et al. detectors. Note the difference in performance betwee n their best conﬁguration based on Strict parameters and our slowest classiﬁer: Not only our performances are considera bly better than theirs, we score 93.1% of precision and 91.4% recall against their 50.1% precision and 75.0% recall, but o ur detector is also faster. These results also highlight that, due to the high volatility of the cryptocurrencies market, dete ctors based only on the coin price and transaction volume are prone to a large number of false positives. Differently from us, Xu et al. [4] build a classiﬁer able to predict the currency target of the next pump and dump to provide a tool for strategic trade. Since the goals are diffe rent, we can not make a comparison in terms of performance between our work and their solutions. Indeed, they prefer to maximize the probability of gain from the investment maximizing the recall at the expense of low precision. They assume that buying wrong currencies does not affect their trading strategy because the value of a not pumped coin will remain at the same level as the purchase price and so do not produce an economic loss. Instead, in our case, we want to provide a reliable approach—with high precision and recall — to help investors stay out of the market when a pump and dump scheme is in action or to analyze anomalies in historical dat a. V. R ELATED WORKS The pump and dump phenomenon is older than the cryp- tocurrency revolution. Therefore, a wide portion of the lit - erature is about pump and dumps done in the traditional stock market. Allen et al. in [15] identify three categories of market manipulation schemes: information-based, actio n- based, and trade-based. The pump and dump schemes are usually a combination of information-based and trade-base d manipulation. In 2004, Mei et al. [16] show that it is possibl e to carry out pump and dump schemes just exploiting the behavioral biases of the investors. They test their theory o n the pump and dump cases prosecuted by the SEC from 1980 to 2002, which conﬁrm their hypothesis. Several case studies highlighted that emerging markets wer e prone to pump and dump schemes. Khwaja et al. in [17] show that the Pakistani weak regulation of the national stoc k exchange allowed brokers of the Karachi Stock Exchange to arrange successful pump and dump schemes. Jiang et al. [18] investigate on the stock pools scheme of the ’20s using daily trading volume from the New Y ork Stock Exchange between 1927 and 1929. The stock pools are groups of traders that delegate to a single manager to trade stocks on their behalf. Since a pool can move a large amount of money, they can increase the volume of trades and attract outsiders to the market. When the stock pool exits the market, the price quick ly drops. As reported by the University of Innsbruck in [19], the Internet boom in the early years of 2000 led to the birth of a new email-based pump and dump scheme. In this new kind of fraud, the manipulators secure their position on the market and then send millions of e-mails claiming to have private information about substantial increases in the pri ces of determined stocks. This causes an increase in the price and volume of the target stocks, followed by a drop as soon as the spam campaign ends. A later analysis in 2013 by Siering in [20] shows that despite the authorities have taken severa l countermeasures against fraudulent stock recommendation s, email-based pump and dump campaigns are still successful. Some works about frauds in the cryptocurrency market have been published in the past few years. The work of Gandal et al. [21] show evidence that the ﬁrst price spike to 1000 USD of the Bitcoin may have been driven by market manipulation. Using the well-known dataset of the Mt.Gox exchange, they found suspicious trading activities carrie d out by two actors, named ’Willy bot’ and ’Markus bot’. The purpose of these actors was to buy Bitcoin to increase the pri ce and the daily volume artiﬁcially. Krafft et al. [22] investi gate on the behavioral patterns of the users on the Cryptsy exchan ge market. In their work, they show that even tiny volumes of buy trades can inﬂuence the market. They use bots to buy a small amount of random currencies and conclude that traders tend to buy currencies with recent activities. Li et al. [23] conduct an empirical investigation on trading data obtaine d from the pump and dumps from Binance, Bittrex, and Y obit, focusing on the economic point of view. They show that pump and dumps lead to short term increase in prices, volume, and volatility followed by a reversal of the trend after some minutes. Moreover, they show that the gain of the investors depends critically on the time they obtain the signal, and fo r this reason, outside investors are systematically disadva ntaged. The work of Kamps et al. [5] shows a ﬁrst attempt to detect pump and dumps using an adaptive threshold. They highlight the issue that a reliable dataset of the conﬁrmed pump and dumps scheme does not exist, so they can not fully validate their results. A crucial contribution of our work is to relea se such a dataset. Xu et al. [4] focuses on the difﬁcult task of predicting pump and dumps, using one-hour intervals data from Cryptopia and Y obit, also showing an approach to exploi t prediction to invest in alt-coins. Since both works have som e goals in common with ours, we conducted a thorough analysis of their results on subsection IV -F. VI. D ISCUSSION Is it possible for pump and dump groups to avoid the detection? We based our features on the idea of detecting an anomalous change of some market parameters and at the same time to be robust against the natural oscillations of the vol atile cryptocurrencies market. So, if the admins of groups or some vip members start to buy the currency gradually in a way that the rise of this parameter is smooth, and the users are few, ou r classiﬁer could be not able to detect the pump and dump. In this case, our classiﬁer cannot detect 4 of the pump and dumps in our dataset. These events were all carried out by one group , and all of them record a consistent pre-pump phase in the hour s before the pump starts. Fortunately, this technique cannot be applied frequently because a smart observer knowing the tim e of the next pump and dump can exploit this pattern to unveil in advance the targeted cryptocurrency. Moreover, after th e pump and dump, this operation will be noticed by most users that could lose the trust of the admins and leave the group. Can pump and dump groups manipulate Bitcoin or ma- jor cryptocurrencies? To answer this question, we make a straightforward simulation. Let us take the buy volume on th e ﬁrst 10 minutes of the biggest pump and dump we monitored that is of 31 BTC on the SingularDTV (SNGLS). Now, we take a snapshot of the exchange order book for the trading pair BTC/USD (data of April 12, 2019), and assume that the market is frozen and only the members of the pump and dump group can make actions, this is the best case for them to make the price raise and get the attention of the outside investor s. We ﬁnd that the amount of money at their disposal can rise the value of BTC of less than 5 USD. Now, we analyze the price oscillation of the Bitcoin in the hour before the snaps hot on time ranges of 10 minutes, and we ﬁnd that the minimum oscillation was of 10 USD while the maximum was more than 50 USD. If we made another similar simulation on the Ripple (XRP), we get that the XRP value increases less than 0.0005 USD, while the minimum and maximum oscillation is of 0.001 and 0.002. As we can see, only the volume of the orders in the orders book is enough to smooth the ﬁrepower of the pump and dump group, and the higher price peak they can achieve, in this extremely optimistic situation, is not enough to dru m up the interests of outside investors. Is it possible for the exchange markets to stop pump and dump schemes? In this work we show that it is possible to detect a pump and dump scheme as soon as it starts. We also believe that an exchange can detect better than us when a fraudulent scheme like this one is in action. In fact, the dat a owned by the exchange is more ﬁne-grained than what we could obtain: It has full knowledge on the kind of operations performed, their amount, and exactly who performed them during the pump and dumps. Moreover, we notice that small policy enforcements against the pump and dumps can reduce drastically the amount of these market manipulations. As an example, BitTrex exchange announced [24] that it actively discourages any type of market manipulation and will begin to punish the participants. Since then, the amount of pump and dumps in the exchange drastically decreased. We counted , before the statement, more than 50 pump and dumps in the 5 months from July to the end of November 2017, and only 31 in almost one year after the statement. Another possible counter-measure could be to stop transactions on a security when it gains or loses more than some threshold, or give special protection to cryptocurrencies with extremely low market capitalization and trading volumes. VII. C ONCLUSION In this work, we performed an in-depth analysis of the pump and dump ecosystem. We have studied the relationship that exists between the groups, the exchange, and the target cryptocurrencies. We also presented two case studies and a tool that can detect in real time a pump and dump in action. Moreover, we have identiﬁed a peculiar kind of orders that are particularly effective for the detection. We think that this work helps to understand a complex phenomenon, improve the awareness of the investors interested in the cryptocurr ency market, and can help the authorities regulate this particul ar market in the future . ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work was supported in part by the MIUR under grant “Dipartimenti di eccellenza 2018-2022” of the Department o f Computer Science of Sapienza University. REFERENCES [1] A. S. Kyle and S. Viswanathan, “How to deﬁne illegal price manipula- tion,” American Economic Review , vol. 98, no. 2, pp. 274–79, 2008. [2] D. B. Kramer, “The way it is and the way it should be: Liabil ity under § 10 (b) of the exchange act and rule 10b-5 thereunder for maki ng false and misleading statements as part of a scheme to” pump and dum p” a stock,” University of Miami Business Law Review , vol. 13, no. 2, p. 243, 2005. [3] S. Golstein. (2018) John mcafee among defendants named i n pump and dump lawsuit. [Online]. Available: https://bit.ly/2U l1hXz [4] J. Xu and B. Livshits, “The anatomy of a cryptocurrency pu mp-and- dump scheme,” in 28th {USENIX} Security Symposium ( {USENIX} Security 19) , 2019, pp. 1609–1625. [5] J. Kamps and B. Kleinberg, “To the moon: deﬁning and detec ting cryptocurrency pump-and-dumps,” Crime Science , vol. 7, no. 1, p. 18, 2018. [6] T. LLC. (2018) Telegram - a new era of messaging. [Online] . Available: https://telegram.org/ [7] D. Inc. (2018) Discord. [Online]. Available: https://d iscordapp.com/ [8] Bitcointalk, ofﬁcial forum of bitcoin. [Online]. Avail able: https://bitcointalk.org [9] Coindetect. [Online]. Available: https://coindetect .org [10] Padl - crypto pump and dump groups -signals - list. [Onli ne]. Available: https://padl.mine.nu [11] Binance. (2018) Public rest api for binance. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/binance-exchange/binance-ofﬁcial-api-docs [12] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Machine learning , vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5–32, 2001. [13] D. W. Hosmer Jr, S. Lemeshow, and R. X. Sturdivant, Applied logistic regression. John Wiley & Sons, 2013, vol. 398. [14] V . A. Siris and F. Papagalou, “Application of anomaly de tection algo- rithms for detecting syn ﬂooding attacks,” in Proc. of IEEE GLOBE- COM’04., vol. 4. IEEE, 2004, pp. 2050–2054. [15] F. Allen and D. Gale, “Stock-price manipulation,” The Review of Financial Studies, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 503–529, 1992. [16] J. Mei, G. Wu, and C. Zhou, “Behavior based manipulation : theory and prosecution evidence,” Available at SSRN 457880 , 2004. [17] A. I. Khwaja and A. Mian, “Unchecked intermediaries: Pr ice manipu- lation in an emerging stock market,” Journal of Financial Economics , vol. 78, no. 1, pp. 203–241, 2005. [18] G. Jiang, P . G. Mahoney, and J. Mei, “Market manipulatio n: A compre- hensive study of stock pools,” Journal of Financial Economics , vol. 77, no. 1, pp. 147–170, 2005. [19] L. Frieder and J. Zittrain, “Spam works: Evidence from s tock touts and corresponding market activity,” Hastings Comm. & Ent. LJ , vol. 30, p. 479, 2007. [20] M. Siering, “All pump, no dump? the impact of internet de ception on stock markets.” in ECIS, 2013, p. 115. [21] N. Gandal, J. Hamrick, T. Moore, and T. Oberman, “Price m anipulation in the bitcoin ecosystem,” Journal of Monetary Economics , vol. 95, pp. 86–96, 2018. [22] P . M. Krafft, N. Della Penna, and A. S. Pentland, “An expe rimental study of cryptocurrency market dynamics,” in Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, 2018, p. 605. [23] T. Li, D. Shin, and B. Wang, “Cryptocurrency pump-and-d ump schemes,” Available at SSRN , 2018. [24] BitTrex. (2018) What are my trade limits? [Online]. Ava ilable: https://support.bittrex.com/hc/en-us/articles/115003004171