Detecting discrete processes with the Epps effect Patrick Changa,b, Etienne Pienaara, Tim Gebbiea aDepartment of Statistical Science, University of Cape Town, Rondebosch 7700, South Africa bMathematical Institute, University of Oxford, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PJ, United Kingdom Abstract The Epps effect is key phenomenology relating to high frequency correlation dynamics in financial markets. We argue that it can be used to provide insight into whether tick data is best represented as samples from Brownian di ffusions, or as samples from truly discrete events represented as connected point processes. We derive the Epps e ffect arising from asynchrony and provide a refined method to correct for the e ffect. We then propose three experiments which show how to discriminate between possible underlying representations. These in turn demonstrate how a simple Hawkes representation recovers phenomenology reported in the literature that cannot be recovered using a Brownian representation without additional ad hoc model complexity. However, complex ad hoc noise models built on Brownian motions cannot in general be discriminated relative to a Hawkes representation. Nevertheless, we argue that high frequency correlation dynamics are most faithfully recovered when tick data is represented as a web of interconnected discrete events rather than being samples from continuous Brownian di ffusions even when combined with noise. Keywords: Epps effect; Hawkes process; Asynchronous sampling; Market microstructure; Statistical finance 1. Introduction Models are abstractions which aim to faithfully recover, ex- plain, and sometimes predict what we observe in real-world data generating processes. When proposing model structures for such processes, we make explicit assumptions about the na- ture of the underlying process. Depending on the mathematical machinery we use to build the model process, we may also incur implicit assumptions that depart from the observed reality. Here we are concerned with such a departure observed in the applica- tion of diffusion models to high frequency financial data. That is, the decay of correlations as the lengths of sampling intervals decrease in high frequency financial markets—the Epps e ffect Epps (1979). Models where the underlying representation is cast in terms of Brownian motions, so-called diffusion models, implicitly assume that correlations exist at infinitesimal scales — an implicit consequence of including correlated Brownian motions in the diffusion model equations. In the real-world where processes can only be observed dis- cretely, and on finite time scales, if such a model is a plausible representation of the true data generating process, one should expect that empirical correlations can be recovered at all sam- pling scales—provided a su fficiently long series is available. Empirically, the Epps effect constitutes a departure of the model process from reality, which needs to be corrected for. In contrast, the fine-to-coarse model proposed by Bacry et al. (2013a) using a mutually exciting Hawkes process implicitly assumes that correlations depend on the sampling interval ∆t. Email addresses: patrick.chang@maths.ox.ac.uk (Patrick Chang), etienne.pienaar@uct.ac.za (Etienne Pienaar), tim.gebbie@uct.ac.za (Tim Gebbie) Therefore, under such a model, the Epps e ffect is a genuine effect and we only need to correct for statistical causes leading to an additional decay in correlations. That is, departures from the decay in correlations over and above what is expected under the model process. Although it is di fficult to determine what truly constitutes a good model in the present context, one may still determine the usefulness of a model in its ability to recover certain stylised facts and interrogate these by obtaining results from simulations that align with what is observed empirically. In our case, a good model should be able to recover the Epps e ffect in its entirety. This has been problematic in the literature where the underlying representation or model data generating process is based purely on Brownian motions M ¨unnix et al. (2011). Such models only explain a fraction of the empirically observed Epps e ffect and thus additional ad hoc complexity such as market microstruc- ture noise have been included in the model specification to try and conform such models with observations. These are latent models where the observed process consists of a diffusion pro- cess with noise added to the trajectory, with the di ffusion thus being treated as a latent component Zhang (2010); Robert and Rosenbaum (2011b); A ¨ıt-Sahalia et al. (2011). Our concern with these specifications is that it may conceal an inappropriate representation of the underlying process. The Epps effect is pervasive and has been observed in stock markets and foreign exchange markets Mastromatteo et al. (2011). The literature has isolated three primary potential sources: (i) asynchrony, (ii) lead-lag and (iii) tick-size. Con- cretely, Ren `o (2003) explored the e ffect of asynchrony in the presence of lead-lag e ffects. Precup and Iori (2007) demon- strated the impact di fferent levels of asynchrony has on the 1 arXiv:2005.10568v4 [q-fin.ST] 12 Dec 2024 Epps effect. Around the same time, T ´oth and Kert ´esz (2007) derived an analytical expression characterising the Epps e ffect as a function of the rate parameter under Poisson sampling. This lead to the realisation that one can decompose the cor- relation measured at time intervals of length ∆t as a function of the correlation at smaller time intervals of length ∆t0 T´oth and Kert´esz (2009). Subsequently, M ¨unnix et al. (2010) inves- tigated the direct impact of tick-size on the Epps e ffect. They were able to find a representation that combined the compen- sation of tick-size with asynchrony M ¨unnix et al. (2011). The analytical expression characterising the Epps effect in T´oth and Kert´esz (2007) was then further extended to separate the ef- fects from asynchrony and that of lead-lag Mastromatteo et al. (2011). More recently, Chang et al. (2021) investigated the Epps effect under varying definitions of time. Asynchrony is a statistical cause contributing to a decay in correlations as the sampling interval decreases. Many meth- ods have been proposed to fix or compensate for this. The now canonical approach of Hayashi and Yoshida (2005) proposed a cumulative covariance estimator. Buccheri et al. (2019) charac- terised the Epps effect in terms of the probability of flat trading and provided a correction for the e ffect. Here we provide a correction based on the distortion resulting from partial over- lapping intervals from the sampling process T ´oth and Kert ´esz (2007); Mastromatteo et al. (2011); M¨unnix et al. (2011). Meth- ods aimed at compensating for asynchrony as a cause of the ef- fect all assume that there is some underlying synchronous pro- cess with some true correlation structure. Our concern is with the underlying representation of the synchronous process itself when there are no true correlations. We demonstrate that the residual Epps effect, the remaining Epps effect after correcting for statistical causes, allows us to discriminate between a di ffusion-based representation for the underlying process and a di ffusion-based process with ad hoc noise or discrete connected events. Currently we cannot dis- criminate between diffusion-based processes with ad hoc noise and processes from discrete connected events. This is because both configurations lead to similar behaviour in the residual Epps effect, albeit for completely different reasons. Finding the correct representation is important, and we ar- gue that the Hawkes representation is likely more appropriate since it does not require ad hoc model complexity to recover the observed phenomenology. The effectiveness and simplicity of the Hawkes representation draws attention to the primacy of the waiting time process as an appropriate description of real- world financial processes at the atomic level; The time between events is a fundamental property and from this property (with appropriate averaging, and limits) the observed properties of fi- nancial market data can be retrieved under the model process. Outside of the Epps literature there have been a large num- ber of studies concerning irregularly spaced data Robert and Rosenbaum (2011b). Here these have arisen from two impor- tant strands of the literature: duration models Engle and Rus- sell (1998), and intensity models Bowsher (2007). Much of the mathematical finance literature starts with continuous Ito semi- martingales, even when it is known that real financial market data does not conform to this representation without significant adjustments to the model. In the idealistic world of continuous time representations, it can be argued that prices are only observed when markets trade and that this price is sampled from some continuous underly- ing process Robert and Rosenbaum (2011a,b). Such models introduce a sampling process but retain the underlying Brown- ian latent model. It must be noted that there are in fact classes of models that can generate correlations as emergent proper- ties extrinsic to the discrete data generating processes Bauer et al. (2024); Diana and Gebbie (2025). Here models are phe- nomenological rather than based on a foundational stochastic process representation, and the discrete model can be averaged to match some continuous-time semi-martingale representation in an appropriate diffusion limit Diana and Gebbie (2025). The argument put forward here is that if a foundational stochastic process representation is to be retained, in order to retain parsimony it should start with the waiting time distribu- tions between events, then include some averaging process; and should not start with some continuous-time semi-martingale based latent model and then engage in a combination of sam- pling and the inclusion ofad hoc noise models. Simple because we observe the prior in real financial markets, and not the latter. The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 demonstrates how the Epps e ffect arises from asynchrony. We introduce three methods to compensate for this e ffect. Section 3 compares the various corrections for asynchrony under di fferent under- lying representations. Section 4 demonstrates how we can use the residual Epps effect to discriminate the underlying process. Section 5 briefly provides some alternative estimation methods and discusses their strengths and weaknesses. Section 6 dis- cusses the limitations of our discrimination and the importance of finding the correct representation. Section 7 we discrimi- nate the underlying representation on trade and quote data from the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE). Finally, we end with some closing remarks in Section 8. 2. Asynchrony 2.1. The Epps e ffect from asynchrony Consider a multivariate di ffusion process as the underlying representation of the stochastic nature of a log-price of the ith asset at time t. Assuming that the process has stationary incre- ments dX i t, let the finite variation over the interval ∆t be given by Xi ∆t = Z ∆t 0 dX i t. The infinitesimal lagged correlation between assets i and j is taken to be D dX i tdX j t′ E = ci j t−t′dtdt′, (1) where ci j t−t′ is defined as ci j t−t′ =  δt−t′ if i = j, cδt−t′ if i̸= j, and δx denotes the delta function (unit impulse) at 0. This meansδx is equal to 1 when x = 0 and is equal 0 when x̸= 0. 2 We want to examine the behaviour of the covariance process Ci j ∆t = D Xi ∆tX j ∆t E on time scales ∆t. This can be computed using Eq. (1) as Ci j ∆t = Z ∆t 0 Z ∆t 0 ci j t−t′dtdt′. Following the double integration and unit impulse, it follows that for the synchronous case we have the variance and covari- ance as Cii ∆t = ∆t and Ci j ∆t = c∆t, respectively. Thus the correla- tion of the synchronous process is ρi j ∆t = Ci j ∆tq Cii ∆t· C j j ∆t = c. We see that for the synchronous process both the variance and covariance scale linearly with the sampling interval ∆t. Thus the correlation is independent of ∆t. Mastromatteo et al. (2011) characterize the Epps e ffect by saying that the Epps e ffect is present wheneverρi j ∆t depends on ∆t and is absent otherwise. A property of high frequency finance is that tick-by-tick trades arrive in an asynchronous fashion following an arrival type representation where the inter-arrivals are not equidistant. The Epps effect arising from asynchrony is derived by synchro- nising the asynchronous observations using previous tick inter- polation. To this end, letUi ={ti k}k∈Z be the set of asynchronous arrival times observed in the interval [0, T] for a realisation of the underlying synchronous process Xi t. Using these two com- ponents we can construct the synchronised process ˜Xi ∆t = Z ti 2 ti 1 dX i t, where ti 1 = max{ti k∈ Ui|ti k≤ 0} and ti 2 = max{ti k∈ Ui|ti k≤ ∆t}. The resulting synchronised process is piece-wise constant with jumps at ti k∈ Ui. A comparison of the two process Xi ∆t and ˜Xi ∆t can be seen in Figure 1. Given Ui and U j, the covariance of the synchronised process can be defined as ˜Ci j ∆t = E hD ˜Xi ∆t ˜X j ∆t E Ui, U ji = E  Z ti 2 ti 1 Z t j 2 t j 1 ci j t−t′dtdt′ Ui, U j  Here E [·] is the expectation of the sampling process. The co- variance is then ˜Ci j ∆t = c· E  h ti 1, ti 2 i ∩ h t j 1, t j 2 i  . (2) Similarly, the variance is ˜Cii ∆t = E  h ti 1, ti 2 i ∩ h ti 1, ti 2 i  . Given Ui and U j, we can estimate the expectation of the overlap of the sampling process at a particular discretisation size ∆t by defining a new variable γi(t) = max{ti k : ti k≤ t} for t∈ [0, T]. The expectation can then be estimated as ˆκi j ∆t = E  γi(t− ∆t),γ i(t)∩ h γ j(t− ∆t),γ j(t) i  . (3) Figure 1: A comparison of a realisation of the synchronous process Xi ∆t (dotted line) and the synchronised process ˜Xi ∆t (solid line). Here the inter-arrival distri- bution of Ui follows an exponential withλ = 1/15. Thus the correlation of the synchronised process is then given by ˜ρi j ∆t = c· ˆκi j ∆tq ˆκii ∆t· ˆκ j j ∆t . (4) This depends on ∆t and therefore the Epps effect is present. The correlation from the synchronous process X∆t is being extracted when the intervals [ti 1, ti 2] and [t j 1, t j 2] overlap, whereas the non-overlapping intervals are uncorrelated M ¨unnix et al. (2011). Therefore the correlation of the synchronised process will be distorted by the non-overlapping intervals. This approach has been previously investigated T ´oth and Kert´esz (2007); Mastromatteo et al. (2011); M ¨unnix et al. (2011). The key di fference between the work of T ´oth and Kert´esz (2007) and Mastromatteo et al. (2011) is that a specific distribution for the sampling process with stationary increments is chosen beforehand, usually a homogeneous Poisson process. Here we only require that the sampling process have stationary increments. This can be useful because characterising the Epps effect with a specific a-priori distribution requires knowledge about the distribution ofW∆t where W∆t = min n γi(t),γ j(t) o − max n γi(t− ∆t),γ j(t− ∆t) o . This is not always easy to obtain. In the case of Poisson sam- pling we can find the exact distribution of W∆t which means Eq. (4) reduces to ˜ρi j ∆t = c 1 + 1 λ∆t  e−λ∆t− 1 ! . (5) There is a fundamental di fference between our approach and that of M ¨unnix et al. (2011). They compensate each of the overlapping return intervals while they are estimating the (com- pensated) correlation. In contrast, we separate the estimation of 3 the correlation ˜ρi j ∆t and the compensation factor ˆκi j ∆t as separate quantities. This is a crucial nuance that allows us to determine both the measured correlation from the synchronised process ˜ρi j ∆t, and the corrected correlation from the synchronous process c. This is possible because our correction is performed after ob- taining the measured correlation. Our correction is then easier to compute as we do not need to search for individual overlap- ping intervals to compensate. 2.2. Correcting for asynchrony Here the Epps e ffect arises from sampling. For this reason the effect can be corrected. We proceed to discuss a few meth- ods to do so. A key assumption underlying the correction is that there exists an underlying “true” and synchronous process which has some correlation quantity we are interested in. The observed samples are then merely realisations from this under- lying process. To measure the correlation ˜ρi j ∆t from the observables of the asynchronous process, we use previous tick interpolation cou- pled with the Realised Covariance (RC) estimator: ˜Σi j T,∆t = ⌊T/∆t⌋X h=0  ˜Xi h∆t− ˜Xi (h−1)∆t  ˜X j h∆t− ˜X j (h−1)∆t  . The measured correlation is then ˜ρi j ∆t = ˜Σi j T,∆t q ˜Σii T,∆t· ˜Σ j j T,∆t . (6) Arrival time (overlap) correction: The first correction method is to correct for the Epps e ffect directly from the characterisation of the synchronised process Eq. (4). To recover the correlation of the true synchronous process we compute: ρi j ∆t = ˜ρi j ∆t· q ˆκii ∆t· ˆκ j j ∆t ˆκi j ∆t . (7) This defines the overlap correction. Here ˆκi j ∆t can be directly estimated using Ui and U j with discretisation size ∆t. Flat trade correction: The second correction for the Epps e ffect is given by Buc- cheri et al. (2019). They take a di fferent approach and assume that the process is observed at n =⌊ T ∆t⌋ + 1 non-random times equispaced over [0, T], i.e. 0 < t0,n < t1,n < ... < tn,n = T where ∆t = t j,n− t j−1,n for j≥ 1. They then characterise the observables as ˜Xi t j,n = Xi t j,n  1− Bi j,n  + ˜Xi t j−1,n Bi j,n, (8) where Bi j,n are pairwise-independent triangular arrays of i.i.d. Bernoulli variables. The probability of flat trading is then E[Bi j,n] = pi. In this setting they prove that the Realized Co- variance estimator is biased (their Theorem 3.1) to then provide a correction ρi j ∆t = ˜ρi j ∆t·  1− ˆp∆t,i ˆp∆t, j   1− ˆp∆t,i  1− ˆp∆t, j . (9) Here ˆp∆t,i is the estimate of the probability of flat trading, pi, given by ˆp∆t,i = 1 ⌊T/∆t⌋ ⌊T/∆t⌋X j=1 1 n ˜Xi j∆t− ˜Xi ( j−1)∆t o =0, (10) where 1 is an indicator function. Convergence ˆp∆t,i p −→pi is then shown to hold. We highlight that the assumptions used by Buccheri et al. (2019) are not always well suited for illiquid tick-by-tick trade data coupled with previous tick interpolation to achieve Eq. (8). Concretely, Assumption 3 of their paper states that the maxi- mum number of consecutive repeated trades is not large rela- tive to the number of data points. This is because the price will only move to a new level when there is a new observable, and then all the grid points between observables will be flat trades. It is therefore difficult to satisfy Assumption 3 using small grid points in illiquid markets with finite data. Hayashi–Yoshida (baseline) correction: Here the estimator corrects the effect by accounting for mul- tiple contributions Hayashi and Yoshida (2005) and is defined by ˆΣi j T = #Ui X ℓ=1 #U j X k=1  Xi ti ℓ − Xi ti ℓ−1  X j t j k − X j t j k−1  1 n (ti ℓ−1,ti ℓ]∩  t j k−1,t j k i ̸=∅ o, (11) where #Ui denotes the cardinality of the setUi. The correlation is then given as ρi j = ˆΣi j Tq ˆΣii T· ˆΣ j j T . (12) The Hayashi–Yoshida estimator is independent of the sampling interval ∆t induced by the estimator from discretising the pro- cess into a synchronised process (performed using previous tick interpolation for the RC estimator). This is because Eq. (11) uses the synchronous process Xi t where the times correspond to asynchronous transaction times given by the set of arrivals Ui. There is no re-sampling or discretisation that induces a time scale ∆t. This means that we cannot use the estimator to inves- tigate the correlations at a specific time scale ∆t. The estimator is independent of ∆t induced by the estimator. For this reason we will use it as a baseline correction for comparison. Note that the estimator is not independent of the sampling frequencies because it depends on the frequency of arrivals Ui. This means that the estimator can be used to investigate di ffer- ent time scales induced by the observables using, for example, k-skip sampling. However, it then becomes unclear what time scale (∆t) the estimator is recovering. Section 4 will discuss the two time scales in more detail. 4 Although we do not deal with lead-lag, we highlight that the Hayashi–Yoshida estimator cannot account for lead-lag as it as- sumes that the correlation between two assets do not extend be- yond the interval with full or partial overlap Griffin and Oomen (2011). 3. Simulation Experiments The experiments focus on comparing the correction of the Epps effect arising from asynchrony from two types of sam- pling. The first from a homogeneous Poisson process – Poisson sampling. The second from a 2-dimensional Hawkes process – Hawkes sampling. The sampling methods are performed on three types of price models. The first is a standard Brownian price model, the second is a stochastic volatility model con- taminated with additive noise and the third is the Hawkes price model Bacry et al. (2013a). The experiments are conducted using simulated paths where T is 20 hours (72,000 seconds). The correlations will be in- vestigated at small intervals where ∆t is measured in seconds. The experiments use a single realisation of the price paths. 1 This is for two reasons. First, this emulates the circumstance with real data where we only have a single realisation. Second, this allows us to focus only on the e ffect of asynchrony when constructing the error ribbons and ensures that we do not con- flate the effect of asynchrony with the sample specific variations from different price paths. Each price path is then re-sampled using either a Poisson or Hawkes sampling scheme for 100 replications. The figures plot the mean estimate at each ∆t over 100 replications for the var- ious correlation and correction estimates. The error ribbons contain 95% of the estimates at each ∆t from the replications computed using the Student t-distribution with 99 degrees of freedom and the standard deviation of the estimates between the replications at each ∆t. Our simulations have two types of sampling. First is the sam- pling of the synchronous process using Poisson or Hawkes sam- pling to obtain the observables. Second is the sampling from the observables using previous tick interpolation at a particular ∆t to create a synchronised process which in turn can be used to estimate the measured correlation using Eq. (6), the overlap correction using Eq. (7), and the flat trade correction using Eq. (9). The two types of sampling relate to the two time scales induced by the observables and estimators respectively; this is discussed in greater detail in Section 4. 3.1. Brownian price model Consider a standard Brownian log-price model satisfying the following SDEs: dX 1 t = µ1− σ2 1 2  dt +σ1dW 1 t, dX 2 t = µ2− σ2 2 2  dt +σ2dW 2 t. 1Simulating many paths does not change our results but could enhance the error ribbons. Here the infinitesimal correlation between dW 1 t and dW 2 t isρ12, and is set to be approximately 0.65.2 The process is simulated using the Euler–Maruyama scheme3 with the discretisation size corresponding to one second intervals. The parameters used are µ1 = µ2 = 0.01, σ2 1 = 0.1 and σ2 2 = 0.2 (given in daily intervals). The first 500 seconds of this process is shown in Figure 1. To obtain the observables, this process is then sampled using a Poisson process with a mean inter-arrival of 1/λ = 15 seconds and a 2-dimensional Hawkes process withλ1 0 =λ2 0 = 0.015 and Φ taking the form Φ = 0 ϕ(s) ϕ(s) 0 ! , (13) whereϕ(s) = 0.023e−0.11t1 t∈R+. Figure 2 compares the correction methods for (a) Poisson and (b) Hawkes sampling on the Brownian price model. The over- lap correction and the Hayashi–Yoshida estimator correctly re- covers the underlying correlation of the synchronous process. What is interesting is that the flat trade correction does not re- cover the induced underlying correlation and the correction re- turns estimates outside the feasible range for correlations under the Hawkes sampling.4 This is curious because the estimator is in fact a consistent estimator as proved by Buccheri et al. (2019). We suspect that the cause of this is due to the long inter-arrivals from our sam- pling of the observables coupled with a small discretisation size ∆t from the previous tick interpolation which leads to extended periods of flat trading. These extended periods of flat trading makes the estimates of flat trade correction under Eq. (10) closer to one. This leads to two possible explanations for why the underlying correlation is not recovered. First, the variance of the flat trade correction spikes when the probabilities of flat trading, p1 and p2, are simultaneously close to one (see Figure 3 of Buccheri et al. (2019)). Second, the high probability of flat trading may lead to numerous consecutive flat trades which possibly violates Assumption 3 under which the estimator is constructed Buccheri et al. (2019). The theoretical Epps e ffect arising from asynchrony (thick solid line) is plotted for the Poisson sampling since the distribu- tion ofW∆t can be recovered in this case. Thus the theoretical Epps effect is given by Eq. (5). This theoretical Epps e ffect is not plotted for the Hawkes sampling as obtaining the distribu- tion ofW∆t is not simple in this case. The main feature behind our correction method is that we do not need to obtain the dis- tribution ofW∆t since the correction can be directly estimated using Eq. (3) given Ui and U j. 3.2. Market microstructure noise model Consider a more complex ad hoc model that is still predi- cated on Brownian motions. We consider a log-price model 2The value is chosen to compare against the limiting correlation of the Hawkes price model. 3The scheme will be exact for this model, but not for state-dependent drifts and diffusions. 4None of the correction methods ensure that corrected correlation estimates lie within [−1, 1]. 5 (a) Brownian price model with Poisson sampling. (b) Brownian price model with Hawkes sampling. Figure 2: A Brownian price model with (a) Poisson sampling and (b) Hawkes sampling is presented: the red line is the measured correlation from the synchronised process calculated using Eq. (6), the blue line is the flat trade correction calculated using Eq. (9), and the green line is the overlap correction calculated using Eq. (7). The black line is the plot of Eq. (5). The horizontal dotted line is the induced correlation of the synchronous system withρ≈ 0.65. Lastly, the horizontal dashed line is the Hayashi–Yoshida estimate, Eq. (12). (a) MMN model with Poisson sampling. (b) MMN model with Hawkes sampling. Figure 3: A market microstructure noise model with (a) Poisson sampling and (b) Hawkes sampling is presented: the red line is the measured correlation from the synchronised process, Eq. (6), the blue line is the flat trade correction, Eq. (9), and the green line is the overlap correction, Eq. (7). The black line is the plot of Eq. (5). The horizontal dotted line is the induced correlation of the synchronous system with ρ≈ 0.65. Lastly, the horizontal dashed line is the Hayashi–Yoshida estimate, Eq. (12). where the synchronous process Xi t has been contaminated with additive noise: X1 t = P1 t +ϵ1 t, ϵ 1 t ∼ NID  0, h2 1  , X2 t = P2 t +ϵ2 t, ϵ 2 t ∼ NID  0, h2 2  , whereϵi t is normal white noise that captures market microstruc- ture effects. Here we assume that the latent process Pi t satisfies the following SDEs: dP1 t =σt,1dW 1 t, dP2 t =σt,2dW 2 t, 6 where the infinitesimal correlation between dW 1 t and dW 2 t is ρ12, and is set to be approximately 0 .65. Here σt,i is a time varying standard deviation that can be decomposed as σt,i = dtgt,i, where dt is a common diurnal pattern given by dt = C + Ae−at + Be−b(1−t) and gt,i evolves according to dg2 t,i = ki  vi− g2 t,i  dt + wigt,idBi t. This model will be henceforth referred to as the market mi- crostructure noise (MMN) model. 5 The process is simulated using the Euler–Maruyama scheme with the discretisation size corresponding to one second intervals. The parameters A = 0.75, B = 0.25 and C = 0.88929198 are set in a way such that 1/T R T 0 d2 t dt  = 1. The remaining parameters are set as v1 = 0.01, v2 = 0.02, w1 = w2 = 0.1 and k1 = k2 = 10. The average signal-to-noise ratio between vi and h2 i is set to be one- to-one and the leverage effect between dBi t and dW i t is set to be 0.01. To obtain the observables, we sample the MMN model with a Poisson process with a mean inter-arrival of 1/λ = 15 seconds and a 2-dimensional Hawkes process taking the form of Eq. (13) with parameters (λ1 0 =λ2 0,α (s),β ) = (0.015, 0.023, 0.11). Figure 3 compares the correction methods for (a) Poisson and (b) Hawkes sampling on the MMN model. We see that in Fig- ure 3a that all the estimates are lower compared to the estimates from Figure 2a. The lower correlation achieved is a result of the contamination from noise. It is known that the realised volatil- ity estimator overestimates the volatility when the process is contaminated with additive noise Zhang et al. (2005). This in- creased volatility estimate leads to a larger normalisation factor and thus the correlation estimates are lower than before. What is interesting is that the estimates in Figure 3b are not as affected by noise when compared to Figure 3a. The reason behind this is because the specification of the Hawkes sampling in Eq. (13) results in longer inter-arrivals compared to the Pois- son sampling. This hints at the fact that the time scale induced by the observables play a role in our ability to correct for asyn- chrony. This result forms the basis for our ability to discrimi- nate between the processes which we will discuss in Section 4. 3.3. Hawkes price model Consider the price model introduced by Bacry et al. (2013a) constructed using interconnected events from a Hawkes pro- cess. Let the bivariate log-price be X1 t = X1 0 + N1(t)− N2(t), X2 t = X2 0 + N3(t)− N4(t), 5This is the same model used in Buccheri et al. (2020) but without lead-lag components. (a) The Epps effect from a Hawkes price model. 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 -15 -10 -5 0 5 (b) Full plot of 20 hours with 1 hour inset. Figure 4: The Epps e ffect is demonstrated from the Hawkes price model on the left, where the red line is the measured correlation from Eq. (6) from synchronous samples. The black line is the plot of Eq. (15) and the dot- ted horizontal line is the correlation as ∆t → ∞. Using the parameters (µ,α (r),α (c),β ) = (0.015, 0.023, 0.05, 0.11) we have thatρ12 ∆t≈ 0.65 as ∆t→∞ . The Hawkes price model is plotted on the right for the full 20 hours where the path looks like that from a diffusion process, and an inset that zooms in the first hour shows jumps. 7 where{Nm(t)}4 m=1 is a 4-dimensional mutually exciting Hawkes process with the kernel Φ taking the form: Φ =  0 ϕ(r) ϕ(c) 0 ϕ(r) 0 0 ϕ(c) ϕ(c) 0 0 ϕ(r) 0 ϕ(c) ϕ(r) 0  . (14) The interpretation of kernel components in Eq. (14) is as fol- lows: ϕ(r) imitates mean reversion because an uptick in X1 by N1 will lead to an increased intensity in the down tick N2— allowing the price level to revert (similarly for X2 through N3 and N4). On the other hand ϕ(c) induces a correlation between the prices by connecting the two prices since an uptick inX1 by N1 will lead to an increased intensity in the uptick ofX2 through N3 (similarly for down ticks through N2 and N4). We use the same specification and parameters as Bacry et al. (2013a) for the construction of kernel in Eq. (14) with λm 0 = µ,∀m, ϕ(r) = α(r)e−βt1 t∈R+ and ϕ(c) = α(c)e−βt1 t∈R+. Therefore the parameters are given as ( µ,α (r),α (c),β ) = (0.015, 0.023, 0.05, 0.11). Figure 4b plots a single realisation for the price model. Fig- ure 4b looks like a diffusive model similar to that found in Fig- ure 1. However, when we zoom into the path (as shown in the inset) we can see the jumps, and that the price model is com- posed of discrete events. Over long horizons these events start behaving like diffusion processes. Limit theorems for Hawkes price models have been derived Bacry et al. (2013b). Bacry et al. (2013a) formulate the Epps e ffect using the Hawkes price model where the covariance matrix is a function of ∆t C11 ∆t ∆t = Λ + RC1 2G1 + RC2 2G2 + RC2G2 1(1− e−∆tG2) + G2 2(Q1e−∆tG1− C1) 2G2 2G2 1∆t , C12 ∆t ∆t = RC2 2G2 − RC1 2G1 + RC1G2 2(1− e−G1∆t) + C2G2 1(e−G2∆t− 1) 2G2 2G2 1∆t . Here the parameters are: Λ = µ 1− Γ12− Γ13 , R = βµ Γ12 + Γ13− 1, C1 = (2 + Γ12 + Γ13) (Γ12 + Γ13) 1 + Γ12 + Γ13 , C2 = (2 + Γ12− Γ13) (Γ12− Γ13) 1 + Γ12− Γ13 , Q1 = Q4 = −µ  Γ2 12 + Γ12− Γ2 13   (Γ12 + 1)2− Γ2 13  (1− Γ12− Γ13) , Q2 = Q3 = −µΓ13 (Γ12 + 1)2− Γ2 13  (1− Γ12− Γ13) , and G1 =β (1 + Γ12 + Γ13), G2 =β (1 + Γ12− Γ13). The underlying correlation for the synchronous Hawkes price model is then ρ12 ∆t = C12 ∆t C11 ∆t . (15) In the limit we have Bacry et al. (2013a) lim ∆t→∞ ρ12 ∆t = 2Γ13 (1 + Γ12) 1 + Γ2 13 + 2Γ12 + Γ2 12 . Figure 4 demonstrates the Epps e ffect arising from the Hawkes price model. A crucial feature here is that the Epps effect arises from synchronous samples. There are no statisti- cal causes such as asynchrony or tick-size nor is the e ffect of lead-lag contributing towards the Epps effect. Under this model it is more accurate to think of the Epps effect as the emergence of correlation as ∆t increases rather than a decay in correlation. This is a crucial insight despite the conceptual simplicity of the model. This is because at small time intervals the events are merely random. The connection between the events can only be de- tected when there are su fficient events in a given interval. Meaning that a system created by events takes a finite time to correlate and requires the concept of intervals to be externally imposed by an external observer to give the notion of corre- lation meaning. This is the fundamental di fference between this model and those considered earlier. Correlation from the Hawkes price model is a result of the prices being coupled be- tween discrete and connected events, whereas the models pred- icated on Brownian motions have an underlying correlation at infinitesimal scales written in a-priori by the system observers to then later be estimated and fitted to observed re-sampled data. The observables are again obtained by sampling the Hawkes price model using a Poisson process with a mean inter-arrival of 1/λ = 15 seconds and a 2-dimensional Hawkes process tak- ing the form of Eq. (13) with parameters ( λ1 0 = λ2 0,α (s),β ) = (0.015, 0.023, 0.11). Figure 5 compares the correction methods for (a) Poisson and (b) Hawkes sampling on the Hawkes price model. We see that the flat trade correction overcorrects the correlation for both cases. This is because the Hawkes price model only jumps to a new price state when an event occurs. Moreover, an uptick is likely followed by a down tick due to the mean reverting property. This interaction can lead to an amplification of an extended period of flat trades which results in the estimate of the probability of flat trading Eq. (10) being closer to one. The measured correlation from the synchronised process exhibits a further Epps e ffect relative to the theoretical syn- chronous Epps effect (thick line) which is expected. This differ- ence is naturally attributed towards the asynchronous sampling. What is interesting is that in both Figures 5a and 5b, the Hayashi–Yoshida estimates recover the limiting correlation but the overlap correction only recovers the limiting correlation in Figure 5b. The overlap correction in Figure 5a under estimates the limiting correlation and over estimates the synchronous Epps effect. This is curious because if we are correcting for asynchrony then we should be recovering the correlation of the theoretical synchronous Epps effect. This hints again at the fact 8 (a) Hawkes price model with Poisson sampling. (b) Hawkes price model with Hawkes sampling. Figure 5: The Hawkes price model with (a) Poisson sampling and (b) Hawkes sampling is presented: the red line is the measured correlation from the synchronised process, Eq. (6), the blue line is the flat trade correction, Eq. (9), and the green line is the overlap correction, Eq. (7). The black line is the plot of Eq. (15). The horizontal dotted line is the limiting correlation when ∆t→∞ which means ρ12 ∆t≈ 0.65. Lastly the horizontal dashed line is the Hayashi–Yoshida estimator, Eq. (12). that the implicit time scales induced by the choices of observ- ables play an important role in our ability to correct for asyn- chrony. 4. The residual Epps e ffect The key realisation is that there are in fact at least two time scales at play. First is the time scale induced by the observ- ables. In our experimental context this is the sampling of the synchronous process to obtain the observables. Second is the time scale induced by the estimator. This is induced by the pre- vious tick interpolation at a particular discretisation size ∆t to create a synchronised process. Previous tick interpolation is not the only way an estimator can induce a time scale. The Malliavin–Mancino Fourier es- timator Malliavin and Mancino (2002, 2009) directly uses the observables without the need to create a synchronised process. However, the estimator induces a time scale through the num- ber of Fourier coe fficients of the price process it uses to es- timate the Fourier coe fficients of the volatility process Chang et al. (2020). It is this property that was exploited to investigate the Epps effect using the Malliavin–Mancino Fourier estimator Ren`o (2003); Precup and Iori (2007). The interplay between the two time scales and the underly- ing process will determine our ability to correct for asynchrony. Concretely, the time scale induced by the observables will not affect our ability to correct for asynchrony on the Brownian price model but it will a ffect our ability to correct for asyn- chrony on the MMN and Hawkes price model. Experiment #1: Hayashi–Yoshida Let us consider some additional experiments to demonstrate this point. The Hayashi–Yoshida estimator is a unique estima- tor in that it does not induce a time scale ∆t when estimating the correlation. It recovers the underlying correlation directly from the observables. This gives us the ability to investigate the effect of the time scale induced by the observables without the interaction from the time scale induced by the estimator. We simulate a single realisation of the price paths from each of the models investigated in Section 3. The time scale in- duced by the observables are controlled using the Poisson sam- pling with the average inter-arrivals ranging from 1 to 45 sec- onds. Each price model is then re-sampled with the di ffer- ent average inter-arrivals 100 times. Figure 6 plots the mean Hayashi–Yoshida estimate on (a) the Brownian price model, (b) the MMN model and (c) the Hawkes price model as a function of the average inter-arrival time with error ribbons containing 95% of the estimates at each 1/λ over the 100 replications. We see in Figure 6 that the Hayashi–Yoshida estimator re- covers the induced correlation of the Brownian price model re- gardless of the time scale induced by the observables. 6 On the other hand we see that the estimator presents an Epps like effect as a function of the average inter-arrival time for the MMN and Hawkes price model. However, the Epps like e ffect from the MMN and Hawkes price models arise because of very different reasons. The decay 6The discretisation in the simulation of the diffusion process should be finer than the average inter-arrivals to avoid insu fficient granularity in the di ffusion process. 9 (a) Brownian price model. (b) MMN model. (c) Hawkes price model. Figure 6: The Hayashi–Yoshida estimate (dashes lines) given in Eq. (12) plotted as a function of the mean inter-arrival for (a) the Brownian price model, (b) the MMN model and (c) the Hawkes price model. The limiting /inducedρ (horizontal dotted line) is approximately 0.65 as before. We see how the time scale induced by the observables can affect the correction of asynchrony for the different underlying processes. in correlations from the MMN model is a result of the signal- to-noise ratio at the di fferent time scales induced by the ob- servables. On shorter time scales the log-return observed from transactions is mostly composed of market microstructure noise and brings little information regarding the volatility of the price process, whereas on longer time scales the amount of market microstructure noise remains constant while the informational content of volatility increases A ¨ıt-Sahalia et al. (2005). This leads to an overestimation of volatility on shorter time scales which results in the decay of correlations. On the other hand the Epps like e ffect from the Hawkes price model is the result of the observables inducing a different time scale average over the underlying events. This means we recover a correlation es- timate from the synchronous process over a mixture of time scales from the observables. This means we can discriminate the underlying process of an unknown system by re-sampling the process at different average inter-arrivals and estimating the Hayashi–Yoshida estimates. 7 If the plot is flat for various values of 1 /λ then the underlying process is a diffusion-based process. If the plot presents decay- ing correlation for smaller 1 /λ then the underlying process is either a diffusion-based process but contaminated with ad hoc noise or it is composed of discrete connected events (a system where correlation is then emergent). Experiment #2: Overlap correction In the next experiment we plot the actual residual Epps curves which allows us to investigate the interplay between the two time scales induced by the observables and the estimator on the MMN and Hawkes price model. Once again the time scale induced by the observables are controlled using the Pois- son sampling with average inter-arrivals set as 1/λ = 1, 10, 25. In this case there is no need to perform the experiment with the 7Our experiments are not formal hypothesis tests but a heuristic approach aimed at determining which implicit model assumption is better satisfied through the stylised facts. Brownian price model. This is because with the Poisson sam- pling, the Epps e ffect is characterised exactly by Eq. (5) and therefore the residual Epps e ffect here will be flat and recover the correct underlying correlation for the various inter-arrivals. In figure 7 we see that in both the MMN and Hawkes price model that the overlap correction tends towards the in- duced/limiting correlation as 1/λ increases, whereas the overlap correction presents the residual Epps effect as 1/λ decreases. We see that our ability to recover the induced correlation be- comes problematic when 1 /λ becomes smaller for the MMN model. This is because the signal-to-noise ratio is larger on shorter time scales. On the other hand we see that we start to recover the correlation from the synchronous case when 1/λ is very small for the Hawkes model. This is expected since the asynchrony correction is supposed to recover the correlation from the synchronous process. This confirms that indeed the time scale induced by the observables do in fact play a funda- mental role in our ability to correct for asynchrony. This experiment also gives us a method to discriminate the underlying process of an unknown system. This is achieved by sampling the unknown system with di fferent average inter- arrivals and then plotting the residual Epps curves using the overlap correction. If the residual Epps curves are flat for all values of 1/λ then the underlying process is a di ffusion-based process. If the residual Epps curves decay more for smaller 1/λ then the underlying process is either a di ffusion-based process but contaminated with ad hoc noise or is composed of discrete connected events. Experiment #3: k-skip Hayashi–Yoshida The first two experiments are well suited to determine the underlying process of an unknown system in a simulation sce- nario. This is because the first two experiments require the re- sampling of the process to obtain di fferent sets of observables Ui and U j with different sized inter-arrivals. This is a prob- lem with TAQ data because there is only one set of Ui and U j. Moreover, the second experiment requires multiple replications to get a good gauge on the error ribbons. Using results based 10 (a) MMN model. (b) Hawkes price model. Figure 7: The overlap correction Eq. (7) for three sampling frequencies of observables are plotted. The three sampling frequencies chosen are: 1 /λ = 1, 10, 25 which corresponds to the red, blue, green lines respectively. The thick line is the theoretical synchronous Epps effect given by Eq. (15) and the horizontal dotted line is the induced/limitingρ set to be approximately 0.65 as before. We see the interplay between the time scale induced by the observables and the time scale induced by the estimator. on one replication with the second experiment cannot mean- ingfully determine the underlying process. Error bands are re- quired to clearly see that the process consistently decays. The first experiment does not require replications to determine the underlying process. This is because the error ribbons are very narrow. This means that the estimates are either flat or they decay. This experiment is a variant of the first experiment but over- comes the issue of requiring multiple sets of Ui and U j. This is achieved by using a single set of Ui and U j when discrim- inating. Gri ffin and Oomen (2011) provide the inspiration to over come this issue by using k-skip sampling. With only one set of arrivals Ui and U j, we can imitate multiple sets of ar- rivals with different sized inter-arrivals by sampling every kth observation in the single set of arrivals. Concretely, from the single set of Ui, let the kth-skip set of samples be the set Ui k = n ti k, ti 2k,..., ti ⌊#Ui/k⌋k o . Note that # Ui is the cardinality of set Ui. Instead of re-sampling and computing the Hayashi–Yoshida estimate with different mean inter-arrival 1/λ, we can now com- pute the Hayashi–Yoshida estimate as a function of thekth-skip set of samples Ui k and U j k. Figure 8 plots the Hayashi–Yoshida estimates as a function of the k-skip sampling for (a) the Brownian price model, (b) the MMN model and (c) the Hawkes price model. The k-skip sampling is performed by sampling every observation k = 1 to every 50th observation k = 50. To re-create conditions similar to that of empirical data, we only sample one set of observables from each price process. Figure 8 recovers similar results as Figure 6. We see that the induced correlation of the Brownian price model is recovered for any sizedk-skip sampling, whereas the MMN and Hawkes price model presents an Epps like effect as a function of the k-skip sampling. This result allows us to discriminate the underlying process of an unknown system with one set of observables. If the plot is flat for various values of k then the underlying process is a diffusion-based process. If the plot presents a decaying cor- relation for smaller k then the underlying process is either a diffusion-based process but contaminated with ad hoc noise or is simply composed of discrete connected events. 5. Estimators for market microstructure noise We apply two alternative estimators in order to try and dis- criminate between the MMN and Hawkes price model. The two estimators considered here are the Quasi-Maximum Likelihood Estimator (QMLE) A ¨ıt-Sahalia et al. (2010) and the Kalman- EM (KEM) estimator Corsi et al. (2015), which is a special case of the Multi-asset Lagged Adjustment (MLA) estimator Buccheri et al. (2020).8 The QMLE and KEM estimator addresses both asynchrony and market microstructure noise. However, the way the two estimators address asynchrony does not fit easily within our ex- perimental framework. First, the QMLE addresses asynchrony by applying a di ffer- ent sampling approach called the generalised sampling time. We use the most naive version of the sampling scheme that re- duces to previous tick interpolation so that the estimator can fit within our experimental framework. 8We do not use the MLA estimator here because we found that the estimator overestimates the correlation in our models which have no lead-lag dependen- cies by trying to account for lead-lags. 11 (a) Brownian price model. (b) MMN model. (c) Hawkes price model. Figure 8: The Hayashi–Yoshida estimate (dashes lines) given in Eq. (12) plotted as a function of the k-skip sampling for (a) the Brownian price model, (b) the MMN model and (c) the Hawkes price model. The limiting /inducedρ (horizontal dotted line) is approximately 0.65 as before. We see that k-skip sampling allows us to discriminate the processes with one set of arrivals. (a) Brownian price model (b) MMN model (c) Hawkes price model Figure 9: The measured correlation (red line), QMLE (blue line) and KEM estimate (green line) are compared on (a) the Brownian price model, (b) the MMN model and (c) the Hawkes price model using Poisson sampling. Second, the KEM addresses asynchrony by using the Kalman filter based smoother to access the latent states. The caveat here is that the observations and missing observations must all occur on a homogeneous grid. This is problematic within our experi- mental framework because we apply Poisson and Hawkes sam- pling to obtain the observables instead of a Bernoulli censor- ing approach. Even though Poisson sampling and independent Bernoulli censoring are equivalent, the subtle difference is that observables from Poisson sampling do not necessarily lie on a homogeneous grid. This creates an ambiguity when creating a homogeneous grid at different time scales∆t. For small ∆t, if an observable is near two grid points, a decision needs to be made in terms of which grid point the observable should be shifted to. For large ∆t, if there are more than two observables near the same grid point, a decision needs to be made in terms of which observable should be on that grid point. To overcome these is- sues, we simply apply previous tick interpolation and create a synchronised grid to feed into the KEM estimator. This also en- sures that the estimator fits within our experimental framework. We reduce the simulation size to T being 6.5 hours (23,400 seconds) and we only perform 10 replications for this proof of concept. The reason for this is because of the long compute time of the QMLE which requires the optimisation of four like- lihoods to obtain a correlation estimate. Otherwise the param- eter settings for the models and the experimental setup remain the same as before. Figure 9 compares the measured correlation, QMLE and KEM estimates for the (a) the Brownian price model, (b) the MMN model and (c) the Hawkes price model under Poisson sampling. We see that the QMLE and KEM estimates are larger than that of the measured correlation for all three models. This larger estimate is a result of the QMLE and KEM adjusting for market microstructure noise which may or may not be present depending on the model. We perform experiment 2 from Section 4 using the two esti- mators to see if they can help us discriminate between the MMN and the Hawkes price model. This can be seen in Figure 10. We see that both processes lead to similar behaviours in the residual Epps effect. The case when 1/λ = 1 is notable as these arguably present different behaviours between the two models. However 12 (a) QMLE on MMN model (b) QMLE on Hawkes price model (c) KEM on MMN model (d) KEM on Hawkes price model Figure 10: The QMLE (first row) and KEM (second row) applied on the MMN (first column) and the Hawkes price model (second column) for three sampling frequencies of observables. The three sampling frequencies chosen are: 1/λ = 1, 10, 25 which corresponds to the red, blue, green lines respectively. The thick line is the theoretical synchronous Epps effect given by Eq. (15) and the horizontal dotted line is the induced/limitingρ set to be approximately 0.65 as before. 13 the difference is not as clear cut as in the case of a simple Brow- nian motion against these two processes. Therefore it does not seem like discrimination between the two processes is possible with our current experiments. What is interesting about Figure 10 is that the behaviour of the residual Epps e ffect under di fferent sampling frequencies (from the observables) are the reversal of what is seen in Fig- ure 7. We see that there is a larger (smaller) decay in the resid- ual Epps e ffect for larger (smaller) 1 /λ. We argue that this is a result of the interplay between the estimators correcting for noise and the signal-to-noise ratio from the di fferent time scales induced by the observables. The estimators pick up a larger signal-to-noise ratio which leads to a larger correction when 1/λ is small, and the estimators pick up a smaller signal- to-noise ratio which leads to a smaller correction when 1 /λ is large. What is concerning is that the estimators also seem to be cor- recting for noise in the Hawkes price model. The estimators are misconstruing the fundamental discreteness in the model as noise. This is because the noise assumption is a-priori built into the estimators. Addressing this a-priori assumption should be considered when picking estimators and designing experi- ments to discriminate between the two processes. Other es- timators that could potentially help us discriminate between the MMN and the Hawkes price model include the estimators from Barndorff-Nielsen et al. (2011); Peluso et al. (2014) and M¨unnix et al. (2011). Additionally, the MLA estimator from Buccheri et al. (2020) could prove useful when trying to dis- criminate under the presence of lead-lag. 6. Perspectives on noise and discreteness Limitations of the discrimination In Section 4 we were able to discriminate between a diffusion-based process and a di ffusion-based processes with ad hoc noise, or discrete connected events. However, we can- not discriminate between diffusion-based processes withad hoc noise and discrete connected events. This is because both of these processes lead to similar behaviour in the residual Epps effect, albeit for completely different reasons. In Section 5 we applied two alternative estimators to demon- strate the complexity and ambiguity relating to attempts to dis- criminate between the MMN and Hawkes price model using the second experiment. Specifically, we applied the Quasi- Maximum Likelihood Estimator (QMLE) A ¨ıt-Sahalia et al. (2010) and the Kalman-EM (KEM) estimator Corsi et al. (2015) to the problem. We find that both processes lead to similar be- haviours in the residual Epps e ffect and it remains unclear on how we can discriminate between these processes. Another possible limitation of our experiments is that they are not designed to account for lead-lag. This could be prob- lematic because Griffin and Oomen (2011) recovered behaviour similar to what was observed in Figures 8b and 8c using em- pirical TAQ data from the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) with the k-skip Hayashi–Yoshida estimator. However, they ar- gue that price dynamics are slow to fully reflect the appropriate correlations in the empirical data. The underlying assumption of the Hayashi–Yoshida estimator is that all available informa- tion regarding the correlation should be fully incorporated when a price update arrives. They then correct for this by adjusting the Hayashi–Yoshida estimator to account lead-lag dependen- cies. Lead-lags can arise within the framework of the Hawkes price model Bacry et al. (2013a,b), however the specification used here in Eq. (14) is fully symmetric and thus there are no lead-lag effects in our models (see Remark 9 of Bacry et al. (2013b)). Currently our discrimination is performed without considering lead-lag effects but this is something that could be incorporated when designing future experiments but does not undermine our claims. Finding the correct representation Intraday financial prices are subject to discretisation e ffects where the prices are multiples of the tick-size Robert and Rosenbaum (2011b). This is a fundamental property arising from how financial markets are designed. This property is naturally incorporated within tick-by-tick models such as the Hawkes price model. In contrast, this property poses a prob- lem for macroscopic models such as those built using Brow- nian motion (diffusion models) because the implied resolution dynamics under such models are at odds with the underlying process — something which becomes immediately clear when estimating correlation structures M ¨unnix et al. (2011); Robert and Rosenbaum (2011a). The “market microstructure noise e ffects” were introduced to reconcile macroscopic latent models with the signature plot A¨ıt-Sahalia et al. (2005, 2011); Zhang et al. (2005). That is, by incorporating noise, various microstructure e ffects due to the discreteness of price dynamics e.g. bid-ask bounces and mea- surement or rounding errors can be accounted for. However, we argue that although with enough such additions one can rec- oncile empirical effects with a chosen latent model they do not reconcile the model process with the data generating process at a microscopic resolution. For this reason we advocate that noise is technically an additionalad hoc9 modelling assumption that is used to reconcile the discrepancy between tick data and macroscopic models when “downscaling” from macroscopic to microscopic A¨ıt-Sahalia and Jacod (2020). Finding a more appropriate representation for the tick data generating process is particularly important when it comes to the investigation of the Epps e ffect. This is because the decay in correlation is an anomaly that requires a correction under the noise representation. The goal of the noise representation is to try recover the constant underlying induced correlation that is independent of ∆t under the presence of ad hoc noise. On the other hand, the decay in correlation is a fundamental property under the representation of discrete connected events. The ambition here is then to only correct for statistical e ffects 9Popper (1974), pp. 986, “I call a conjecture “ad hoc” if it is introduced [. . . ] to explain a particular difficulty, but if [. . . ] it cannot be tested independently”; here it may be best to think about the noise assumption as “unwarranted” fol- lowing Hunt (2012). 14 leading to a decay in correlations so that we can recover the the- oretical underlying correlation that does depend on ∆t. Indeed, starting with a representation that recovers fundamental proper- ties at the atomic scale may still resolve effects when transition- ing to macroscopic observation scales, e.g. Diana and Gebbie (2025) provide a discrete model that can be averaged to gener- ate the emergence of an Epps effect Bauer et al. (2024). In this model the system comprises discrete events that do not natu- rally align in a unique global trading time and there are events that cannot be uniquely aligned in a cross sectional epoch. Cor- relations can only emerge on averaging scales sufficiently long that there are enough events in the discrete sample periods to allow meaningful estimation. Correlations are then an extrinsic property as the result of an averaging procedure that is separate from the data generating process. The key point we are making is that additional ad hoc model complexity is required in order to recover the observed phe- nomena from models which are based on Brownian motions. This type of model complexity is not required when using a Hawkes representation which starts with the event waiting time distributions, nor is it required when starting with order- flow models built on market phenomenology Diana and Geb- bie (2025) that start with discrete order events. We argue, based on the principle of parsimony, i.e. Occam’s razor , that the Hawkes representation is a more appropriate foundational stochastic process based representation, and that the simplest explanation for the Epps e ffect is that it is the signature, the “smoking gun”, of a fundamentally discrete and event driven data generating process. Indeed, the discrete nature of real-world market processes do not only arise through the lens of correlation. Discreteness at the atomic scale shows up even when attempting to model in- dividual trajectories using jump diffusion models; Detectability of jumps in such processes using discretely observed trajecto- ries is heavily dependant on the resolution (both length and fre- quency of the series) of the data10. More importantly, the extent to which one can distinguish be- tween pure diffusion, diffusion with jumps, and pure jump pro- cesses such as Hawkes processes becomes similarly dependant on the observation resolution – note all three of these model classes can be subsumed within the jump di ffusion class 11. However, careful scrutiny of how such competing models be- have under various resolutions has made it clear to the present authors that the di ffusion component, at least as far as it con- cerns financial data, is a mathematical convenience that allows one to model at finite scales without the awkwardness of mea- suring events that occur at frequencies which cannot be ob- served at the time scale of the observations, and such discrep- ancies point to the underlying data generating process being discrete. When modelling at the atomic scale, di ffusion-based models, direct or latent do not reflect the dynamics of the true 10See Chapter 4 of Pienaar (2016) 11For example, see Figure 4.8.3 of Pienaar (2016) and compare the transi- tional density dynamics of other jump di ffusion models in the text, and note that these transitional densities are the lens through which we make inference at finite time scales. data generating process. 7. Empirical Investigation We compare the correction methods and detect the under- lying processes using banking equities from the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) with TAQ data for 40 trading days start- ing from 2019/05/02 to 2019/06/28. The data is extracted from Bloomberg Pro and is processed so that trades with the same time stamp are aggregated using a volume weighted average. The equities considered are: FirstRand Limited (FSR), Absa Group Ltd (ABG), Nedbank Group Ltd (NED) and Standard Bank Group Ltd (SBK). The correlations are measured for each trading day and the ensemble is reported. The error ribbons are computed such that they contain 95% of the estimates at each ∆t between the trad- ing days. They are computed using the Student t-distribution with 39 degrees of freedom and the standard deviation of the estimates between the days at each ∆t. Additionally, t = 0 starts once the equity pair has each made their first trade and T = 28, 200 seconds for a seven hour and 50 minute trading day. Table 1: The table reports the mean inter-arrival estimate and the associated standard deviation for the four banking equities over the 40 day trading period. Tickers 1 /ˆλ[sec] ˆ σ(1/λ) FSR 12.09 19.53 SBK 13.06 21.51 NED 15.39 25.14 ABG 15.68 26.27 We only have one set of observables from empirical TAQ data which means that the second experiment is not well suited for discriminating empirical data. Nonetheless we attempt to apply the experiment because it does reveal something inter- esting. In order to apply the second experiment we try to re- create the simulation setting by finding equity pairs with sim- ilar correlation levels but di fferent average inter-arrivals. Ta- ble 1 gives the estimate for the mean and standard deviation for the inter-arrival time over the 40 trading day period. It is clear that the pair FSR and SBK (NED and ABG) have comparable and on average smaller (larger) inter-arrival times respectively. Therefore we will compare the corrections on FSR/SBK against NED/ABG to determine if there is a di fference in the decay of the residual Epps e ffect following the spirit of the second ex- periment. Figure 11 compares the correction methods on the pair (a) FSR/SBK and (b) NED /ABG to investigate the residual Epps effect. We see that the variability of the correlation estimates between days is very high but largely remains positive. This is why we chose the banking equities since they have a strong correlation. If the equities are less correlated, the Epps curves can jump between negative and positive between the days. The flat trade correction again over-compensates the correction. The Hayashi–Yoshida estimates do not recover the same estimates 15 (a) SBK/FSR. (b) NED/ABG. Figure 11: The corrections are applied and compared for the equity pairs (a) SBK /FSR, and (b) NED /ABG. The red line is the measured correlation from the synchronised process Eq. (6), the blue line is the flat trade correction Eq. (9) and the green line is the overlap correction Eq. (7). Lastly the horizontal dashed line is the Hayashi–Yoshida estimator Eq. (12). Figure 12: Comparison of the overlap correction (dotted lines) and the mea- sured correlation (solid lines). All the estimates are scaled by the saturation cor- relation so that clearer comparisons can be made for the equity pairs NED/ABG (red) and SBK/FSR (blue). as the overlap correction or the saturation level. This is an indi- cation that empirical TAQ data cannot be modelled using Brow- nian motions alone. Figure 12 takes a closer look at the overlap correction and the measured correlation for the equity pairs SBK /FSR and NED/ABG investigated in Figure 11. Here we re-scale the es- timates by the saturation level for better comparison since we have two different equity pairs. We see the measured and cor- Figure 13: The k-skip sampling with the Hayashi–Yoshida estimator applied to the equity pairs SBK/FSR (blue line) and NED/ABG (red line). The empirical reality suggests the underlying system is from discrete connected events. rection are similar for both the equity pairs. The similarity of the overlap correction may be due to the fact that the average inter-arrivals are not significantly di fferent. What is more in- teresting is this U-shaped residual Epps curve which has not been reported in the broader literature. This might be because the corrections are usually not applied at such a fine resolu- tion. Here when ∆t > 100 seconds the decay is present, the decay starts to flatten out for ∆t between 50 and 100 seconds, and below 50 seconds the residual correlation starts to rise back 16 towards the saturation level. This behaviour could not be repli- cated in the simulations with the models and sampling methods considered. We apply the k-skip Hayashi–Yoshida to better discrimi- nate the underlying process. Figure 13 computes the Hayashi– Yoshida estimates with the k-skip sampling for k ranging from 1 to 50 on the equity pairs SBK/FSR and NED/ABG. Both eq- uity pairs present a decaying correlation for smaller k. This is strong evidence suggesting that empirical TAQ data cannot simply be modelled using a pure di ffusion-based process. Ad- ditional model complexity such as market microstructure noise or a more appropriate representation using discrete connected events is required. Even though the evidence in Figure 13 may seem convinc- ing, we have yet to control for the effect of lead-lag. Additional work is required to design experiments that incorporate the im- pact of lead-lags when discriminating the underlying process. This extension may possibly provide insight into this U-shaped residual Epps curve. 8. Conclusion In empirical market studies it can be argued the that funda- mental feature of real markets are that they are discrete and event based. This then suggests that any stochastic process based representation should start with the waiting times be- tween events and then motivate other averaged features from this. This provides an ambiguity in the representation if an un- derlying continuous-time representation is to be retained. To study this ambiguity we consider the Epps effect arising from a Hawkes process representation. We derive the Epps effect arising from asynchrony and pro- vide a refined method based on existing work M ¨unnix et al. (2010, 2011) to correct for this e ffect. This has been informed by the rich prior literature Bacry et al. (2013a,b); Mastromatteo et al. (2011); T ´oth and Kert ´esz (2007, 2009); Precup and Iori (2007). The refinement is simpler to compute as it separates the estimation of correlation from the correction factor without making strong assumptions about the distributional properties of the sampling processes. The method is compared against the Hayashi–Yoshida esti- mator Hayashi and Yoshida (2005) and a correction using the probability of flat trading Buccheri et al. (2019) on three mod- els. We found that our correction recovers similar estimates to the Hayashi–Yoshida estimator and outperforms the flat trade correction. We design three experiments to discriminate the underlying process between di ffusion-based processes against di ffusion- based processes with ad hoc noise, and a process made from discrete connected events. The first two experiments are bet- ter suited for simulation scenarios because they repeatedly re- sample the process. The third experiment uses k-skip sampling and allows us to detect the underlying process with one set of observables. These experiments demonstrate that discrimination is in prin- ciple possible but highlights the complexity relating to discrim- inating between di ffusion-based processes with ad hoc noise against discrete connected events. This is because the two pro- cesses recover similar correlation dynamics albeit for very dif- ferent reasons. We argue that the Hawkes representation is the more appropriate representation because it is the simpler model that recovers the observed phenomenology without ad hoc as- sumptions. The experiments are applied to trade and quote data from the Johannesburg Stock Exchange. We found an interesting U- shaped residual Epps curve which could not be replicated un- der simulation. We find evidence using the k-skip sampling suggesting that diffusion-based process alone are insufficient to model empirical trade and quote data. The modelling should be done using discrete connected events or the di ffusion process needs to be contaminated with ad hoc noise. If the Epps effect is not just a statistical anomaly that requires a correction then this would mean that we need to be more care- ful when considering the impact of time scales in decision mak- ing if the decisions are predicated on estimates of correlation matrices. In particular, investigating the financial implications and finding the optimal scale(s) to estimate correlation matrices for different types of financial decisions will be a useful exer- cise. If tick-by-tick models such as the Hawkes processes can point to an appropriate stochastic process representations then a reconciliation of time-series properties across various time scales is necessary. Nearly unstable Hawkes processes Jais- son and Rosenbaum (2015, 2016) can be seen as the first steps towards a unified model that fits both microstructure stylised facts and diffusive stylised facts Bacry et al. (2015) while recov- ering rough volatility Gatheral et al. (2018) and hence aspects of long-memory—all from the perspective of the fundamental nature of discrete data generating processes. Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank colleagues and others in the community for constructive feedback. P.C. would like to acknowledge the support by the Manuel & Luby Washkansky Scholarship and the South African Statistical Association [grant number 127931]. References Y . A¨ıt-Sahalia and J. Jacod. From tick data to semimartingales. The Annals of Applied Probability, 30(6):2740 – 2768, 2020. doi: 10.1214 /20-AAP1571. Y . A¨ıt-Sahalia, P. A. Mykland, and L. Zhang. How Often to Sample a Continuous-Time Process in the Presence of Market Microstructure Noise. The Review of Financial Studies, 18(2):351–416, 02 2005. ISSN 0893-9454. doi: 10.1093/rfs/hhi016. Y . A¨ıt-Sahalia, J. Fan, and D. Xiu. High-Frequency Covariance Estimates With Noisy and Asynchronous Financial Data.Journal of the American Statistical Association, 105(492):1504–1517, 2010. doi: 10.1198 /jasa.2010.tm10163. Y . A¨ıt-Sahalia, P. A. Mykland, and L. Zhang. Ultra high frequency volatility estimation with dependent microstructure noise. Journal of Econometrics, 160(1):160 – 175, 2011. ISSN 0304-4076. doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/j. jeconom.2010.03.028. Realized V olatility. E. Bacry, S. Delattre, M. Hoffmann, and J. F. Muzy. Modelling microstructure noise with mutually exciting point processes. Quantitative Finance, 13(1): 65–77, 2013a. doi: 10.1080 /14697688.2011.647054. 17 E. Bacry, S. Delattre, M. Ho ffmann, and J. F. Muzy. Some limit theorems for Hawkes processes and application to financial statistics. Stochastic Pro- cesses and their Applications, 123, 07 2013b. E. Bacry, I. Mastromatteo, and J.-F. Muzy. Hawkes processes in finance. Mar- ket Microstructure and Liquidity , 01(01):1550005, 2015. doi: 10.1142 / S2382626615500057. O. E. Barndor ff-Nielsen, P. R. Hansen, A. Lunde, and N. Shephard. Mul- tivariate realised kernels: Consistent positive semi-definite estimators of the covariation of equity prices with noise and non-synchronous trading. Journal of Econometrics , 162(2):149–169, 2011. ISSN 0304-4076. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeconom.2010.07.009. D. Bauer, D. Diana, and T. Gebbie. Correlation emergence in two coupled sim- ulated limit order books, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408. 03181. C. Bowsher. Modelling security market events in continuous time: Intensity based, multivariate point process models. Journal of Econometrics, 141(2): 876–912, 2007. URL https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee: econom:v:141:y:2007:i:2:p:876-912. G. Buccheri, G. Livieri, D. Pirino, and A. Pollastri. A closed-form formula characterization of the Epps e ffect. Quantitative Finance, 20(2):243–254, 2019. doi: 10.1080 /14697688.2019.1659992. G. Buccheri, F. Corsi, and S. Peluso. High-Frequency Lead-Lag E ffects and Cross-Asset Linkages: A Multi-Asset Lagged Adjustment Model. Jour- nal of Business & Economic Statistics , 0(0):1–22, 2020. doi: 10.1080 / 07350015.2019.1697699. P. Chang, E. Pienaar, and T. Gebbie. Malliavin–Mancino Estimators Imple- mented with Nonuniform Fast Fourier Transforms. SIAM Journal on Scien- tific Computing, 42(6):B1378–B1403, 2020. doi: 10.1137 /20M1325903. P. Chang, E. Pienaar, and T. Gebbie. The Epps e ffect under alternative sam- pling schemes. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 583: 126329, 2021. ISSN 0378-4371. doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2021. 126329. F. Corsi, S. Peluso, and F. Audrino. Missing in Asynchronicity: A Kalman- em Approach for Multivariate Realized Covariance Estimation. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 30(3):377–397, 2015. doi: https: //doi.org/10.1002/ jae.2378. D. Diana and T. Gebbie. Non-uniformly sampled simulated price impact of an order-book. Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics , 456: 116202, 2025. ISSN 0377-0427. doi: 10.1016 /j.cam.2024.116202. R. F. Engle and J. R. Russell. Autoregressive conditional duration: A new model for irregularly spaced transaction data. Econometrica, 66(5):1127– 1162, 1998. ISSN 00129682, 14680262. doi: 10.2307 /2999632. T. W. Epps. Comovements in stock prices in the very short run. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 74(366):291–298, 1979. ISSN 01621459. J. Gatheral, T. Jaisson, and M. Rosenbaum. V olatility is rough. Quantitative Finance, 18(6):933–949, 2018. doi: 10.1080 /14697688.2017.1393551. J. E. Griffin and R. C. Oomen. Covariance measurement in the presence of non- synchronous trading and market microstructure noise.Journal of Economet- rics, 160(1):58–68, 01 2011. T. Hayashi and N. Yoshida. On covariance estimation of non-synchronously observed diffusion processes. Bernoulli, 11(2):359–379, 04 2005. doi: 10. 3150/bj/1116340299. J. C. Hunt. On ad hoc hypotheses*. Philosophy of Science, 79(1):1–14, 2012. ISSN 00318248, 1539767X. T. Jaisson and M. Rosenbaum. Limit theorems for nearly unstable hawkes processes. The Annals of Applied Probability , 25(2):600–631, Apr 2015. ISSN 1050-5164. doi: 10.1214 /14-aap1005. T. Jaisson and M. Rosenbaum. Rough fractional di ffusions as scaling limits of nearly unstable heavy tailed Hawkes processes. The Annals of Applied Probability, 26(5):2860 – 2882, 2016. doi: 10.1214 /15-AAP1164. P. Malliavin and M. Mancino. Fourier series method for measurement of mul- tivariate volatilities. Finance and Stochastics, 6(1):49–61, 01 2002. ISSN 0949-2984. doi: 10.1007 /s780-002-8400-6. P. Malliavin and M. Mancino. A Fourier transform method for nonparamet- ric estimation of multivariate volatility. Ann. Statist., 37(4):1983–2010, 08 2009. doi: 10.1214 /08-AOS633. I. Mastromatteo, M. Marsili, and P. Zoi. Financial correlations at ultra-high frequency: theoretical models and empirical estimation. The European Physical Journal B , 80(2):243–253, 03 2011. ISSN 1434-6036. doi: 10.1140/epjb/e2011-10865-y. M. C. M ¨unnix, R. Sch ¨afer, and T. Guhr. Impact of the tick-size on finan- cial returns and correlations. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 389(21):4828 – 4843, 2010. ISSN 0378-4371. doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2010.06.037. M. C. M ¨unnix, R. Sch ¨afer, and T. Guhr. Statistical causes for the Epps e ffect in microstructure noise. International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance, 14(08):1231–1246, 2011. doi: 10.1142 /S0219024911006838. S. Peluso, F. Corsi, and A. Mira. A Bayesian High-Frequency Estimator of the Multivariate Covariance of Noisy and Asynchronous Returns. Journal of Financial Econometrics, 13(3):665–697, 07 2014. ISSN 1479-8409. doi: 10.1093/jjfinec/nbu017. E. A. Pienaar. Non-Linear Diffusion Processes and Applications. PhD thesis, University of Cape Town, 2016. K. Popper. Replies to my critics. In P. A. Schilpp, editor, The Philosophy of Karl Popper, pages 961–1197. Open Court, 1974. O. V . Precup and G. Iori. Cross-correlation measures in the high-frequency domain. The European Journal of Finance, 13(4):319–331, 2007. doi: 10. 1080/13518470600813565. R. Ren`o. A closer look at the Epps effect. International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance, 06(01):87–102, 11 2003. doi: 10.2139 /ssrn.314723. C. Y . Robert and M. Rosenbaum. The model with uncertainty zones for ultra high frequency prices and durations: Applications to statistical estimation and mathematical finance. In F. Abergel, B. K. Chakrabarti, A. Chakraborti, and M. Mitra, editors, Econophysics of Order-driven Markets: Proceedings of Econophys-Kolkata V , pages 203–224, Milano, 2011a. Springer Milan. ISBN 978-88-470-1766-5. doi: 10.1007 /978-88-470-1766-5 14. C. Y . Robert and M. Rosenbaum. A new approach for the dynamics of ultra- high-frequency data: The model with uncertainty zones.Journal of financial econometrics, 9(2):344–366, 2011b. ISSN 1479-8409. B. T´oth and J. Kert´esz. Modeling the Epps e ffect of cross correlations in asset prices. In J. Kert ´esz, S. Bornholdt, and R. N. Mantegna, editors, Noise and Stochastics in Complex Systems and Finance, volume 6601, pages 89 – 97. International Society for Optics and Photonics, SPIE, 2007. doi: 10.1117 / 12.727127. B. T´oth and J. Kert ´esz. The Epps e ffect revisited. Quantitative Finance, 9(7): 793–802, 2009. doi: 10.1080 /14697680802595668. L. Zhang. Estimating covariation: Epps effect, microstructure noise. Journal of Econometrics, 160:33–47, 02 2010. doi: 10.1016 /j.jeconom.2010.03.012. L. Zhang, P. A. Mykland, and Y . A¨ıt-Sahalia. A tale of two time scales: De- termining integrated volatility with noisy high-frequency data. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 100(472):1394–1411, 2005. ISSN 01621459. 18