Generating Realistic Stock Market Order Streams Junyi Li,1 Xintong Wang,2 Yaoyang Lin,3 Arunesh Sinha,4 Michael P . Wellman2 1University of Pittsburgh, 2University of Michigan, 3Harvard University, 4Singapore Management University jul116@pitt.edu, xintongw@umich.edu, yaoyanglin@g.harvard.edu, aruneshs@smu.edu.sg, wellman@umich.edu Abstract We propose an approach to generate realistic and high- ﬁdelity stock market data based on generative adversarial networks (GANs). Our Stock-GAN model employs a con- ditional Wasserstein GAN to capture history dependence of orders. The generator design includes specially crafted aspects including components that approximate the market’s auction mechanism, augmenting the order history with order-book constructions to improve the generation task. We perform an ablation study to verify the usefulness of aspects of our net- work structure. We provide a mathematical characterization of distribution learned by the generator. We also propose statis- tics to measure the quality of generated orders. We test our approach with synthetic and actual market data, compare to many baseline generative models, and ﬁnd the generated data to be close to real data. 1 Introduction Financial markets are among the most well-studied and closely watched complex multiagent systems in existence. Well-functioning ﬁnancial markets are critical to the oper- ation of a complex global economy, and small changes in the efﬁciency or stability of such markets can have enor- mous ramiﬁcations. Accurate modeling of ﬁnancial markets can support improved design and regulation of these criti- cal institutions. There is a vast literature on ﬁnancial market modeling, though still a large gap between the state-of-art and the ideal. Analytic approaches provide insight through highly stylized model forms. Agent-based models accom- modate greater dynamic complexity, and are often able to reproduce “stylized facts” of real-world markets (LeBaron 2006). Currently lacking, however, is a simulation capable of producing market data at high ﬁdelity and high realism. Our aim is to develop such a model, to support a range of market design and analysis problems. This work provides a ﬁrst step, learning a high-ﬁdelity generator from real stock market data streams. Our main contribution is Stock-GAN: an approach to pro- duce realistic stock market order streams from real market data. We utilize a conditional Wasserstein GAN (WGAN) (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017; Mirza and Osindero 2014) to capture the time-dependence of order streams, with Copyright c© 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved. both the generator and critic conditional on history of orders. The main innovation in the Stock-GAN network architecture lies in two deliberately crafted features of the generator. The ﬁrst is a separate neural network that is used to approximate the double auction mechanism underlying stock exchanges. This pre-trained network is embedded in the generator en- abling it to model order processing and transaction generation. The second feature is the inclusion of order-book information in the conditioning history of the network. The order book captures the key features of market state that are not directly apparent from order history segments. Our second contribution is a mathematical characteriza- tion of the distribution learned by the generator. We show that our designed generator models the stock market data stream as arising from a stochastic process with ﬁnite mem- ory dependence. The stochastic process view also makes precise the conditional distribution that the generator is learn- ing as well the joint distribution that the critic of the WGAN distinguishes by estimating the earth mover’s distance. The stochastic process has no closed form representation, which necessitates the use of a neural network to learn it. Finally, we experiment with synthetic and real market data. The synthetic data is produced using a stock market sim- ulator that has been used in several agent-based ﬁnancial studies (Wellman and Wah 2017), but is far from real market data. The real market data was obtained from OneMarket- Data, a ﬁnancial data provider. We propose ﬁve statistics for evaluating stock market data, such as the distribution of price and quantity of orders, inter-arrival times of orders, and the best bid and best ask evolution over time. We compare against other baseline generative models such as recurrent conditional variational auto-encoder (V AE) and DCGAN in- stead of WGAN within Stock-GAN. We perform an ablation study showing the usefulness of our generator structure de- sign as elaborated above. Overall, Stock-GAN is able to best generate realistic data compared to the alternatives. An ap- pendix in the full version provides all additional results and code for our work. 2 Related Work and Background WGAN is a well-known GAN variant (Goodfellow et al . 2014; Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017). Most prior work on generation of sequences using GANs has been in the domain of text generation (Press et al . 2017; Zhang et al . arXiv:2006.04212v1 [q-fin.ST] 7 Jun 2020 Figure 1: Representation and evolution of a limit order book. 2017). However, since the space of word representations is not continuous, the semantics change with nearby word representation, and given a lack of agreement on the metrics for measuring goodness of sentences, producing good quality text using GANs is still an active area of research. Stock market data does not suffer from this representation problem but the history dependence for stock markets can be much longer than for text generation. There are many advanced proposals to deal with long term dependence (Neil, Pfeiffer, and Liu 2016; Chang et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2017), however, we ﬁnd that our use of LSTMs with conditional WGAN performs quite good with little tuning of hyperparameters. Xiao et al. (2017; 2018) introduced GAN-based methods for generating point processes; they generate the time for transaction events in stock markets. Other work aim to generate transaction prices in a stock market (Da Silva and Shi 2019; Koshiyama, Firoozye, and Treleaven 2019; Zhang et al. 2019; Wiese et al. 2019). Our problem is richer and harder as we aim to generate the actual limit orders including time, order type, price, and quantity information. Deep neural networks and machine learning techniques have been used on ﬁnancial data mostly for prediction of transaction price (Hiransha et al. 2018; Bao, Yue, and Rao 2017; Qian 2017; Zhang, Aggarwal, and Qi 2017) and for prediction of actual returns (Abe and Nakayama 2018). As stated, our goal is not market prediction per se, but rather mar- ket modeling. Whereas the problems of learning to predict and generate may overlap (e.g., both aim to capture regular- ity in the domain), the evaluation criteria and end product are quite distinct. GANs have been used for generation of customer buy orders in e-commerce setting (Shi et al. 2019; Kumar, Biswas, and Sanyal 2018), however, stock market orders are much more complex with buys, sells, and cancel- lations; further we attempt to ensure realism of higher level dynamics like the best bid and ask evolution over time. Limit order books The stock market is a venue where eq- uities or stocks of publicly held companies are traded. Nearly all stock markets follow thecontinuous double auction(CDA) mechanism (Friedman 1993). Traders submit bids, or limit orders, specifying the maximum price at which they would be willing to buy a speciﬁed quantity of a stock, or the mini- mum price at which they would be willing to sell a quantity. 1 The order book is a store that maintains the set of active orders: those submitted but not yet transacted or canceled. CDAs are continuous in the sense that when a new order matches an existing (incumbent) order in the order book, the market clears immediately and the trade is executed at the price of the incumbent order—which is then removed from the order book. Orders may be submitted at any time, and a buy order matches and transacts with a sell order when their respective limits are mutually satisﬁed. For example, as shown in Figure 1, if a buy order with price $10.01 and quantity 100 arrives and the best sell offer in the order book has the same price and quantity, then they match exactly and transact. As shown, the next buy order does not match any sell, and the following sell order partially matches what is then the best buy in the order book. The limit order book maintains the current active orders in the market (or the state of the market), which can be described in terms of the quantity offered to buy or sell across the range of price levels. Each order arrival changes the market state, recorded as an update to the order book. After processing any arrived order every buy price level is higher than all sell price levels, and the best bid refers to the lowest buy price level and the best ask refers to the highest sell price level. See Figure 1 for an illustration. The order book is often approximated by few (e.g., ten) price levels above the best bid and ten price levels below the best ask; as these prices are typically the ones that dictate the transactions in 1Hence, the CDA is often referred to as a limit-order market in the ﬁnance literature (Abergel et al. 2016). (a) xi (b) Generator (c) Critic Figure 2: Stock-GAN architecture the market. There are various kinds of traders in a stock market, ranging from individual investors to large investing ﬁrms. Thus, there is a wide variation in the nature of orders submitted. We aim to generate streams of orders that are close in aggregate (not per trader) to real order streams for a given stock. We focus on generating orders and not transactions, as the CDA mechanism is deterministic and transactions can be determined exactly given a stream of orders. In fact, we model the CDA as a ﬁxed (and separately learned) neural network within the generation process. In this work, we limit ourselves to limit orders as we do not have access to richer order types such as iceberg or bracket orders. 3 Stock-GAN We view the stock market orders for a given chunk of time of day ∆t as a collection of vector valued random variable {xi}i∈N indexed by the limit order sequence number in N ={1, . . . , n}.{xi} corresponds to the ith limit order, but, includes more information than the limit order such as the current best bid and best ask. The components of the random vector xi include the time interval di, type of order ti, limit order price pi, limit order quantity qi, and the best bid ai and best ask bi. The time intervaldi speciﬁes the differ- ence in time between the current order i and previous order i− 1 (in precision of milliseconds); the range of di is ﬁnite. The type of order can be buy, sell, cancel buy, or cancel sell (represented in two bits). The price and quantity are restricted to lie within ﬁnite bounds. The price range is discretized in units of US cents and the quantity range is discretized in units of the equity (non-negative integers). The best bid and best ask are limit orders themselves and are speciﬁed by price and quantity. We divide the time in a day into 24 equal intervals and ∆t refers to the index of the interval. A visual representation of xi is shown in Figure 2a. 3.1 Architecture The architecture is shown in Figure 2. We use a conditional WGAN (Mirza and Osindero 2014) with both the generator and critic conditioned on a k length history of xi’s and the time interval ∆t. We choose k = 20 . The history is con- densed to one vector using a single LSTM layer. This vector and uniform noise of dimension 100 is fed to a fully con- nected layer followed by 4 convolution layers. The generator outputs the next xi and the critic outputs a real number. Note that when training both generator and critic are fed history from real data, but when the generator executes after training it is fed its own generated data as history. The generator also outputs the best bid and ask as part of xi, which is the output coming out of the CDA network. Recall that the best bid and ask can be inferred deterministically from the current order and the previous best bid and ask (for most orders); we use the CDA network (with frozen weights during GAN training) to output the best bid and best ask; the CDA network serves as a differentiable approximation of the true CDA function. The CDA network has a fully connected layer layer followed by 3 convolutional layers. Its input is a limit order and the current best bid and best ask and the output is the next best bid and best ask. The CDA network is trained separately using the orders and order-book data using a standard mean squared error loss. Appendix B has the code for generator, critic, and the CDA network that precisely describes the structure, loss, and hyperparameters. We use the standard WGAN loss with a gradient penalty term (Gulrajani et al. 2017). The critic is trained 100 times in each iteration. The notable part in constructing the training data is that for each of 64 data points in a mini-batch the sequence of orders chosen (including history) is far away from any other sequence in that mini-batch. This is to break the dependence among data points for the history dependent stock market data. We make this mathematically precise next. (a) Synthetic price distribution (b) Synthetic quantity distribution (c) Synthetic intensity (d) Synthetic best bid/ask (e) Stock-GAN best bid/ask (f) no CDA network best bid/ask (g) no order book best bid/ask (h) Synthetic spectral density (i) Stock-GAN spectral density (j) no CDA spectral density (k) no order book spectral density Figure 3: A comparison of different statistics for generated and real synthetic limit orders. Additional results are in appendix. 3.2 Mathematical Characterization of Stock-GAN We show how general stochastic process view of limit or- der generation provides an interpretation of the distribution that the generator that Stock-GAN is learning. Recall that a stochastic process is a collection of random variables indexed by a set of numbers. We view the stock market orders for a given chunk of time of day ∆t as a collection of vector valued random variable{xi}i∈N indexed by the limit order sequence number in N ={1, . . . , n}, where n is the maxi- mum number of limit orders that can possibly show up in any ∆t time interval. Following the terminology for stochastic processes, the above process is discrete time and discrete space (discrete time here refers to the discreteness of the index set N). The k length history we use implies a ﬁnite history dependence of the current output xi, that is, P (xi | xi−1, . . . ,∆t) = P (xi| xi−1, . . . ,xi−m, ∆t) for some m. Such dependence is justiﬁed by the observation that recent or- ders mostly determine the transactions and transaction price in the market as orders that have been in the market for long either get transacted or canceled. Further, the best bid and best ask serves as an (approximate) sufﬁcient statistic for events beyond the history length m. While this process is not a Markov chain (MC), it forms what is known as a higher order MC, which implies that the process given by yi = (xi, . . . ,xi−m+1) is a MC for any given time interval ∆t. We assume that this chain formed by yi has a stationary distribution (i.e., it is irreducible and positive recurrent). A MC is a stationary stochastic process if it starts with its sta- tionary distribution. After some initial mixing time, the MC does reach its stationary distribution, thus, we assume that the process is stationary by throwing away some initial data for the day. Also, for the jumps across two time intervals ∆t, we assume the change in stationary distribution is small and hence the mixing happens very quickly. A stationary process means that P (xi, . . . ,xi−m+1| ∆t) has the same distribu- tion for any i. In practice we do not know m. However, we assume that our choice k satisﬁes k + 1 > m, and then it is straightforward to check that yt = (xi, . . . ,xi−k) is a MC and the claims above hold with m− 1 replaced by k. Note that unlike simple stochastic processes for transaction prices (or fundamental value of a stock) used in ﬁnance literature, such as the mean reverting Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process, our stochastic process of market order has a complex random variable per time step and cannot be described in a closed form. Hence, we use a neural network to learn this complex stochastic process. Given the above stochastic process view, we show that the generator aims to learn the real conditional distribution Pr(xi| xi−1, . . . ,xi−k, ∆t). We use the subscript r to refer to real distributions and the subscript g to refer to gener- ated distributions. The real data x1, x2, . . . is a realization of the stochastic process. It is worth noting that even though P (xi, . . . ,xi−k| ∆t) has the same distribution for any i, the realized real data sequencexi, . . .xi−k is correlated with any overlapping sequnce xi+k′, . . .xi−k+k′ for k≥ k′≥− k. Our training data points are sequences xi, . . .xi−k and as stated earlier we make sure that the sequences in a batch are sufﬁciently far apart. In light of the interpretation above, this ensures independence of data points within a batch. Critic interpretation : When fed real data, the critic can be seen as a function cw of the realized data si = (xi, . . . ,xi−k, ∆t), where w are the weights of the critic net- work. As argued earlier, samples in a batch that are chosen from real data that are spaced at leastk apart are i.i.d. samples of Pr. Then for m samples fed to the critic, 1 m ∑m i=1 cw(si) estimates Es∼Pr(cw(s)). When fed generated data (with the ten price levels determined from the output order and pre- vious ten levels), by similar reasoning 1 m ∑m i=1 cw(si) esti- mates Es∼Pg(cw(s)) when the samples are sufﬁciently apart (recall that the history is always real data). Thus, the critic computes the Wasserstein distance between the joint distribu- tions Pr(xi, . . . ,xi−k, ∆t) and Pg(xi, . . . ,xi−k, ∆t). Generator interpretation: The generator learns the condi- tional distribution Pg(xi| xi−1, . . . ,xi−k, ∆t). Along with the real history that is fed during training, the generator represents the distribution Pg(xi, . . . ,xi−k, ∆t) = Pg(xi| xi−1, . . . ,xi−k, ∆t)Pr(xi−1, . . . ,xi−k, ∆t). 4 Experimental Results Evaluating generative models is an inherently challenging task, even in the well-established domain of image generation (Borji 2019). To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to generate limit order streams in stock market that is calibrated to real data and as part of our contribution we propose to mea- sure the quality of generated data using ﬁve statistics. These statistics capture various aspects of order streams observed in stock markets that are often studied in ﬁnance literature. Our ﬁve proposed statistics are 1. Price: Distribution over price for the day’s limit orders, by order type. 2. Quantity: Distribution over quantity for the day’s limit orders, by order type. 3. Inter-arrival time: Distribution over inter-arrival duration for the day’s limit orders, by order type. 4. Intensity evolution: Number of orders for consecutive T - second chunks of time. 5. Best bid/ask evolution: Changes in the best bid and ask over time as new orders arrive. For each of these statistics, we also present various quanti- tative numbers to measure the quality. Due to lack of space, Figure 4: Synthetic inter-arrival distribution in the main paper the results for price, quantity, inter-arrival distributions are shown only for buy orders. The results for the other types are similar to buy type results and presented in the appendix. 4.1 Synthetic Data We ﬁrst evaluate Stock-GAN on synthetic orders generated from an agent-based market simulator. Previously adopted to study a variety of issues in ﬁnancial markets (e.g., market making (Wah, Wright, and Wellman 2017) and manipula- tion (Wang, V orobeychik, and Wellman 2018)), the simulator captures stylized facts of the complex ﬁnancial market with speciﬁed stochastic processes and distributions (Wellman and Wah 2017). However, the simulator is still very basic and quite far from real market data. For example, fundamental valuation shocks are generated from a ﬁxed Gaussian dis- tribution (Figure 3a) and quantity is always 1 (Figure 3b), whereas the real market data distributions can be seen to be quite non-smooth (Figures 5a- 5c). Thus, we use the output of this basic simulator as our synthetic data (which we call as real in results below). We use about 300,000 orders gen- erated by the simulator as our synthetic data. These orders are generated over a horizon of 1000 seconds, but the actual horizon length is not important for synthetic data as it can be scaled arbitrarily. The price output by the simulator is normalized to [−1, 1], which is the reason for negative prices in the synthetic data. Stock-GAN and baselines: Our ﬁrst results show the per- formance of Stock-GAN (S-GAN in graphs) and compares it to baselines, namely to a recurrent variational autoen- coder (Chung et al. 2015) (V AE) and the same network as ours, except using a DCGAN (Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015) instead of WGAN. We show results for price distri- (a) GOOG price distribution (b) GOOG quantity distribution (c) GOOG intensity (d) GOOG best bid/ask (e) Stock-GAN best bid/ask (f) no CDA network best bid/ask (g) no order book best bid/ask (h) GOOG spectral bid/ask (i) Stock-GAN spectral density (j) no CDA spectral density (k) no order book spectral density Figure 5: A comparison of different statistics for generated and real GOOG limit orders. Additional results are in appendix. Real,S-GAN Real,V AE Real,DCGAN Price 0.108 0.502 0.284 Inter-arrival 0.18 0.756 0.923 Table 1: KS distances against real (synthetic) bution (Figure 3a), quantity distribution (Figure 3b), and inter-arrival distribution (Figure 4a, 4b—shown in two larger graphs for clarity). The results show that V AE and DCGAN produce distributions far from the real one. We capture these differences quantitatively using the Kolmogorov-Smirnoff (KS) distance (Table 1). The KS distance is always in [0, 1]. We skip the KS dis- tance between quantity, which is always trivially one in the synthetic data. The much smaller KS distance between real and Stock-GAN supports our claim of better performance of Stock-GAN compared to V AE and DCGAN. For intensity, we choose T = 100 seconds sized chunks of time and measure intensity as the number of orders in each chunk divided by the total number of orders. Figure 3c shows that V AE completely fails to match the real (synthetic) data intensity. DCGAN has the same ﬂat intensity throughout and again failing to match the real data intensity completely. In contrast, Stock-GAN matches the real data intensity very closely. Ablation: The real and Stock-GAN generated best bid/ask evolutions are in Figure 3d and 3e respectively. We perform two ablation experiments, one by removing the CDA network (no cda) and one by removing order-book information (no ob), shown in Figures 3f and 3g respectively. Differences can be seen in best bid/ask means for no cda and no ob compared to the real and Stock-GAN results, but the quantitative dis- tinction is in the spectral densities for these time series shown in Figures 3h–3k. The spectral density of a time series is the magnitude of each frequency component in the Fourier trans- form of the time series. The spectral density ﬁgures shows the frequency component magnitude for every frequency on the x-axis, which is a quantitative means of comparing two time series. It can be seen that no cda and no ob have much fewer higher frequency components as compared to synthetic spectral density, which can also be seen by the smoother time variation in Figures 3f and 3g. Stock-GAN’s and the synthetic Figure 6: GOOG inter-arrival distribution spectral density match more closely. 4.2 Real Data We obtained real limit-order streams from OneMarketData, who provided access to their OneTick database for selected time periods and stocks. The provided data streams comprise order submissions and cancellations at millisecond granular- ity. In experiments, we evaluate the performance of Stock- GAN on a large capitalization stock, Alphabet Inc (GOOG). We also tried a small capitalization stock Patriot National (PN). After pre-processing, the PN daily order stream has about 20,000 orders and GOOG has about 230,000. Hence, naturally PN is not a good ﬁt for learning using data hungry neural networks and our results for PN (shown in appendix) validate this claim. Relative to synthetic data, the real market data is very noisy including many orders at extreme prices far from the range where transactions occur. Since our interest is primarily on behavior that can affect market outcomes, we focus on orders in the relevant range near the best bid and ask. Speciﬁcally, in a preprocessing step, we eliminate limit orders that never appear within ten levels of the best bid and ask prices. In the experiment here, we use historical market data of GOOG during one trading day in August 2017. Our results for GOOG follow the same evaluation metrics as for synthetic data. Stock-GAN and baselines: We show the performance of Stock-GAN and compare it to V AE and DCGAN variant of our network. We show these results for price distribution (Fig- ure 5a), quantity distribution (Figure 5b), and inter-arrival times (Figure 6a, 6b—shown in two larger graphs for clarity). As earlier, we capture these differences quantitatively using the KS distance shown in Table 2. Similar to synthetic data, the numbers reveal that Stock-GAN is able to model GOOG Real,S-GAN Real,V AE Real,DCGAN Price 0.126 0.218 0.181 Quantity 0.182 0.248 0.471 Inter-arrival 0.066 0.835 0.154 Table 2: KS distances against real (GOOG) data better than the baselines. Intensity is measured in the same way as synthetic data, except we choose T = 1000 seconds sized chunks of time due to the longer horizon of GOOG data. Figure 5c shows much smoother intensity pro- duced by V AE and DCGAN as opposed to Stock-GAN which is much closer to the real data intensity. Ablation: The real and Stock-GAN generated best bid/ask evolution are in Figures 5d and 5e respectively. As for syn- thetic data, we perform two ablation experiments, one by removing the CDA network (no cda) and one by removing order-book information (no ob), shown in Figure 5f and 5g respectively. The quantitative distinction is seen in the spec- tral densities for these time series shown in Figures 5h-5k. However, unlike the synthetic data, here it can be seen that no cda has more higher frequency components that real data, which can also be seen by the high variation over time in Fig- ure 5f. On the other hand, no ob has less higher frequency (or even lower frequency) components which results in the ﬂat shape in Figure 5g. The Stock-GAN spectral density, while closest to real one among all alternatives, also misses out on some low frequency components. Nonetheless, Stock-GAN is closest to real data due to our novel structural approach of the CDA network and use of order-book data. 5 Limitations and Conclusion We showed the superior performance of Stock-GAN in pro- ducing realistic market order streams compared to other ap- proaches. In doing so, we also introduced ﬁve statistics to measure the realism of generated stock market order stream. We chose our real GOOG data for dates in which there were no external events, such as ﬁnancial performance report. Thus, we did not model the effect of exogenous factors on stock market, which we believe is technically possible by just adding another condition for the generator. Notwithstanding these effects, we demonstrated that stock market data can be generated with high ﬁdelity which provides a means for conducting research on sensitive stock market data without access to the real data. In future work, we intend to test the effectiveness of the Stock-GAN on more stocks, other than PN and GOOG that we did in this work. Acknowledgement We thank OneMarketData for the dataset used for this work. Most of this work was done when Junyi, Yaoyang, and Arunesh were at the University of Michigan, where the work was supported by US National Science Foundation under grant IIS-1741190. References [Abe and Nakayama 2018] Abe, M., and Nakayama, H. 2018. Deep learning for forecasting stock returns in the cross- section. In Paciﬁc-Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 273–284. [Abergel et al. 2016] Abergel, F.; Marouane, A.; Chakraborti, A.; Jedidi, A.; and Muni Toke, I. 2016. Limit Order Books. Cambridge University Press. [Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017] Arjovsky, M.; Chin- tala, S.; and Bottou, L. 2017. Wasserstein generative ad- versarial networks. In 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, 214–223. [Bao, Yue, and Rao 2017] Bao, W.; Yue, J.; and Rao, Y . 2017. A deep learning framework for ﬁnancial time series using stacked autoencoders and long-short term memory. PLOS One 12(7):e0180944. [Borji 2019] Borji, A. 2019. Pros and cons of GAN evalua- tion measures. Computer Vision and Image Understanding 179:41–65. [Chang et al. 2017] Chang, S.; Zhang, Y .; Han, W.; Yu, M.; Guo, X.; Tan, W.; Cui, X.; Witbrock, M.; Hasegawa-Johnson, M. A.; and Huang, T. S. 2017. Dilated recurrent neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 77–87. [Chung et al. 2015] Chung, J.; Kastner, K.; Dinh, L.; Goel, K.; Courville, A. C.; and Bengio, Y . 2015. A recurrent latent variable model for sequential data. In Advances in neural information processing systems, 2980–2988. [Da Silva and Shi 2019] Da Silva, B., and Shi, S. S. 2019. Towards improved generalization in ﬁnancial markets with synthetic data generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.03232. [Friedman 1993] Friedman, D. 1993. The double auction market institution: A survey. The Double Auction Market Institutions, Theories and Evidence, Addison Wesley. [Goodfellow et al. 2014] Goodfellow, I.; Pouget-Abadie, J.; Mirza, M.; Xu, B.; Warde-Farley, D.; Ozair, S.; Courville, A.; and Bengio, Y . 2014. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2672– 2680. [Gulrajani et al. 2017] Gulrajani, I.; Ahmed, F.; Arjovsky, M.; Dumoulin, V .; and Courville, A. C. 2017. Improved training of Wasserstein GANs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 5767–5777. [Hiransha et al. 2018] Hiransha, M.; Gopalakrishnan, E. A.; Menon, V . K.; and Soman, K. P. 2018. NSE stock market prediction using deep-learning models. Procedia Computer Science 132:1351 – 1362. International Conference on Com- putational Intelligence and Data Science. [Koshiyama, Firoozye, and Treleaven 2019] Koshiyama, A.; Firoozye, N.; and Treleaven, P. 2019. Generative adversar- ial networks for ﬁnancial trading strategies ﬁne-tuning and combination. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.01751. [Kumar, Biswas, and Sanyal 2018] Kumar, A.; Biswas, A.; and Sanyal, S. 2018. ecommercegan: A generative adversarial network for e-commerce. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.03244. [LeBaron 2006] LeBaron, B. 2006. Agent-based compu- tational ﬁnance. In Tesfatsion, L., and Judd, K. L., eds., Handbook of Computational Economics. Elsevier. [Mirza and Osindero 2014] Mirza, M., and Osindero, S. 2014. Conditional generative adversarial nets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.1784. [Neil, Pfeiffer, and Liu 2016] Neil, D.; Pfeiffer, M.; and Liu, S.-C. 2016. Phased lstm: Accelerating recurrent network training for long or event-based sequences. In Advances in neural information processing systems, 3882–3890. [Press et al. 2017] Press, O.; Bar, A.; Bogin, B.; Berant, J.; and Wolf, L. 2017. Language generation with recurrent generative adversarial networks without pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.01399. [Qian 2017] Qian, X.-Y . 2017. Financial series prediction: Comparison between precision of time series models and machine learning methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.00948. [Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015] Radford, A.; Metz, L.; and Chintala, S. 2015. Unsupervised representation learn- ing with deep convolutional generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434. [Shi et al. 2019] Shi, J.-C.; Yu, Y .; Da, Q.; Chen, S.-Y .; and Zeng, A.-X. 2019. Virtual-taobao: Virtualizing real-world online retail environment for reinforcement learning. In AAAI. [Wah, Wright, and Wellman 2017] Wah, E.; Wright, M.; and Wellman, M. P. 2017. Welfare effects of market making in continuous double auctions. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 59:613–650. [Wang, V orobeychik, and Wellman 2018]Wang, X.; V orob- eychik, Y .; and Wellman, M. P. 2018. A cloaking mechanism to mitigate market manipulation. In 27th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 541–547. [Wellman and Wah 2017] Wellman, M. P., and Wah, E. 2017. Strategic agent-based modeling of ﬁnancial markets. Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences 3(1):104– 119. [Wiese et al. 2019] Wiese, M.; Knobloch, R.; Korn, R.; and Kretschmer, P. 2019. Quant gans: Deep generation of ﬁnan- cial time series. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.06673. [Xiao et al. 2017] Xiao, S.; Farajtabar, M.; Ye, X.; Yan, J.; Song, L.; and Zha, H. 2017. Wasserstein learning of deep generative point process models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 3247–3257. [Xiao et al. 2018] Xiao, S.; Xu, H.; Yan, J.; Farajtabar, M.; Yang, X.; Song, L.; and Zha, H. 2018. Learning conditional generative models for temporal point processes. In 32nd AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence. [Yu et al. 2017] Yu, R.; Zheng, S.; Anandkumar, A.; and Yue, Y . 2017. Long-term forecasting using tensor-train rnns.arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00073. [Zhang, Aggarwal, and Qi 2017] Zhang, L.; Aggarwal, C.; and Qi, G.-J. 2017. Stock price prediction via discover- ing multi-frequency trading patterns. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, 2141–2149. ACM. [Zhang et al. 2017] Zhang, Y .; Gan, Z.; Fan, K.; Chen, Z.; Henao, R.; Shen, D.; and Carin, L. 2017. Adversar- ial feature matching for text generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03850. [Zhang et al. 2019] Zhang, K.; Zhong, G.; Dong, J.; Wang, S.; and Wang, Y . 2019. Stock market prediction based on generative adversarial network. Procedia computer science 147:400–406.