Optimal Order Execution in Intraday Markets: Minimizing Costs in Trade Trajectories Christopher Katha,*, Florian Ziel b aUniversity Duisburg-Essen, Chair for Environmental Economics bUniversity Duisburg-Essen, Chair for Environmental Economics Abstract Optimal execution, i.e., the determination of the most cost-eﬀective way to trade volumes in continuous trading sessions, has been a topic of interest in the equity trading world for years. Electricity intraday trading slowly follows this trend but is far from being well-researched. The underlying problem is a very complex one. Energy traders, producers, and electricity wholesale companies receive various position updates from customer businesses, renewable energy production, or plant outages and need to trade these positions in intraday markets. They have a variety of options when it comes to position sizing or timing. Is it better to trade all amounts at once? Should they split orders into smaller pieces? Taking the German continuous hourly intraday market as an example, this paper derives an appropriate model for electricity trading. We present our results from an out-of-sample study and diﬀerentiate between simple benchmark models and our more reﬁned optimization approach that takes into account order book depth, time to delivery, and diﬀerent trading regimes like XBID (Cross-Border Intraday Project) trading. Our paper is highly relevant as it contributes further insight into the academic discussion of algorithmic execution in continuous intraday markets and serves as an orientation for practitioners. Our initial results suggest that optimal execution strategies have a considerable monetary impact. Keywords: Intraday electricity market, Market Microstructure, Optimal Execution, Algorithmic Trading ∗Corresponding author Email addresses: christopher.kath@stud.uni-due.de (Florian Ziel b), florian.ziel@uni-due.de (Florian Ziel b) Preprint submitted to Elsevier October 6, 2020 arXiv:2009.07892v2 [q-fin.TR] 3 Oct 2020 2 1. Introduction Intraday markets are of tremendous importance in German electricity trading. Traded vol- umes rise from year to year and set a new record in 2019 (EPEX Spot SE [9]). The growing share of renewable energy requires market participants to balance their positions in very short-term intraday markets and causes more traded volume close before delivery (Koch and Hirth [27]). Intraday trading is usually used for rebalancing after power plant out- ages, updated consumption forecasts, or speculative trading approaches, as demonstrated by Maciejowska et al. [29]. This paper refers to hourly continuous intraday trading, leaving quarter-hourly trading and intraday auctions aside. The German market allowed for trad- ing up to ﬁve minutes before delivery in mid-2020 coupled with other European intraday markets, as Kath [24] analyzed and worked on a pay-as-bid basis, meaning that orders were continuously matched and executed at their respective prices. Figure 1 displays the diﬀerent time lines of German hourly intraday trading, including the coupling among markets under the Cross-border intraday project (XBID). More information on the German market is also provided by Viehmann [42]. While the German intraday market itself has develoed into a central market-place, its many simultaneously traded hours have also brought another topic to the agenda: auto- mated and algorithmic trading. The term describes the algorithm-aided execution of trades or liquidity provision strategies, as mentioned by Hendershott and Riordan [20]. Herein, we will drill down our focus to optimal execution and leave liquidity provision strategies aside. The continuous matching process is crucial in understanding the main issue of optimal ex- ecution. Energy companies face a practical problem: Their trading books are ﬂooded with volumes, which may stem from outages, renewable generation, or trading decisions. But how can they execute the volumes in an optimal way? A market participant could trade the entire volume at once, wait for a better point in time with more favorable prices, or even slice the volume into many small portions to be traded. The slicing aspect, or the determination of an optimal trading trajectory, is what optimal execution aims to identify. There is a rich body of literature on analytical aspects that discuss market determinants, such as Kiesel and Paraschiv [26], Hagemann [18], Narajewski and Ziel [33], Pape et al. [35], and forecasting approaches, like Uniejewski et al. [41], Janke and Steinke [23], Kath and Ziel [25], and [25]. From a practical perspective, these papers only discuss reasons for the price movements and predictability of intraday trading but leave the question of ’how to trade’ open. The problem of executing orders in the most optimal way was referred to by Garnier and Madlener [12] and Aïd et al. [1] with a strict focus on renewable energy source (RES) 2.1 Why Order Book Data are Diﬀerent 3 Day-Ahead 22:00 Coupling with rest of Europe Intraday Balancing energy Delivery08:00 Local trading 13:45 – 14:30 Trading freeze 18:00 XBID start, coupling with Nordic markes -60 Min.* Decoupling, Local trading across Germany Stop of trading -5 Min.* *Minutes prior to delivery Figure 1: Chronological order of the German hourly intraday market. generation. However, what the current academic discussion misses is a more generic discus- sion of optimal execution strategies in the German electricity intraday market. While there are many stochastic models under the umbrella of equity trading (e.g., Almgren and Chriss [2], Almgren [3], Bertsimas and Lo [4]), there were only three electricity trading approaches present when this paper was written. The ﬁrst one, provided by von Luckner et al. [43], discusses optimal market-making strategies in the context of the German intraday market. Meanwhile, Glas et al. [14] and Glas et al. [15] addressed a more general numerical execu- tion approach for both renewable and conventional generation output. Finally, Coulon and Ströjby [7] presented a preliminary model on executing volumes of renewable generation in an optimal manner. We aim to position the topic of optimal execution more prominently in the current dis- cussion of German intraday markets and analyze various approaches in the remainder of this paper. Our work is structured as follows: Section 2 takes a deeper look at order books and the underlying data. Most of the time, actual trades are analyzed in the context of intraday trading which is why we need to address what distinguishes order book data from trades. In the course of the data discussion, we will derive the problem of optimal execution in a more formal way. Section 3 introduces execution approaches and discusses, which weaknesses they exhibit in the context of electricity markets. Leaving the theoretical part aside, we compute trading trajectories under diﬀerent scenarios and evaluate the results in an empirical out-of- sample study in Section 4 and summarize our ﬁndings and the contributions of this paper in Section 5. 4 Price in EUR/MWh Volume in MW 37 39 43 10 0 20 30 Sell Order (Ask) Buy Order (Bid) 38 40 41 42 Bid-Ask Spread Figure 2: Schematic depiction of a typical intraday continuous order book for a speciﬁc delivery hour. The best bid is the order that is willing to buy at the highest price, while the best ask is that ready to sell at the lowest price. Please note that there can be multiple orders at the same price level, as shown at the best bid order. 2. Order Book Data and the Problem of Optimal Execution 2.1. Why Order Book Data are Diﬀerent If one takes a historic view of intraday papers, the evolution of complexity and availabil- ity in the research data becomes evident. Early articles like Hagemann [18] solely used volume-weighted average prices of the entire trading period. This modus operandi ignores the characteristics of continuous trading and takes a more time series-oriented approach. Later papers dealt with individual intraday trade data (e.g., Janke and Steinke [23]). They focused on individual transactions and derived partial averages. However, this is only one side of the coin since these papers focused on trades, i.e., the buying and selling of orders that could be matched. Better availability of data has allowed researchers to analyze order book data. These data-sets comprise not only trades but also unmatched orders. Orders grant new insight into continuous trading and the market microstructure behind it. In a limit order book (LOB), orders are continuously sorted based on the price per buying and selling direction for each delivery hour. Thus, a typical LOB for one delivery hour can be imagined like a t-account with buy and sell sides. Figure 2 represents an order book in a graphical manner. All buy orders, or the "bid" side, are sorted in descending order, while all sell orders, or the "ask" side, are ordered in ascending order, such that the best sell order in the market is the one with the lowest price. The next crucial aspect of understanding LOB data is timing. Figure 2 displays a snap- shot of one speciﬁc second. However, we need to deﬁne a describing element that discretizes countless snapshots and aggregates the information. The bid-ask spread (BAS) serves this 2.1 Why Order Book Data are Diﬀerent 5 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Median Bid/Ask spread in €/MWh Trading Date 0-10 MW10-25 MW25-75 MW model trainingout-of-sample test Figure 3: Median bid-ask spread from January 2018 to November 2019. The data were aggregated in minute buckets and reﬂect the development of spreads under the trading volume, i.e., the typical cost of trading averaged for one minute of order book activity for the ﬁrst 0 to 10 MW, 10 to 25 MW, and the next 25 to 75 MW. The data are separated into a model training phase and an out-of-sample section to realistically benchmark the execution models. aspect well as it compresses buy and sell orders into one numerical ﬁgure. However, LOB data are not one-dimensional. Figure 2 reveals the connection of volumes available at diﬀer- ent price levels. It makes no sense to focus on the best bid and ask for the BAS computation if the volume sums up to 0.1 MWh. Therefore, we aggregate the BAS into diﬀerent volume buckets, i.e., BAS per ﬁrst 1 MW traded, BAS for the volume between 1 and 5 MW, and so on (see Section 2.2 for the mathematical formulation). Last but not least, we need a second level of discretization to cover the aspect of time. We can aggregate our data into minute buckets such that we can identify the best 1 MW BAS over an interval of one minute of trading, for instance. We used LOB data from 01.01.2019 to 27.11.2019 provided by EPEX Spot SE. The data can be purchased from EPEX Spot SE. For more information on EPEX order book data and the required data preparation, refer to Martin and Otterson [32]. Unfortunately, the data are not completely available for the year 2019, which is why Figure 3 ends in late November 2019. We also split the data into training (year 2018) and out-of-sample testing (year 2019). Some execution algorithms require historic data for model training. We used the entire year of 2018 for model training. All data of 2019 were used to benchmark the models in an out- of-sample manner. The series of median BAS data, as shown in Figure 3, does not suggest any yearly sea- sonality. There are some spikes, but, all in all, the spreads seem to be stable across the year. Figure 4 zooms in and shows the median BAS per weekday and delivery hour as well as the corresponding traded volume. A similar pattern evolves for both the weekly and hourly 2.2 Discretization Methodology 6 bid-ask series. They appear to be stable no matter the day or delivery hour. The market participants seem to have similar order quoting behavior. This is an important ﬁrst obser- vation as it leads to a conclusion on execution algorithms. If quoting is stable, considering seasonality is not a major concern. The picture changes with the trading volume. Saturdays and Sundays feature lower trading volumes. Figure 4 delivers evidence for hourly patterns: The delivery hours 1—7 show signs of less trading volume. Last but not least, we want to analyze the continuous trading character of German intra- day markets. Figure 5 shows how the median BAS behaves with respect to time to delivery. Its level is constant over time but changes 60 and 30 minutes before delivery. This eﬀect is connected to the local coupling of markets. One hour before delivery, no European orders are coupled under XBID with the German market anymore, and 30 minutes before delivery, local within-grid area trading starts (see Kath [24]). Consequently, volumes sharply drop at 60 and 30 minutes to recover later. Figure 5 is also a good summary of the problem of optimal execution itself. How should volumes be distributed over the available trading time up to delivery? Moreover, how should volumes be sliced to ensure that a minimum spread is paid? 2.2. Discretization Methodology The amount of data with LOB requires diﬀerent handling than that with trade data. Our dataset is around 60 GB, it does not allow for simple calculation on an order basis anymore but demands an aggregation approach. Orders need to be aggregated bytime and trading volume. We will start with time. To understand the concept of time aggregation, a few notations need to be introduced. Imagine one line in our data frame as Z :{yt,d,v t,d,s t,d,e t,d,d t,d|t = 1,...,T ∧d = [buy, sell]}. (1) Let this be the set of all buy and sell orders at delivery timet comprising its price yt,d, the volume of an order denoted asvt,d, its startst,d, and expiry time stampet,d in seconds from the start of the observation. We divide the diﬀerence between the reception of any position to be traded at i and the delivery at time t in equidistant steps k = 1,...,N , where N = ⌊ t (24×60×60)− i (24×60×60) ⌋ . Thus, we havek buckets of one minute in length. The parameter k is a dynamic one depending on the arrival of the position ati. That means that if the time of arrival changes, the computation of the optimal execution likewise diﬀers, as the length ofk is diﬀerent. Based onk, it is possible to deﬁne time discretization buckets 2.2 Discretization Methodology 7 Ot,k,d Ot,k,d ={yt,d,v t,d,s t,d,e t,d,d t,d∈Z|(s< 60×k× 1∧e > 60(k− 1))}, (2) which comprise all active orders1 in the k-th minute interval bucket for each delivery time stamp t and direction d. Note that this automatically ﬁlters out unnecessary information present before the position arrival ati, which reduces the memory space used. The choice of minute buckets seems suitable for the EPEX intraday market as with lower granularity, one faces many instances with missing data as there are simply no new activities, e.g., one will face many buckets with no trades every second. However, decreasing the resolution to 15-minute buckets lessens the trading abilities of the algorithms and might turn out to be a poor choice, as the volume is split on fewer buckets with less trades but more volume per trade and, as a consequence, higher spreads. Therefore, one-minute buckets appear to be a good compromise. Other approaches like Glas et al. [15] use ﬁve minute intervals, but we believe that a ﬁner grid causes the results to be more realistic. Asanextstep, weneedtoﬁlterbycumulativesum CS t,d ofvolume vt orderedbyprice yt,d in an ascending (in the case of buy orders) or descending manner (in the case of sell orders). First, we deﬁne auxiliary volume bucketsbr with r = 1,..., 23 for our aggregation logic as b1 = [0, 1], b2 = [1, 5], b3,..,7 = [5, 10],..., [25, 30], b8,..,14 = [30, 40],..., [90, 100], b15,..,18 = [100, 125],..., [175, 200], b19,20 = [200, 250], [250, 300], b21,22 = [300, 400], [400, 500] and b23 = [500,∞]. This leads to a reﬁned version of Eq. (2) that allocates not only based on thek-th time bucket but also on ther-th volume bucket in Ot,k,r,d ={yt,d,v t,d,s t,d,e t,d,d t,d∈Z|(s< 60×k× 1∧e > 60(k− 1))∧CS∈br}. (3) The buckets br serve as separators for the cumulative volume. Obviously, trading costs vary over time. However, they also change with the designated trading volume, as depicted in Figure 5. The LOB is ordered by price in the case of both buying and selling. Unless all orders are entered with identical prices, a price ladder will emerge. The best buy and sell prices might feature only a small share of the total volume. As a consequence, trading usually gets more expensive with large quantities. We can take this aspect into consideration by aggregating buckets by volume as well. One could argue that the aspect of time-weighted orders is missing in this approach. It 1Note that we need to remove cancellations from the set of all active orders in order to avoid counting any orders twice. 2.3 Underlying Market Assumptions and Problem Formulation 8 120 125 130 135 140 145 150 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 MON TUE WE D THU FRI SAT SUN Average traded volume per day in GWh Median Bid/Ask spread in €/MWh Weekday 0-10 MW 10-25 MW 25-75 MW 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 123456789101112131415161718192021222324 Average traded volume per hour in MWh Median Bid/Ask spread in €/MWh Delivery Hour 0-10 MW 10-25 MW 25-75 MW Figure 4: Evolvement of weekly and hourly patterns in median BAS and volumes of aggregate minute clips ranging from January 2018 to November 2019. makes a diﬀerence if an order exists for a few seconds or for the entire bucket range of 60 seconds. We have neglected this aspect, as the additional volume weighting ensures that small orders that just exist for a few seconds do not count too much. A limited simulation showed that there were no substantial diﬀerences if we added another time weighting component, which is why we have left it out for the sake of a faster computational time. 2.3. Underlying Market Assumptions and Problem Formulation The market microstructure of intraday markets requires more consideration as well. There- fore, we assume the following for our optimal execution analysis: • ThealgorithmscanonlyacceptexistingordersintheLOBandactivelypaytheBAS.To understand this concept, we need to discuss the two execution alternatives. A market player can initiate an order by quoting a price and volume pair. Say, for instance, the best buy order is at 50€/MWh, and the best sell order is at 51€/MWh. A trader can initiate another buy at 50.10€/MWh and wait for execution, Or they can actively accept an existing order by entering a buy at 51€/MWh, which results in immediate execution as there is a corresponding sell order available. Technically speaking, the latter can be seen as an active click in the LOB. We assume it as the only way to trade, since waiting for other traders to accept the order is very complex to depict. It requires modeling other traders who are willing to accept the order. • We ignore further trading costs (such as fees), as they are usually constant in time and volume and should not inﬂuence our optimal execution path. In addition, they are counter-party speciﬁc and vary based on bilateral agreements between traders, the exchange, and clearing banks. 2.3 Underlying Market Assumptions and Problem Formulation 9 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 -300-270-240-210-180-150-120-90-60-30 Median traded volume per minute in MWh Median Bid/Ask spread in €/MWh Time to delivery 0-1 MW actual 0-1 MW fitted 1-5 MW actual 1-5 MW fitted 5-10 MW actual 5-10 MW fitted XBID tradingnon-XBID trading cutover phase Figure 5: Median BAS and median volume of minute clips, i.e., all orders aggregated every minute of trading with respect to time to delivery. The x-axis shows the time in minutes until physical delivery. The dashed lines reﬂect the in-sample ﬁt of the spline-based market impact model described in section 3.1 and emphasize how well our optimization model can anticipate costs measured as median spreads. • The optimal execution is probed for a ﬁxed trading volume. This is, for instance, the case for plant outages that need to be covered in the intraday market. Generation up- dates for renewable energy sources imply uncertainty in forecasts and changing position sizes, which add another dimension of complexity and are ignored in this paper. • Following Narajewski and Ziel [33], the intraday market is considered as eﬃcient in this paper. Thus, we do not have any view or opinion on price developments and only focus on execution. • All algorithms stop their activities 30 minutes before delivery. Kath [24] showed that this is the time when intra-control area trading starts. Therefore, it makes sense to see this threshold as an operational barrier, as no Germany-wide trading is possible anymore. Apart from that, the EPEX indices ID3 and ID1 stop 30 minutes before delivery (for an ID3 example, see Uniejewski et al. [41]), which makes our approach time-congruent with the EPEX data. This implies that, for instance,k = 180 means 180 minutes of trading starting from 210 minutes2 before delivery up to 30 minutes before delivery. • We round all volumes stemming from the trading trajectories to one digit whenever possible since this is the minimum tick size at the exchange. 2It is important to understand the chronological diﬀerences. The trading time stops 30 minutes before delivery. Thus, we can deﬁne trading time=lead-time minus 30 minutes. 10 3. Optimal Execution Strategies 3.1. Proposed Execution Model Approach 3.1.1. Determinants of Optimal Execution The ﬁrst model on optimal execution was provided by Bertsimas and Lo [4]. Their contri- bution was a consideration of market impact, meaning the temporary and constant change of prices due to own trading activity. Almgren and Chriss [2] expanded the idea by taking into account the traders’ risk appetite. They proposed a mean-variance-based approach that locates an optimum between minimizing the trading costs and minimizing the variance of costs. Later on, Almgren [3] expanded the existing model with a non-linear market impact function. All models share that they were applied on equity markets and have not been fully tested in electricity intraday markets for optimal execution yet. Herein, we borrow basic principles from the above mentioned papers and derive a suitable model for intraday power markets. First, we need to introduce some further notations that are important for our model (see Table 1 for a detailed description of the model parameters). We have • a priceyk (meaning a more general notation of prices here than the one of Section 2.2, where we referred to the prices of individual orders), • an overall amount ofX we need to sell or buy in the continuous intraday market before its physical delivery at timet, • the volumes traded in each time stepk denoted as nk and s.t. X =∑N k=1nk and xk =X−∑k j=1nj, • the trade inventory positionxk describing how much volume is still to be traded at each time bucketk (it follows thatxo =X and xN = 0 ), and • the volatility ofyk given byσk. In the case of buying positions,nk shall be positive and in the case of selling positionsnk shall be negative. This assumption allows us to have a position-neutral notation, as buying and selling changes with the positive or negative position input ofnk. Another very important concept is the idea of market impact. A common approach (e.g., 3.1 Proposed Execution Model Approach 11 Determinant Description Value Calculation/Derivation S0 Initial price of electricity [€/MWh] 47.22 Average price of all 2018 trades X Total position to trade [MWh] changing To be adjusted per scenario σ Daily volatility [€/MWh] 20.57 Yearly volatility µ Annual growth [€/MWh] 0 No price growth/drift is assumed λ Risk aversion [no speciﬁc unit] 2x10^(—5) Slightly less risk averse than Almgren and Chriss [2] T able 1: Optimization model parameter used in the empirical study and the means of derivation. The authors tried to estimate most of the parameters based on empirical data from the training period in year 2018. However, some parameters had to be guessed based on experience or applications in the ﬁnancial world. in Almgren and Chriss [2]) is to divide it into two parts such that the market impactIk is denoted by Ik(nk,k,t ) = I temp k (nk,k,t ) +I perm k (nk−1,k− 1,t ), (4) where I temp k is the temporary component that is due to the order book depth and less favor- able prices that market participants receive for large volumes;I perm k describes the permanent change in market prices after trading has happened. It is important to note that the per- manent market impact is only observable in the following epoch after the liquidity providers have re-entered their orders, which is why its determinantsnk−1 and k− 1 are lagged in Eq. (4). The underlying price model, based on Almgren and Chriss [2], is assumed to follow yk =yk−1 +σkξk−I perm k−1 (nk−1,k− 1,t ), (5) where ξj is an independent random variable withE[ξk] = 0 and i.i.d. as well asVar [ξk] = 1 . We acknowledge that these assumptions are not totally perfect, as Narajewski and Ziel [34] showed, but they seem to be reasonable for our application. The permanent market impact refers to the most recent time lag as the latest order is assumed to inﬂuence the current prices in the form of its permanent market impact function. Note that we have left out any drift term in Eq. (5). However, since electricity tends to be mean-reverting, a drift term does not seem to be suitable for intraday markets. We deﬁne 3.1 Proposed Execution Model Approach 12 the formal cost function as C(x1,...,x N ) = N∑ k=1 nky0 + N∑ k=1 nk(σkξk)| {z } volatility + N∑ k=1 nkI temp k (nk,k,t )| {z } temporary impact + N∑ k=1 nkI perm k (nk−1,k− 1,t )| {z } permanent impact . (6) The costs are given by the volatility of prices and the two market impacts. In addition to just optimizing costs, Almgren and Chriss [2] proposed a mean-variance approach to execute volume under the constraint of risk aversion. Based on the idea of a mean-variance optimum such as the one in the modern portfolio theory of Markowitz [31], one can compute the expected costsE(C) and its varianceV (C) from Eq. (6) and derive a mean-variance optimization in min xk (E(C) +λV (C)), (7) where λ is the risk aversion parameter. The solution of Eq. (7) yields our two novel execution approaches OptiC and Optiσv, whereas the ﬁrst model only optimizes costs and setsλ = 0 while the second assumes a certain level of risk aversion3 with λ = 2x10(−5). Thus, we present two diﬀerent models suitable for diﬀerent levels of risk appetite. However, to ﬁnally compute a solution for Eq. (7), we need to determine the market impact model in the next sub-section. 3.1.2. The Choice of Market Impact Models Market impact models determine the mathematical complexity of Eq. (6) to a great extent but are also the core of the execution approach as they determine the costs. Financial markets often assume less repercussions from individual trading and imply a linear inﬂuence, as done by Almgren and Chriss [2]. Exponential approaches are also utilized (see Almgren [3]). Another frequently applied approach is the square-root impact model. It is versatile and works in many diverse markets such as crypto or options trading as Tóth et al. [40] pointed out. Gatheral et al. [13] proposed a transient yet linear price impact model that decays over time. However, there is no blueprint ready for intraday electricity markets, which is why we follow a data-driven approach herein and derive a numerical model based on the intraday data of the year 2018. But how can we measure permanent and temporary market impact 3Our choice of lambda shall ensure an appropriate level of risk aversion. We tried more aggressive levels and found that they do not cause large diﬀerences as more traded volume means much higher costs. The algorithm always tries to balance the costs, even if less volatility in costs is desired. Hence, we believe the current selection is appropriate, as the other values do not change the path too much. 3.1 Proposed Execution Model Approach 13 Time in seconds Volume in MW 0 30 60 1 0 5 10 a) Temporary Market Impact Approximation b) Permanent Market Impact Approximation Individual Orders Median aggregation of bid-ask spreads, i.e., the difference between the bid and the ask of valid orders Time in seconds Volume in MW 010 60 1 0 5 10 40 Difference = permanent Impact Median aggregation of the prices of all trades in the aggregation window, also aggregated by volume Permanent market impact derived from difference between trades and bid-ask spreads with a 40-second interval in between to let the order book normalize Figure 6: Derivation of a) temporary and b) permanent market impact from EPEX order book data depicted in a schematic representation. The plot is limited to the dimensions volume and time and does not show any price levels. Obviously, all orders are sorted by prices as well, but this is irrelevant to understanding the discretization approach. Both plots depict a one-minute interval and highlight how the minute interval is used to derive the impact data. based on an LOB? Permanent market impact is that which evolves after a trade and is often caused by liquidity providers that adjust their price levels after the arrival of transactions. As an approximation, we ﬁrst compute the mean of all trades happening within a range of 10 seconds, as shown in Figure 6. After another 40 seconds of time delay, assuming that the order book normalizes again, we compute the median BAS averaged over 20 seconds and compare its level to the aggregated BAS before the arrival of trades. We also group the output in volume buckets to reﬂect that the market impact depends on the traded volume. The resulting data derivation is also shown in Figure 6. Temporary market impact vanishes immediately after trading and can be described as a liquidity premium that is demanded for higher volumes in the current order book. Traders are less willing to quote at the best possible price if the volumes are very large. The impact is 3.1 Proposed Execution Model Approach 14 temporary, as one pays a volume premium and, afterward, the order book volumes normalize again. Here, we derive the temporary impact by means of the BAS per volume bucket. Based on the year 2018, the median BAS per volume is used to derive a cost curve per minute bucket k, delivery hour, and weekday (see Figure 7). As mentioned above, we receive two cost structures that increase with higher volumes ofnk and less time to delivery based on the minute bucketsk and—minding the seasonality of electricity prices—vary slightly across delivery hours and weekdays (see Wolﬀ and Feuerriegel [44] for seasonality). We model the evolving relationship between impact in euros/MWh and the mentioned determinants as a distribution in I perm k (nk− 1,k− 1,t )∼ NO (µ,σ )), (8) I temp k (nk,k,t )∼ NO (µ,σ )), (9) where (speciﬁcally forI temp k (nk,k,t )) log(µ) = β0 + M∑ m=1 fm(nk,k,t ), (10) log(σ) = β0 + M∑ m=1 fm(nk,k,t ), (11) for nk⁄= 0 . If nk = 0 , the impact function’s result has to be zero, as no costs occur. The above is the generalized additive model (GAM) of Hastie and Tibshirani [19] and tries to model the parameters of a distribution—in our case the normal distribution—with a linear model that consists of an intercept coeﬃcientβ0 and m additional functions fm(nk,k,t ) depending on the input factorsnk,k,t. Other applications of GAMs were supplied by Wood [45] and Gaillard et al. [11]. In general, a GAM tries to model distribution parameters with a linear model that is connected closely to the well-known ordinary least squares model. However, instead of just adding linear input variables, it is a linear model consisting of diﬀerentfunctions. Thus, thefunctionsfm replacetheusuallinearcoeﬃcients. Thefunctions can take a variety of forms, from simple polynomials to more complex splines. We have tried both and found that splines model the market impact much more precisely than polynomials or linear functions. The model itself is ﬁtted with the R-package gamlss of Rigby and Stasinopoulos [37] and the splines are computed using thepb function. We use the log as a link function for bothˆµ and ˆσ in our GAM. The model was determined in a limited tuning study on 2018 in-sample data using polynomials, cubic splines, and monotonic p-splines. 3.1 Proposed Execution Model Approach 15 Figure 7: Derived cost curves for permanent and temporary market impact. The permanent market impact is derived from BAS adjustments after trading, and the temporary market impact derives a cost curve based on order book depth in MW. Note that both plots assume symmetric order book volumes as we do not divide them into buying and selling. All computations were done with LOB data from the year 2018. The most simplistic form of splines are cubic ones, meaning an ensemble of piecewise polynomials of order three that join each other at diﬀerent knots (see Stasinopoulos et al. [39] for more insight into splines in the context of GAMs). The more knots used, the more “ﬁtted” the resulting curve is. Obviously, the choice of an appropriate spline setting is not trivial and could lead to overﬁtting. A way to overcome this issue is presented by Eilers and Marx[8]. Penalizationremovesunsuitablepolynomialﬁtsandhelpstoavoidamisconstructed model. Let ψk,r(xk) be a cubic spline on input vectorxk for time bucketk and number of knots r. Penalized splines (or p-splines) try to minimize the smoothing parametersγ in N∑ k=1 ( yt R∑ r=1 fm(xk,r) )2 + R∑ r=1 γ ∫ ‖f′′ m(xk,r)‖2 2dx. (12) In a limited backtest study, p-splines modeled the impact curves of Figure 7 best. The gen- eral goodness of ﬁt is also reﬂected by the dashed lines in Figure 5. The non-linear, complex modeling of market impact distinguishes our approach from stud- ies like Glas et al. [15], which applied a simpler polynomial ﬁt. The other novelty of our approach is the explicit consideration of trading characteristics. Figure 7 shows the relation- ship between impact in euros per MWh and its determinant volume (denoted asnk) and lead-time (minute buckets k) in a three-dimensional way. Figure 5 plots the relationship in a more detailed way. Another important aspect to note is the striking increase around 3.1 Proposed Execution Model Approach 16 60 minutes before delivery. This has to do with the lack of coupling afterward. Normally, XBID is only active until one hour before delivery, meaning that during the last 60 minutes of trading, orders are solely German ones in the German LOB. Due to system restrictions, most market players delete their orders and re-enter them at this speciﬁc point in time, leading to two minutes of low liquidity and high BAS levels. Both Figures 5 and 7 conﬁrm that. Thus, we need to introduce a dependency of time until delivery to realistically model the market impact. Therefore, we split the trading session into three regimes (as shown in Figure 5 as well): XBID, cutover phase, and non-XBID trading in tXBID =k≤N− 61 tcutover =N− 60,N− 59 tlocal =k >N− 58, with N being the number ofk minute buckets. Note that we deﬁne the cutover phase as 2 minutes, starting from 59 to 60 minutes before delivery and ending in the minute bucket starting from 60 and ending 59 minutes prior to delivery. The data suggest that both minute aggregates feature a special impact behavior. Combining the formal deﬁnition of Eq. (8) as well as the timing separation from above leads to our approximationˆµ of the true parameter µ in (exemplarily forI temp k (nk,k,t ): log(µtemp k ) = fXBID (nk,k,t ) +fcutover(nk,k,t ) (13) +flocal(nk,k,t ), log(σtemp k ) = fXBID (nk,k,t ) +fcutover(nk,k,t ) (14) +flocal(nk,k,t ), for nk⁄= 0 . In the case of the permanent market impact functionI perm k (nk− 1,k− 1,t ), we needs to consider the lagged relationship in(nk− 1,k− 1). If nk = 0 , we haveµtemp k = 0 and σtemp k = 0 since no volume means no cost of trading and no variance of such. Thus, we have diﬀerent functions for the three trading phases in our GAM model. The diﬀerent functions themselves are given by fXBID (nk,k,t ) = 1 {tXBID} (β0,XBID +g1,XBID (k) (15) +g2,XBID (nk) +β1,XBIDwe(t) +β2,XBIDh(t)), fcutover(nk,k,t ) = 1 {tcutover} (β0,cutover +β1k +g1,cutover(nk) (16) 3.1 Proposed Execution Model Approach 17 +β2,cutoverwe(t) +β3,cutoverh(t)), flocal(nk,k,t ) = 1 {tlocal} (β0,local +g1,local(k) (17) +g2,local(nk) +β1,localwe(t) +β2,localh(t)). Note that the variance of each model is also computed by the GAM model in the form of estimated parameter ˆσ. Due to the separation into the three regimes, we have three diﬀerent sigmas per impact function: one for XBID, one for local trading, and one for the cutover phase. The termg(x) denotes a penalized spline function of the input variablex discussed earlier in the context of Eq. (12). The functiong(x) does not depend on lead time in the case of the cutover regime, as the model requires at least four distinct values to compute a spline. During cutover, we only have two individualk values. The functionsh(t) and we(t) of Eqs. (15)—(17) extract peak/oﬀ-peak hours and weekend information out of delivery time stamp t and transform it into a binary dummy variable such that the model separates between diﬀerent times. 3.1.3. Solving the Optimization Problem With Eqs. (12) and (14) in mind, we can compute the expected costs and variance of Eq. (6) in more detail: E(C) = y0(n1 +n2 +... +nN )| {z } intraday price + N∑ k=2 nkµperm k| {z } permanent impact + N∑ k=1 nkµtemp k| {z } temporary impact , (18) = N∑ k=1 nky0|{z} intraday price + N∑ k=2 nkµperm k| {z } permanent impact + N∑ k=1 nkµtemp k| {z } temporary impact . Note that we assume independence of the three cost components in Eq. (18) such that the covariance of the three terms is assumed to be zero. Since all components are deterministic and do not depend on a random variable, their expectation is simply the function itself. Minding the deterministic character leads to the variance given by Var (C) = N∑ k=1 n2 kσ2 kk|{z} price variance + N∑ k=1 n2 kσ2 perm(nk,k,t )| {z } permanent impact variance + N∑ k=1 n2 kσ2 temp(nk,k,t ).| {z } temporary impact variance (19) Putting this all together leaves the optimization problem in 3.2 Simple Benchmark Strategies 18 min nk (( N∑ k=2 nkµperm k| {z } permanent Impact + N∑ k=1 nkµtemp k| {z } temporary Impact ) +λ( N∑ k=1 n2 kσ2 kk|{z} price variance (20) + N∑ k=1 n2 kσ2 perm(nk,k,t )| {z } permanent impact variance + N∑ k=1 n2 kσ2 temp(nk,k,t ))| {z } temporary impact variance ), subject tonk≥ 0 (in case of buying), N∑ k=1 nk =X. (21) We tried a variety of diﬀerent approaches such as simulated annealing or gradient-based non-linear optimizers and found that a genetic algorithm (see Holland [21] or Goldberg and Holland [16]) works well in our case. It is readily implemented in the R-packageGA of Scrucca [38] and—inspired by genetic processes—mutates an initial population on a random basis. Only the parameter combinations that generate the best values for the objective function in Eq. (20) survive, and the process is repeated again until no more decrease of cost is reached given a certain amount of iterations—in our case 650. 3.2. Simple Benchmark Strategies 3.2.1. Instant Order Book Execution The last section introduced our novel execution approach tailor-made for intraday markets. Section 3.2 will present more general execution strategies that serve as a performance bench- mark. The ﬁrst approach is not a strategy per se but the most simplistic form of trade execution. Instant order book execution (IOBE) does not require any computation or pre- deﬁned trade trajectory. Instead, an energy trader just accepts existing orders in the order book and trades the full volume at once. In mathematical terms, this strategy is n1 =X, (22) with n2,...,n N = 0 . From a technical perspective, this is equal to a click in the EPEX trading system on either the bid or the ask side. It implies a willingness to pay the BAS for the sake of instant execution. Figure 7 indicates the downside of such simplicity. The higher the volume, the higher the BAS is. Prices are less favorable, as the trader has to accept not only the ﬁrst few orders on top of the order book but a number of deeper ones as well. This 3.2 Simple Benchmark Strategies 19 usually leads to prices being far from the surrounding small volume trades and implies a high degree of market impact of a singular and large volume order. Another associated risk is given by price developments. Since the trade is entered at a speciﬁc point in time, prices can develop adversely after the trade. This eﬀect is less apparent with small slicing strategies that trade over the entire time window. As such, why do traders use IOBE? To start, its proﬁtability is highly dependent on the traded volume. For small traders, IOBE might be a cost-eﬀective way to cover open positions. More sophisticated approaches like the ones that follow require algorithms that allocate volumes and slice them down to multiple trades. An application programming interface (API) connection to the exchange as well as a designated software solution is needed, while with IOBE trades, trading can be done manually via any exchange trading system. Thus, there is a trade-oﬀ between trading costs occurring through IOBE versus the additional costs caused by API connections and IT systems. 3.2.2. Time-Weighted Average Price Execution Another very common strategy is an equidistant allocation of the entire volume on each volume bucket. Almgren and Chriss [2] referred to this as a minimum-impact strategy, but in the world of trading, such algorithms are commonly denoted as time-weighted average price (TW AP) execution. The idea is very simple. Regardless of empirical volume distributions, volumes are equally distributed over time such thatn1 =n2 =... =nN or xk = (N−k)X N, (23) nk = X N. (24) The term minimum impact might be correct at ﬁrst sight since we slice the volume into as many small pieces as possible (depending on the number ofk = 1,...,N trading buckets) and try to tackle the factor market inﬂuence with position size. However, the strategy does not need to be the one with the smallest market impact, as this disregards the distribution of the trading volume or lead time. If one trades equal amounts and the trading volume is distributed very unequally over time, an order can cause a larger market impact in a low- liquidity time frame, leading to an overall larger impact than desired. However, Figure 5 shows that the trading volume is constant for a long time and only changes substantially in the late trading phase, which is why we think the strategy can still be a simple enhancement to IOBE. 3.2 Simple Benchmark Strategies 20 3.2.3. Volume-Weighted Average Price Execution The thoughts of sub-section 3.2 bring us to a closely connected strategy. While TWAP approaches do not consider deviations in trading volumes, volume-weighted average price (VW AP) algorithms explicitly do. Papers like Konishi [28] propose a VWAP algorithm that tries to minimize the diﬀerence between the actual VWAP of all trades and the trader’s own VWAP. We deliberately deviate from this as our goal is not index replication but optimal execution. For more information on index replication strategies and pricing of such con- tracts, the interested reader might refer to Guéant and Royer [17], Humphery-Jenner [22] and Białkowski et al. [5]. Recall that the VWAP itself is given by VWAP t = 1∑N k=1vk N∑ k=1 ykvk. (25) It describes the volume-weighted average price from reception of the position updatei until time of deliveryt. It is impossible to achieve VWAPs if parts of the measured time lie in the past, i.e., you cannot replicate a VWAP of three hours of trading only by being active solely in the last hour. Some VWAPs do not comprise the full trading session, which is why they are sometimes called partial VWAPs as by Narajewski and Ziel [33] and Kath [24]. In order to trade near or equal to the VWAP, we assume xk = (N−k) (X NFk ) , (26) nk = X NFk, (27) where Fj is a volume reallocation factor that should ensure a distribution based on the traded volume per minute bucketk in Fk = ˆvk 1 N ∑N k=1 ˆvk . (28) The actual traded volumevk is not known ex ante which is why we assumevk = ˆvk, where ˆvk is deﬁned as an estimation for the true volumevk. In our case,ˆvk is simply the empirical volume per bucket of the year 2018. Hence,Fk does not change per trading hour or day and is static throughout the entire out-of-sample test. Also, recall that indexk changes with the arrival time of each position to be traded. Thus, the allocation factorFk requires a new computation if the arrival time changes. The algorithm should ideally start to trade 21 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 1 1325374961738597109121133145157169181193205217229241253265 Residual Position in MWh Minute bucket k Trading trajectories IOBE TWAP Opti_C Opti_sigma VWAP XBID trading local trading Figure 8: Trading trajectories of all algorithms of Section 3 fork = 1,..., 270, i.e., trading from 300 to 30 minutes before delivery assuming a volume of 270 MWh to be traded. Note that we have decided to plot the trajectory for peak-load and weeks in case the optimization algorithms OptiC and Optiσv, weekend, or oﬀ-peak trajectories partially diﬀer. However, the overall diﬀerence is negligible. immediately, which is why it can be very useful to compute a set of factorsFk for diﬀerent choices ofk in advance. It also follows that N∏ k=1 Fk = 1, (29) such that suﬃcient volume is traded. Since the strategy allocates higher volumes to trading phases with large traded volumes, it could be a proﬁtable way to execute positions. 4. Intraday Market Execution Simulation 4.1. Resulting Trading Trajectories Diﬀerent algorithms result in diﬀerent trading trajectories. Section 3 focused on a mathe- matical formulation. In addition, we want to discuss trading behavior to sharpen the under- standing of the numerical results. The easiest way to understand volume allocation behavior is by inspecting a trade path plot. Figure 8 shows the trading trajectories of all algorithms. It 4.1 Resulting Trading Trajectories 22 assumes a volume of 270 MW to be executed in 270 minute-buckets4. The two optimization algorithms Optiσv and OptiC yield diﬀerent paths per total position to be executed. However, the diﬀerences are marginal, and only very large positions lead to a slightly smoother curve. Therefore, we have decided to plot 270 MWh as a compromise. Positions around 200—300 MWh apply to many market participants and depict an industry-wide optimal execution problem. Here, IOBE executes the entire volume in the ﬁrst minute bucket. This is arguably the simplest form of execution and leads to one big trade. In contrast to that, the TWAP approach equally splits the volume in equidistant steps, which yields a straight and linear execution reﬂected by a black dashed line. It serves as a good reference path to compare all other algorithms against. The TWAPs try to minimize the impact by means of the smallest equidistant steps possible. This sounds rather naive but could prove proﬁtable if we recap the sharp exponential growth of BAS with the higher volumes depicted in Figure 5. Hence, it is interesting to see how other approaches deviate from this. The VWAP algorithm allocates based on historic volume distributions over time. This leads to an interesting pattern. The trading volume increases with time to delivery, as shown in Figure 4. The VWAP algorithm shifts a bit of volume into later trading phases. In the middle of the selected trading win- dow, its inventory position is around 10 MWh higher compared to the TWAP allocations. However, the overall change is small and does not lead to a drastic change. Another interesting pattern evolves with OptiC. Recall that this algorithm purely opti- mizes costs based on a GAM trained on 2018 data. The algorithm starts with slower trading rates than all other approaches and leaves a higher position open in the early and mid- trading phases. A striking behavior happens shortly before the switch from pan-European XBID trading to local German trading. Starting at aroundk = 185, positions are closed more aggressively compared to TWAP and all other models, which results in a smaller open position when local trading starts. Taking a look at Figure 5, this makes perfect sense as this decision avoids the high BAS levels in local trading. Figure 8 makes it almost impossible to see, but both optimization approaches avoid the very expensive cutover phase entirely. Optiσv is closely connected to the pure cost optimization but considers risk aversion in the form of the volatility of prices and bid-ask spreads. If one recalls, that this approach balances between expected trading costs (which means equally sized small volumes per bucket) and 4We stop trading 30 minutes before delivery as there is only intra-grid area trading allowed from this point onwards. However, this means that a lead time (i.e., the nominal time to delivery) of 300 minutes results in 270 minutes of trading. 4.1 Resulting Trading Trajectories 23 Volume [MWh] Lead time [Minutes] IOBE TWAP VWAP OptiC Optiσ 19.06 2.97 2.99 2.84 2.91 (72.40) (5.90) (5.91) (5.74) (5.81) 20.09 1.52 1.58 1.42 1.50 (34.14) (2.63) (2.81) (2.33) (2.60) 66.2 2.97 3.34 3.48 3.41 (368.53) (5.90) (6.56) (6.81) (6.77) 20.09 1.71 1.72 1.59 1.65 (124.14) (2.92) (3.02) (2.54) (2.79) 379.26 6.03 5.75 6.18 6.13 (1043.25) (13.34) (12.71) (18.19) (15.65) 160.58 1.71 1.86 1.73 1.97 (294.70) (2.92) (3.25) (2.74) (3.22) 300 100 1000 300 90 300 90 300 90 T able 2: Median BAS per strategy, lead time, and volume. The lead time is connected to the choice ofk. If, for instance,k = 30 , then the corresponding lead time is 60 minutes to delivery. The unit of the Bid-Ask spread is €/MWh. In addition to the median, we report mean values in brackets. the variance of expected costs, it becomes evident that the algorithm tries to avoid additional variance at the cost of slightly higher market impact. This leads to an almost TWAP-like trading path. One could ask why there is no remarkable change in the trajectories as shown by Almgren and Chriss [2], wherein mean-variance approaches resulted in very diﬀerent trade trajectories. The answer is given by the market impact functions. The mentioned paper as- sumed a linear impact. Thus, risk aversion does not cause the trader to pay a large premium in the form of bid-ask spreads for the sake of less variance in costs and execution prices. An optimization algorithm could easily shift trading volumes into early trading phases without causing an exponential cost increase. This is diﬀerent from intraday trading and our market impact models. Every time trading is shifted away from a late trading point to an early one, this causes an exponential growth in costs while reducing volatility in an exponential way as well. Our parameter choice forλ seems to be very conservative. Thus, Optiσv carefully balances between expected costs and volatility. However, we found that even more aggressive choices forλ do not create substantially diﬀerent trading trajectories. This is interesting as intraday markets feature price spikes and a generally high level of volatility, as mentioned by Wolﬀ and Feuerriegel [44]. Although there is a high level of volatility, a mathematically optimized execution seems to deviate only partially from the benchmark path of TWAP al- location. Despite the fact that we have a diverse set of algorithmic trading models that diﬀer in trad- ing, computational complexity, and consideration of market impact, the trading trajectories are less heterogeneous than expected. In fact, this leads to the ﬁrst interesting conclusion. In trading areas with sparse order books and exponential growth in the temporary and per- 4.2 Realized Execution Costs and Variance 24 manent market impact, the predominant strategy aspect is to trade as little as possible per aggregation step to reduce the impact and only partially deviate from that rule of thumb for the sake of risk aversion or additional knowledge about market regimes or volumes. 4.2. Realized Execution Costs and Variance Volume [MWh] Lead time [Minutes] TWAP VWAP 90 0.12 0.11 300 <0.0001 <0.0001 90 1 0.96 300 <0.0001 <0.0001 90 1 1 300 <0.0001 <0.0001 Alternative Hypothesis: OptiC BAS less than TWAP/VWAP 100 300 1000 Single-sided t-test for OptiC results T able 3:Resultsofasingle-sidedt-testtestingforsta- tistical signiﬁcance of the alternative hypothesis that OptiC resultsarelowerthanthecomparedalternatives. Section 4.1 demonstrated how considering diﬀerent aspects such as market coupling leads to diﬀerent execution paths. It is im- portant to note that all models were solely trained on 2018 data. Thus, all assump- tions and optimizations might turn out to be incorrect for the year 2019. Following the aggregation logic of section 2.2, we com- pare how each algorithm trades volumes and benchmarkthetradesagainsttheaggregated BAS and prices of each individual minute bucket of 2019. The aggregation averages out all spikes and outliers while still being very granular so that we have detailed results. Apart from that, we analyze diﬀerent trading volumes (100, 300, 1,000) and diﬀerent times to contract expiry, i.e.,k ={60, 270}, to reﬂect the behavior under changing conditions. To our knowledge, this paper is the ﬁrst one that reports out-of-sample results for the German intraday market. We want to ﬁrst focus on realized execution costs in the form of BAS, more formally deﬁned as BASt,k,r = (yt,k,r,sell−yt,k,r,buy). (30) Hence, the BAS is aggregated per delivery datet, minute bucketk, and accumulated vol- ume r. Using it as a benchmark also covers the most important trade execution aspects mentioned by Perold [36]. Table 2 grants a ﬁrst overview of our empirical simulation. Since the mean is not a robust measure in the case of outliers, we have decided to focus on the median and only report the mean in brackets for the sake of completeness. The ﬁrst striking observation is the high level of BAS if IOBE execution is concerned. It becomes obvious that actively “clicking away” the entire volume at once leads to a dramatic cost level that no company should aim for. Simple approaches like TWAP that do not require massive computation already beat IOBE by far. The VWAP strategy is also much better than IOBE 4.2 Realized Execution Costs and Variance 25 but stays behind TWAP in most cases. This is somehow unexpected and shows that a huge trading volume does not necessarily go hand in hand with low spreads. The dedicated optimization algorithm OptiC performs as expected when the volumes per bucket are low and beats all other approaches. However, this is only the case if there is lots of time to close positions, i.e., when the lead time is 300 or when there is less volume to be traded. But why is that so? We can think of two reasons. Taking a closer look at Figure 5, we can see that the dashed black line is below the actual spreads in the late trading phases before XBID. That means that the costs in local trading are slightly overestimated. Our choice of 60 minutes to trade seems to underline the model limitations. The optimization model exhibits weaknesses if applied in late trading and forced to trade large volumes. The other explanation is more pragmatic. We have used 2018 data to train the models, but that does not necessarily mean that identical patterns will evolve for 2019. Parts of the diﬀerences might also be due to the random noise that is present with all empirical approaches. Optiσv expands OptiC by a certain level of risk aversion that ﬂattens the trading volumes. Consequently, there is a shift in performance. In phases where OptiC performs well, a pre- mium in the form of slightly lower performance is paid. In the case of OptiC suﬀering from limitations, the risk-averse approach Optiσv loses less. All models struggle to keep their spread level when volumes increase. This observation makes sense, as the resulting orders hit deep layers in the order book and more spread is paid. There is no diﬀerence between the TWAP results in the cases of 100- and 300-MW volume for a lead time of 90 minutes. While this is contradictory at ﬁrst, a deeper look gains more insight. We have aggregated into time and volume buckets, and 300 MW/100 MW allocated into 60 time buckets means trades of 5 MW and 1.1 MW each. It is important to note that our second volume bucket spans from 1 to 5 MW, meaning that both orders result in the same out-of-sample spread simply due to our aggregation logic being too gross in that speciﬁc scenario. That is the reason why some algorithms’ results equal each other. We can see that the optimization approach makes sense in many scenarios. However, does that postulation hold true under a stricter statistical analysis? A one-sided t-test that checks for the signiﬁcance of OptiC BAS levels being lower than the TWAP and VWAP brings more clarity (see results in Table 3). All scenarios with 300-MW positions are clearly signiﬁcant. The results for 100 MW and 90 minutes of lead time are a bit better but do not persist under our stricter framework. The diﬀerences could also be random-based. Higher volumes and 90 minutes of lead time are clearly not signiﬁcant, which further underlines the inherent OptiC model’s limitations. But what does that mean in terms of monetary eﬀects? Our optimization model outperforms all other models by around 15 ct/MWh if we stick to the 4.2 Realized Execution Costs and Variance 26 more robust median BAS as our measure of choice. Say a trader usually trades 100 MW per day and hour. As an approximation for the premium on either a buy or sell trade, we assume the half-spread, i.e.,BASt,k,j/2. We acknowledge that this assumption requires symmetric savings for buy and sell trades, but for simpliﬁcation matters, this should suﬃce. The trader will then save 100 MW*24 hours*365 days*8 ct, the latter value being roughly the diﬀerence between OptiC and TWAP. The approach saves 70,080 euros per year due to an optimized execution. Assume a volume of 300 MW 300 minutes before delivery, the alternatives being IOBE and the optimized model. This comparison results in savings of 2,775 euros for each individual delivery hour and underlines that optimal execution can be an important perfor- mance driver. Last but not least, the variance of cost requires discussion. Equations (19) and (20) re- ﬂect how Optiσv balances between minimizing cost and variance. Inevitably, mean-variance approaches introduce subjectivity since the risk-aversion parameterλ is chosen by the user. One could argue that with just a few hours of trading, variance does not play a major role. If equity trading is concerned, there are usually much longer holding periods and daily volatil- ity reports of open position, but in intraday trading, positions are closed within minutes or hours. However, we want to inspect if Optiσv achieves the goal of lower variance. Our measure of choice is the weighted standard deviation of BAS, deﬁned as StdBAS = vuu√ ∑T t=1(BASt,k,r−µt,r)2 ( T−1 T )∑T t=1valgo t,k,r , (31) where T equals the length of our backtest time series andvalgo t,k,r the volume allocated by each algorithm per delivery date t, minute bucket k, and accumulated volume r. It is crucial to conduct a volume-weighting as the volumes are not distributed symmetrically. For instance, IOBE trades just once but with 100% of the position. Without taking volumes into consideration, the results would be biased. Table 4 demonstrates a mixed performance. In some cases, the variance of Optiσv is low or even the lowest across all models. However, the diﬀerence is small and comes at the price of a higher BAS. The overall trade trajectory is smoother and volumes are split more equally if we compare Optiσv with OptiC. Unfortunately, both models share the same shortcomings. Optiσv does not deliver less variance in problematic scenarios (low lead time and large positions). All in all, the goal of lower variance is achieved. However, the trade-oﬀ between higher spreads and lower variance does not seem to be too convincing in intraday markets. 4.3 Trade Price Benchmarking and Randomization of Volumes 27 Volume [MWh] Lead time [Minutes] IOBE TWAP VWAP OptiC Optiσ 90 568.14 61.51 62.17 60.84 60.31 300 135.98 23.41 25.84 18.66 22.99 90 1386.04 61.51 64.96 67.24 66.02 300 590.04 24.67 27.27 19.22 23.53 90 2043.59 127.12 121.35 167.85 159.44 300 1187.32 24.68 28.35 19.73 24.93 100 300 1000 T able 4: Volume weighted standard deviation of BAS per strategy, lead time, and volume. The lead time is connected to the choice ofk. If, for instance,k = 30 then the corresponding lead time is 1 hour before delivery. The unit of the Bid-Ask spread is€/MWh. 4.3. Trade Price Benchmarking and Randomization of Volumes The median BAS is a suitable measure as it allows for a compressed overview of performance. However, it features two drawbacks. First, the BAS is a symmetrical measure and does not contain any information on buy- or sell-side performance. If a company is a net seller, looking at spreads has limited value. Second, spreads are not as easily interpretable as prices, for instance. Many other papers utilize plain prices or averages like the ID3 or ID1 as a reference. We want to exploit these two aspects and, additionally, benchmark our algorithms against buy and sell prices. One might argue that the BAS is a direct result of prices, as shown in Eq. (29). This is basically true, but for this second benchmark, we have computed the prices from scratch following the logic of section 2.2. The ﬁndings of the price results in section 4.3 and BAS tables of section 4.2 might slightly diﬀer due to diﬀerent roundings, i.e., a price result will not 1:1 add up to the BAS results. While this could be perceived as confusing, we see it as an additional layer of veriﬁcation as we apply a newly computed measure. Table 5 reports all ﬁndings separated into buy and sell as well as the known scenarios with diﬀerent trading volumes and lead times. In addition, we report two volume-weighted reference prices published by EPEX Spot SE. For a lead time of 300 minutes, that is, the ID3, for 90 minutes until delivery, we apply the ID1. These indices do not comprise the relevant time frames 1:1 but serve as an appropriate and reproducible benchmark. Note that we only report the indices as a reference point but not as a measure per se. For readers interested in index-tracking or VWAP pricing, we refer to Frei and Westray [10] and Cartea and Jaimungal [6]. Unsurprisingly, Table 5 conﬁrms the overall impression of our spread analysis. Opti C yields convincing results with longer lead times, or—if forced to liquidate positions with shorter lead times—only in the case of small values. Moreover, TWAP also shows favorable prices. Taking a deeper look at buying and selling separately, some interesting patterns emerge. 4.3 Trade Price Benchmarking and Randomization of Volumes 28 Volume [MWh] Lead time [Minutes] Reference Price* IOBE TWAP VWAP OptiC Optiσ IOBE TWAP VWAP OptiC Optiσ 48.19 39.56 39.55 39.51 39.53 30.12 37.18 37.15 37.19 37.13 (73.33) (40.11) (40.09) (40.02) (40.06) (12.81) (36.55) (36.54) (36.62) (36.59) 49.24 39.12 39.16 38.99 39.01 29.2 37.68 37.62 37.75 37.7 (57.99) (39.26) (39.30) (39.16) (39.24) (24.76) (37.33) (37.22) (37.41) (37.35) 69.81 39.52 39.84 39.9 39.88 11.88 37.18 37.11 37.02 37.11 (226.43) (40.11) (40.34) (40.45) (40.42) -(117.17) (36.55) (36.27) (36.18) (36.19) 70.14 39.07 39.05 39.03 39.01 10.52 37.59 37.57 37.69 37.62 (107.31) (39.38) (39.39) (29.26) (39.33) -(15.57) (37.19) (37.17) (37.30) (37.25) 233.88 41.07 41.01 41.17 41.34 -130.41 36.06 36.34 36.04 35.90 (580.61) (42.88) (42.64) (43.22) (43.74) -(444.71) (33.68) (34.01) -(33.16) (32.76) 109.91 39.07 39.15 39.05 39.2 -30.99 37.59 37.53 37.62 37.51 (195.77) (39.38) (39.49) (39.34) (39.51) -(98.37) (37.19) (37.06) (37.22) (37.06) *Average ID3 price for 300 minutes lead time, average ID1 price for 90 minutes lead time Sell 90 300 300 90 38.32 38.3 38.32 38.3 38.32 38.3 90 300 100 1000 Buy 300 T able 5: Average BAS per strategy, lead time, and volume. The lead time is connected to the choice of k. If, for instance,k = 60 , then the corresponding lead time is 90 minutes before delivery. The unit of the Bid-Ask spread is€/MWh. In low-volume scenarios, the beneﬁts of our optimization approach are stronger when buying volumes. This eﬀect cancels out with higher volumes. In the case of medium volumes, one can observe slightly better sell than buy prices (e.g., considering the diﬀerence between OptiC and TWAP). However, this eﬀect is negligible. Overall, the LOB imbalance in terms of prices is rather low. It does not seem to make a diﬀerence if one is buying or selling, which delivers evidence to the fact that quoted volumes and resulting execution prices are symmetrical. There might be times where this conclusion does not hold anymore, such as large plant outages or renewables forecast updates that cause the entire market to sell generated power. However, these go beyond our considerations and obviously seem to cancel out with a sample size of almost one year of out-of-sample data. Another interesting insight is connected to reference prices. Many intraday papers like Kath and Ziel [25] just apply index prices published by EPEX Spot. However, if we compare the realized price levels to the reference price, the diﬀerence is striking. No algorithm can trade at the reference price. Instead, an additional mark-up (selling at lower prices or buying at higher ones) of around 0.70—1.20€/MWh is required. But why is that so? We must keep in mind that the reference price is a mid-price between buys and sells. So, in order to trade at or near an ID3, a trader has to—at least partially—earn the BAS. This contradicts one of our core assumptions, namely the active trading of positions meaning accepting orders directly in LOBs. Our algorithms explicitly pay the BAS as they do not want to wait for execution and face the risk of non-trading over a longer period of time. Additionally, earning the BAS, i.e., waiting for others to accept their own orders, requires one to be always on top of the order book. This aspect is a trading strategy on its own, as one needs to deﬁne price aggression, 29 position sizes, and inventory risks in a diﬀerent way than is done in this paper. However, the simple comparison with reference prices reveals a major ﬁnding with large academic impact. Even complex execution algorithms trade far from ID1 and ID3. Thus, the assumption of trading at index prices is an unrealistic one or needs at least a proper discussion of index replications algorithms and optimal execution. The topic itself is beyond the scope of this paper, but the naive comparison of our results and the reference prices emphasizes a core limitation of the majority of papers on intraday trading. Last but not least, we want to examine if the results persist under changing conditions. Assuming ﬁxed positions amid all days and hours of the year is a strong assumption that will only account for a number of very large market players. However, what if smaller traders utilize the execution algorithms only occasionally? In addition to gaining more realistic results, we introduce an additional robustness check by manipulating the sample. Do the algorithms deliver a constant performance, or are the results of Table 5 only due to some very speciﬁc events? Based on the described out-of-sample tests, we can erratically remove days from the sample to ﬁnd answers to these questions. Figure 9 plots the modus operandi. Based on 100% of the out-of-sample data, we randomly delete 60% and then another 40% or, ﬁrst, 25% followed by 50%, which results in four diﬀerent randomization paths for two diﬀerent lead-time and volume scenarios. Inspecting the results, we ﬁnd that the robustness check by sampling conﬁrms the previous results: TWAP and VWAP are generally more proﬁtable in high-volume, low-lead-time scenarios, while the optimization approaches show superior performance if given more time to trade. Thus, we have delivered evidence of the fact that the results of Tables 2 and 5 hold true under more general conditions. They are valid for the entire data set as well as randomly sampled parts of it, which renders them as a good line of orientation for market players. 5. Contributions and Outlook 5.1. Conclusion Optimal execution of positions in intraday markets, despite its importance with regard to a trader’s performance, has only come to academic attention recently. Recent papers like Glas et al. [15] use LOB data, aggregate information into discrete time steps, and solve numerical optimization problems, aiming for an appropriate trade trajectory that minimizes bid-ask spreads. Equity markets supply a rich body of literature but lack certain characteristics like diﬀerent trading regimes, short lead-times, and exponential growth of costs due to liquidity 5.1 Conclusion 30 Buy Sell Buy Sell OptiC39.5736.7 OptiC39.5536.51 Optiσ 39.536.7 Optiσ 39.536.52 TWAP39.2736.96 TWAP39.336.84 VWAP39.536.78 VWAP39.5136.63 Buy Sell Buy Sell Buy Sell OptiC39.8837.02 OptiC40.0237.13 OptiC40.0137.3 Optiσ 39.937.11 Optiσ 40.0137.15 Optiσ 40.0337.32 TWAP39.5237.18 TWAP38.8837.41 TWAP39.6937.51 VWAP39.8437.11 VWAP39.9937.2 VWAP40.0137.4 Buy Sell Buy Sell Buy Sell OptiC39.0337.63 OptiC38.9537.54 OptiC38.5937.2 Optiσ 39.0137.62 Optiσ 38.9937.52 Optiσ 38.6537.12 TWAP39.0737.59 TWAP39.0137.51 TWAP38.737.1 VWAP39.0537.57 VWAP39.0437.51 VWAP38.737.09 Buy Sell Buy Sell OptiC39.6338.24 OptiC34.4138.03 Optiσ 39.738.2 Optiσ 39.4538.01 TWAP 39.74 38.15 TWAP 39.52 38.01 VWAP 39.75 38.15 VWAP 39.53 38.01 25% sampled & deleted 50% sampled & deleted 50% sampled & deleted 25% sampled & deleted 40% sampled & deleted 40% sampled & deleted Leadtime 90 minutes 300MWh Leadtime 300 minutes 300MWh Figure 9: Out-of-sample scenario analysis given randomly sampled days of the year 2019. The calculation emphasizes whether the results persist under changing conditions or erratic occurrences of positions to be executed, e.g., plant outages. restrictions. We provide a more reﬁned optimization approach. Our model minimizes ex- pected costs as well as—if desired—expected variance and outputs an optimal trading path per minute. Based on aggregated minute buckets, we have ﬁtted two GAM models to consider per- manent and temporary market impact. Our calculations have shown that penalized splines work well for modeling the relationship between spreads and lead time, trading volumes, and times of trading in German continuous intraday markets. Thus, the GAMs comprise mul- tiple p-splines and model the exponential growth of median bid-ask spreads depending on the aforementioned variables. Another important thing unprecedentedly considered by our approach is European market coupling. A simple lead time analysis showed that BAS levels dramatically increase when the European coupling of intraday orders under XBID stops one hour before delivery. Although trading costs normalize shortly after this cut-over phase, their overall level tends to be higher without coupling. Our approach takes this chronological char- acteristic into account and models XBID trading, local German trading, and the cut-over phase separately. To our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst optimization method to incorporate so many market-speciﬁc determinants based on 60-second data. But is it worth the eﬀort? We compared the model performance in an out-of-sample study 5.2 Outlook 31 based on the year 2019 data against other simple benchmarks like immediate order-book ex- ecution or time- and volume-weighted average approaches. Both measures of choice, bid-ask spreads and plain buy and sell prices, suggest that a more complex computation yields better execution performance in the form of lower spreads and more favorable prices. Only in late trading phases around 90 minutes before delivery and in the case of large volumes to be traded in that phase does a limitation of the GAM calculation become obvious. Costs are partially underestimated, which causes the algorithm to trade more than is optimal in speciﬁc time buckets. However, this only occurs when being forced to liquidate large positions. In most scenarios, an additional saving of 10—15 cents median BAS and 15—20 cents/MWh in the form of favorable prices can be realized. Apart from that, the study revealed how prob- lematic simple clicks in the order book can be. If volumes increase, this form of execution can cause additional costs of over 100 euros/MWh and should be avoided. That being said, even simple algorithms like an equally sized split of volumes on all available time buckets performs surprisingly well and highlight the importance of discussing the optimal execution of trades. Another crucial insight is connected to optimal execution and average prices. The major- ity of current intraday trading papers (e.g., Janke and Steinke [23] and Uniejewski et al. [41] to name a few) utilize volume-weighted price averages as their measure of choice. Our results suggest that this is problematic. All algorithms trade around 1 euro/MWh away from those prices. Using them without discussing the costs of trading in the form of market impact and paid bid-ask spreads makes results appear less appealing. Additionally, we believe that the discussion of optimal execution will play an important role in the future of electricity intra- day trading as markets mature and margins shrink. It has a direct impact on each trader’s performance and is applicable in almost every situation, whether it be a plant outage, a large position update from customer load, or a proprietary view on the market. 5.2. Outlook The previous analysis has shown that optimal execution, whilst not being extensively dis- cussed in the literature yet, can be an interesting value driver. However, what role will optimal execution play in the future, and how could further research promote its impor- tance? We encourage trading-oriented forecasting approaches like that of Maciejowska et al. [30] or Maciejowska et al. [29] to discuss execution as well. Benchmarks like ID3 are a suitable ﬁrst approximation but neglect the trading character and the fact that a trader often has to pay bid-ask spreads. Future research should steer backtests in that direction and use order Bibliography 32 book data whenever possible instead of trades to have more realistic results. Concerning the methodology of this paper, there are several extensions possible. We lim- ited our model mostly to a ﬁxed volume that does not change over time. While this is convenient for many cases, typical RES generation implies erratic position changes. Thus, the algorithm and its underlying optimization problem might be extended to consider the random character of volumes. Another interesting direction for further research is given by the market impact functions. They are crucial for volume allocation and determine trading behavior to a great extent. We have derived a suitable implementation based on data, but other approaches could prove to be even better. The empirical study of Section 4 revealed model limitations with larger volumes and less time to trade. The authors assumed that the market impact functions generally work better with low volumes. The model underes- timates the exponential eﬀects of high trading amounts per volume bucket in late coupled trading. Therefore, it could turn out to be beneﬁcial to benchmark other impact models such as the transient one of Gatheral et al. [13] or the well-known and often utilized square-root model (see Tóth et al. [40]). A general comparison of diﬀerent approaches would sharpen the understanding of intraday market microstructure. Last but not least, the present paper limited its focus to hourly trading. Quarter-hourly continuous trading works similarly but is—due to missing European sister markets—not as widely coupled as its hourly opponent. An analysis and modeling of quarter hours would be novel and could add further insight into how intraday markets work. Bibliography [1] René Aïd, Pierre Gruet, and Huyên Pham. An optimal trading problem in intraday electricity markets. Mathematics and Financial Economics, 10(1):49–85, 2016. [2] Robert Almgren and Neil Chriss. Optimal execution of portfolio transactions.Journal of Risk, 3:5–40, 2001. [3] Robert F Almgren. Optimal execution with nonlinear impact functions and trading-enhanced risk. Applied mathematical ﬁnance, 10(1):1–18, 2003. [4] Dimitris Bertsimas and Andrew W Lo. Optimal control of execution costs.Journal of Financial Markets, 1(1):1–50, 1998. [5] Jędrzej Białkowski, Serge Darolles, and Gaëlle Le Fol. Improving vwap strategies: A dynamic volume approach. Journal of Banking & Finance, 32(9):1709–1722, 2008. [6] Álvaro Cartea and Sebastian Jaimungal. A closed-form execution strategy to target volume weighted average price.SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics, 7(1):760–785, 2016. [7] M. Coulon and Jonas Ströjby. Wind park valuation and risk management in the german intraday power markets, January 2020. URL Bibliography 33 https://www.fime-lab.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/EDFParisCoulon.pdf. accessed on 23.08.2020. [8] Paul HC Eilers and Brian D Marx. Flexible smoothing with b-splines and penalties.Statistical science, pages 89–102, 1996. [9] EPEX Spot SE. New trading record on epex spot in 2019, 2020. URL https://www.epexspot.com/en/news/new-trading-record-epex-spot-201926A . accessed on 26th January 2020. [10] Christoph Frei and Nicholas Westray. Optimal execution of a vwap order: a stochastic control approach. Mathematical Finance, 25(3):612–639, 2015. [11] Pierre Gaillard, Yannig Goude, and Raphaël Nedellec. Additive models and robust aggregation for gefcom2014 probabilistic electric load and electricity price forecasting.International Journal of forecasting, 32(3):1038–1050, 2016. [12] Ernesto Garnier and Reinhard Madlener. Balancing forecast errors in continuous-trade intraday markets. Energy Systems, 6(3):361–388, 2015. [13] Jim Gatheral, Alexander Schied, and Alla Slynko. Transient linear price impact and fredholm integral equations. Mathematical Finance: An International Journal of Mathematics, Statistics and Financial Economics, 22(3):445–474, 2012. [14] Silke Glas, Rüdiger Kiesel, Sven Kolkmann, Marcel Kremer, Nikolaus Graf von Luckner, Lars Ostmeier, Karsten Urban, and Christoph Weber. Intraday renewable electricity trading: advanced modeling and optimal control. InProgress in industrial mathematics at ECMI 2018, pages 469–475. Springer, 2019. [15] Silke Glas, Rüdiger Kiesel, Sven Kolkmann, Marcel Kremer, Nikolaus Graf von Luckner, Lars Ostmeier, Karsten Urban, and Christoph Weber. Intraday renewable electricity trading: advanced modeling and numerical optimal control.Journal of Mathematics in Industry, 10(1):3, 2020. [16] David E Goldberg and John Henry Holland. Genetic algorithms and machine learning. 1988. [17] Olivier Guéant and Guillaume Royer. Vwap execution and guaranteed vwap.SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics, 5(1):445–471, 2014. [18] Simon Hagemann. Price determinants in the german intraday market for electricity: an empirical analysis. Journal of Energy Markets, 8(2):21–45, 2015. [19] Trevor J Hastie and Robert J Tibshirani.Generalized additive models, volume 43. CRC press, 1990. [20] Terrence Hendershott and Ryan Riordan. Algorithmic trading and the market for liquidity.Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 48(4):1001–1024, 2013. [21] John H Holland. Genetic algorithms.Scientiﬁc american, 267(1):66–73, 1992. [22] Mark L Humphery-Jenner. Optimal vwap trading under noisy conditions.Journal of Banking & Finance, 35(9):2319–2329, 2011. [23] Tim Janke and Florian Steinke. Forecasting the price distribution of continuous intraday electricity trading. Energies, 12(22):4262, 2019. [24] Christopher Kath. Modeling intraday markets under the new advances of the cross-border intraday project (xbid): Evidence from the german intraday market.Energies, 12(22):4339, 2019. [25] Christopher Kath and Florian Ziel. The value of forecasts: Quantifying the economic gains of accurate quarter-hourly electricity price forecasts.Energy Economics, 76:411–423, 2018. Bibliography 34 [26] Rüdiger Kiesel and Florentina Paraschiv. Econometric analysis of 15-minute intraday electricity prices. Energy Economics, 64:77–90, 2017. [27] Christopher Koch and Lion Hirth. Short-term electricity trading for system balancing: An empirical analysis of the role of intraday trading in balancing germany’s electricity system.Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 113:109275, 2019. [28] Hizuru Konishi. Optimal slice of a vwap trade.Journal of Financial Markets, 5(2):197–221, 2002. [29] Katarzyna Maciejowska, Weronika Nitka, and Tomasz Weron. Day-ahead vs. intraday-forecasting the price spread to maximize economic beneﬁts.Energies, 12(4):631, 2019. [30] Katarzyna Maciejowska, Bartosz Uniejewski, and Tomasz Seraﬁn. Pca forecast averaging-predicting day-ahead and intraday electricity prices.Energies, 13(14):3530, 2020. [31] Harry Markowitz. Portfolio selection.The Journal of Finance, 7(1):77–91, March 1952. [32] Henry Martin and Scott Otterson. German intraday electricity market analysis and modeling based on the limit order book. In2018 15th International Conference on the European Energy Market (EEM), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2018. [33] Michał Narajewski and Florian Ziel. Econometric modelling and forecasting of intraday electricity prices. Journal of Commodity Markets, 19:100107, 2020. [34] Michał Narajewski and Florian Ziel. Ensemble forecasting for intraday electricity prices: Simulating trajectories. Applied Energy, 279, December 2020. [35] Christian Pape, Simon Hagemann, and Christoph Weber. Are fundamentals enough? explaining price variations in the german day-ahead and intraday power market.Energy Economics, 54:376–387, 2016. [36] Andre F Perold. The implementation shortfall: Paper versus reality.Journal of Portfolio Management, 14(3):4, 1988. [37] R. A. Rigby and D. M. Stasinopoulos. Generalized additive models for location, scale and shape,(with discussion). Applied Statistics, 54:507–554, 2005. [38] L Scrucca. Ga: A package for genetic algorithms in r. journal of statistical software.Foundation for Open Access Statistics, 53(4), 2013. [39] Mikis D Stasinopoulos, Robert A Rigby, Gillian Z Heller, Vlasios Voudouris, and Fernanda De Bastiani. Flexible regression and smoothing: using GAMLSS in R. CRC Press, 2017. [40] Bence Tóth, Zoltán Eisler, and J-P Bouchaud. The square-root impace law also holds for option markets. Wilmott, 2016(85):70–73, 2016. [41] Bartosz Uniejewski, Grzegorz Marcjasz, and Rafał Weron. Understanding intraday electricity markets: Variable selection and very short-term price forecasting using lasso.International Journal of Forecasting, 35(4):1533 – 1547, 2019. [42] Johannes Viehmann. State of the german short-term power market.Zeitschrift für Energiewirtschaft, 41(2):87–103, 2017. [43] Nikolaus Graf von Luckner, Álvaro Cartea, Sebastian Jaimungal, and Rüdiger Kiesel. Optimal market maker pricing in the german intraday power market. House of Energy Markets and Finance, Essen, Germany, 2017. [44] Georg Wolﬀ and Stefan Feuerriegel. Short-term dynamics of day-ahead and intraday electricity prices. International Journal of Energy Sector Management, 4(4):557–573, 2017. [45] Simon N Wood.Generalized additive models: an introduction with R. CRC press, 2017.