arXiv:2009.09993v4 [q-fin.TR] 18 Jun 2022 A G ENERIC METHODOLOGY FOR THE STATISTICALLY UNIFORM & C OMPARABLE EVALUATION OF AUTOMATED TRADING PLATFORM COMPONENTS Artur Sokolovsky School of Computing Newcastle University 1 Science Square, NE4 5TG, UK artur.sokolovky@gmail.com Luca Arnaboldi School of Informatics University of Edinburgh 10 Crichton St, EH8 9AB, UK luca.arnaboldi@ed.ac.uk June 22, 2022 ABSTRACT Introduction: Although machine learning approaches have been widely used in the ﬁeld of ﬁnance, to very successful degrees, these approaches remain bespok e to speciﬁc investigations and opaque in terms of explainability, comparability, and reproducib ility. Objectives: The primary objective of this research was to shed light upon this ﬁeld by providing a generic methodology that was investigation-agnostic and i nterpretable to a ﬁnancial markets practi- tioner, thus enhancing their efﬁciency, reducing barriers to entry, and increasing the reproducibility of experiments. The proposed methodology is showcased on tw o automated trading platform com- ponents. Namely, price levels, a well-known trading patter n, and a novel 2-step feature extraction method. Methods: This proposed a generic methodology, usable across markets , the methodology relies on hypothesis testing, which is widely applied in other social and scientiﬁc disciplines to effectively evaluate the concrete results beyond simple classiﬁcation accuracy. The ﬁrst hypothesis was for- mulated to evaluate whether the selected trading pattern is suitable for use in the machine learning setting. The second hypothesis allows to systematically as sess whether the proposed feature ex- traction method leads to any statistically signiﬁcant impr ovement in the automated trading platform performance. Results: Experiments were conducted across, 10 contracts, 3 feature spaces, and 3 rebound conﬁg- urations (for feature extraction), resulting in 90 experim ents. Across the experiments we found that the use of the considered trading pattern in the machine lear ning setting is only partially supported by statistics, resulting in insigniﬁcant effect sizes (Rebound 7 - 0.64±1.02, Rebound 11 0.38±0.98, and rebound 15 - 1.05 ± 1.16), but allowed the rejection of the null hypothesis based on t he outcome of the statistical test. While the results of the proposed 2- step feature extraction looked promising at ﬁrst sight, statistics did not support this, this demonstra ted the usefulness of the proposed method- ology. Additionally, we obtained SHAP values for the consid ered models, providing insights for adjustments to the feature space. Conclusion: We showcased the generic methodology on a US futures market i nstrument and pro- vided evidence that with this methodology we could easily ob tain informative metrics beyond the more traditional performance and proﬁtability metrics. Th e interpretability of these results allows the practitioner to construct more effective automated tra ding pipelines by analysing their strategies using an intuitive and statistically sound methodology. Th is work is one of the ﬁrst in applying this rigorous statistically-backed approach to the ﬁeld of ﬁnan cial markets and we hope this may be a springboard for more research. A full reproducibility pack age is shared. Keywords Generic Methodology · Automated Trading Platform · Algorithmic trading · Financial Markets · Interpretability A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 1 Introduction As machine learning (ML) changes and takes over virtually ev ery aspect of our lives, we are now able to automate tasks that previously were only possible with human interve ntion. A ﬁeld in which it has quickly gained traction and popularity is ﬁnance [ 30]. Most current-day trading is done electronically, through v arious available applications [19]. Market data is propagated by the trading exchanges and handled by specialised trading feeds to keep track of trades, bids and asks by the partic- ipants of the exchange. Different exchanges provide data in varying formats with different levels of granularity (e.g. order book) and can be accessed live through APIs or download ed for historical data. A diagram of what an Automated Trading Platform (A TP) looks l ike in practice is presented in Fig 1. 1 . Bid Ask Order Book Electronic T rading Platform Historic Data Machine Learning 2. T rading Strategy A. B. preprocess 5.6. . Order Entry Gateway 7. Feed HandlerExchange market data Figure 1: Schematic representation of the Automated Tradin g Platform components Research gap Machine learning in ﬁnance has been largely dominated by dee p learning approaches [ 74, 63]. The consensus has been that deep learning has continuously been the best performing predictor class, not only across ﬁ- nancial time series but across a myriad of other disciples [ 74]. However, it is well known that deep learning techniques are at least difﬁcult to explain and provide no intuition in r egards to their decisions [ 1]. As an outcome of this, there has been a spike in research into the explainability and acco untability of machine learning [ 71, 2]. Whilst the model performance is no doubt an important factor in designing pro ﬁtable patterns, the inherent trade-off with explainabili ty cannot be dismissed lightly. Following the decisions of a de ep learning model is non-trivial, and even deemed unfeasi- ble in most scenarios [ 7]. When high ﬁnancial risks are in place, it is important to be able to understand the root cause of a potential loss and adapt the strategy accordingly, howe ver, this is incredibly difﬁcult if not impossible using dee p learning approaches [83, 1]. What is instead desirable is to be able to measure the effec tiveness of the selected trading pattern, the feature space and the model predictions, thus a llowing the full power of machine learning to be supported by expert insights. A ﬁne balance is to use modern, highly acc urate approaches, such as tree boosting [ 67], but that can also be interpreted more effectively through post-hoc e xplanation methods [1]. An example of a technique relying on expert patterns to trade using machine learning approach es [54] shows that these can be used as a direct indicator of market performance, providing proﬁtable returns and con crete evidence of success, this is a technique that is much more approachable to the average ML practitioner. To assess these approaches and apply the designed component s of APT successfully, statistical techniques should be applied to provide the desired interpretability and compar ability. Statistical analysis such as this, on the data and 2 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 predictors, is often applied to scientiﬁc ﬁelds such as medi cine and psychology [ 21], but is much rarer in machine learning contexts. As one can see further in the text, the proposed approach allo ws for the careful selection of trading criteria, greatly simplifying the analysis process, improving the uniformit y of experiments, allowing by-design comparability, and justifying every layer of added complexity. Study aim The aim of the study is comprised of multiple aspects: i) intr oduce and showcase a methodology for reproducible and comparable evaluation of the A TP components, ii) automate a well-known trading pattern extraction method (price levels [ 68, 32]) and evaluate it following the proposed methodology, iii) propose and evaluate a 2-step way of feature design in the context of the automated trading system. Research Question 1 As the ﬁrst research question, we aim to assess whether the co nsidered trading pattern can be classiﬁed with performance better than the baseline, alway s-positive class model. RQ1: Is it feasible to classify the extracted price extrema with a precision better than the bas eline? Answering the research question allows us to tell whether th e proposed trading pattern is suitable for the machine learning setting. Alternatively, whether the added comple xity of introducing machine learning methods in the pipelin e can be justiﬁed. There are a few scenarios possible. For inst ance, it might be the case that the proposed trading pattern in itself leads to a good baseline performance, which, howev er, cannot be further improved with machine learning methods. At this point, one concludes that the use of machine learning is not justiﬁed. Alternatively, the pattern might perform poorly on its own but allows great classiﬁcati on performance improvement using machine learning tools. In such a case, the added complexity is well-justiﬁed . Finally, the worst case is that the pattern performs poorly and cannot be further improved using machine learning metho ds. We believe that answering this research question is an essential initial step for trading pattern design, as w ithout this information any following analysis is lacking t he necessary context. Research Question 2 As the second research question, we consider a domain knowle dge-based 2-step extraction method that is believed to capture a more complete represent ation of the market and investigate whether it gives any beneﬁt in comparison to using any of the extraction steps alo ne. RQ2: Does the use of the 2-step feature extraction improve the price level classiﬁcation performance with res pect to the individual steps? Outline The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2) pro vides the ﬁnancial and machine learning back- ground needed to understand our approach; Section 3) provid es descriptions of some related work; Section 4) presents the studied data and the study methodology for the automated market proﬁling approach and assessment methodology; Section 5) details our constructed APT results; in Section 6 ) a discussion on results, their implications and limitatio ns is provided; and Section 7) concludes the work. Contributions The contributions of this work are the following: 1. We propose a methodology to design and statistically eval uate components of an automated trading platform using machine learning; 2. We present an automated trading pattern extraction metho d with their further classiﬁcation into trading sce- narios; 3. We propose and evaluate the performance of a domain knowle dge-based feature space design method using the proposed methodology. 2 Background and related works In this work, we build upon and make use of several different concepts from the ﬁelds of ﬁnance, machine learning and statistical reproducibility. In this section, we include b ackground details required to understand each of these topi cs as well as an overview of the relevant literature in these are as. We ﬁnally conclude the section by discussing similar methodologies and how they differ from our proposed approac h. 2.1 Financial time series analysis and trading This section breaks down how data is handled, processed and u sed in the context of ﬁnancial analysis. This includes the pre-processing phase pattern extraction, trading, eva luation methods and features. 3 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 2.1.1 Data pre-processing To prepare data for processing, the raw data is structured in to predetermined formats to make it easier for machine learning algorithms to digest. There are several ways to gro up data, and various features may be aggregated. The main idea is to identify a window of interest based on some heurist ic, and then aggregate the features of that window to get a representation, called Bar. Bars may contain several features and it is up to the individ ual to decide what features to select, common features include Bar start time , Bar end time , Sum of V olume, Open Price, Close Price, Min and Max (usually called High and Low) prices, and any other features that might help characterise the trading performed within this window [ 23]. How the bars are selected has a distinct impact on performa nce e.g. using time as a metric for the bar window is affected by active and non-active trading periods, so you might ﬁnd that only some bars are usef ul using this methodology. 2.1.2 Discovery of the price levels In mathematics, an extremum is any point at which the value of a function is largest (a maximum) or smallest (a minimum). These can either be local or global extrema. At the local extremum, the value is larger/lower at immediately adjacent points, while at a global extremum the value of the f unction is larger than its value at any other point in the interval of interest. If one wants to maximise their proﬁts t heoretically, they would intend to identify an extremum (or a price level) and trade at that point of optimality i.e. the p eak. This is one of the many ways of deﬁning the points of optimality. As far as the algorithms for an A TP are considered, they oftenwork in the trading context, so ﬁnding a global extremum serves little purpose. Consequently, local extrema within a pre-selected window are instead chosen. Several complex algorithms exist for this with use cases in many ﬁelds such as biology [ 26]. However, the objective is quite simple: identify a sample for which neighbours on each side have lowe r values for maxima and higher values for minima. This approach is very straightforward and can be implemente d with a linear search. In the case where there are ﬂat peaks, which means several entries are of equal value the mid dle entry may be selected. Two further metrics of interest are, the prominence and width of a peak. The prominence of a pe ak measures how much a peak stands out from the surrounding baseline of the near entries, and is deﬁned as th e vertical distance between the peak and lowest point. The width of the peak is the distance between each of the lower bou nds of the peak, signifying the duration of the peaks. In the case of peak classiﬁcation, these measures can aid a ma chine learning estimator to relate the obtained features with the discovered peaks, this avoids attempts to directly relate properties of narrow or less prominent peaks with wider or more prominent peaks. These measures provide a cont ext in terms of price level characteristics. One might expect that they would aid the classiﬁcation of trading poin ts. We are by no means the ﬁrst to look at price extremums as one of t he metrics of interest, volatility is still one of the core metrics for trading [ 4]. To statistically analyse price changes and break down key events in the market Caginalp & Caginalp [ 12], propose a method to ﬁnd peaks in the volatility, leading to more prominent price levels. But whilst this work is a recent approach, price levels were ﬁrst used in the 80s and proven to be very successful [ 68, 32] The price extrema represent the optimal point at which the price is being traded before a large ﬂuctuation. Since the implied relationship of supply and demand is something that will hold for any exchange, this is a great ﬁt for various instruments. In a different context, Miller et al [ 60], analyse Bitcoin data to ﬁnd proﬁtable trading bounds. Bit coin, unlike more traditional exchanges, is decentralised and traded 24h a da y, making the data much more sparse and with less concen- trated trading periods. This makes the trends harder to anal yse. Their approach manipulates the data in such a way that it is smoothed, through the removal of splines, this see ks to manipulate curves to make its points more closely related. By this technique, they can remove outliers and ﬁnd clearer points of ﬂuctuation as well as peaks. The authors then construct a bounded trading strategy that proves to per form well against unbounded strategies. Since Bitcoin has more decentralised access, and by the very nature of those in vesting in it, this also reduces barriers to entry, making automated trading much more common. This indicates that tec hniques to identify bounds and points of interest in the market are also more favoured and widely used. 2.1.3 Derivation of the market microstructure features A market microstructure is the study of ﬁnancial markets and how they operate. Its features represent the way that the market operates, how decisions are made about trades, the pr ice discovery process and many more [ 50]. The process of market microstructure analysis is the identiﬁcation of w hy and how the market prices will change, to trade prof- itably. These may include, 1) the time between trades, as it is usually an indicator of trading intensity [ 6] 2) volatility, which might represent evidence of good and bad trading scena rios, as high volatility may lead to an unsuitable market state [37], 3) volume, which may directly correlate with trade duration, as it mig ht represent informed trading rather 4 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 than less high volume active trading [ 58], and 4) trade duration , high trading activity is related to greater price im- pact of trades and faster price adjustment to trade-related events, whilst slower trades may indicate informed single entities [27]. In their work Munnix et al [ 61] proposed the characterisation of market structures based on correlation. Through this, they were able to detect key states of market cr ises from raw market data. Whist several other options are available they are often instrument-related and requir e expert domain knowledge. In general, it is important to tailor and evaluate your features to cater to the speciﬁc sce nario identiﬁed. One such important scenario to consider when catering to pri ces is whether the price action is caused by aggressive buyers or sellers. In an Order Book, a match implies a trade, w hich occurs whenever a bid matches an ask and conversely, however the trade is only ever initiated by one party. To dictate who the aggressor is in this scenario (if not annotated by the marketplace), the tick rule is used [ 3]. The rule labels a buy-initiated trade as 1, and a sell-init iated trade as -1. The logic is the following an initial label l is assigned an arbitrary value of 1 if a trade occurs and the pr ice change is positive, then l = 1 if the price change is negative, and l = 0 and if there is no price change l is inverted. This can identify the aggressor with a high degree of accurac y [29]. 2.2 Automated trading and strategies Rule-based methods have seen mixed successes in the context of ﬁnancial time series [ 65]. In part, this is due to the wide usage of quite simple rules [ 16]. What may instead be more desirable is to use patterns for tr ading [54]. These patterns can perform with high levels of proﬁtability and ca n be automatically extracted from data, which is in itself, quite desirable. Despite early criticisms [ 72], not only have these patterns been shown to be particularly effective [16], they might be particularly useful in the machine learning se tting. To evaluate the effectiveness of the trading strategy the Sh arpe Ratio can be used. This is a measure for assessing the performance of an investment or trading approach and can be c omputed as the following: S = Rp − Rf σp , (1) where Rp & Rf correspond to the portfolio and risk free returns, respecti vely, and σp is a standard deviation of the portfolio return. While the equation gives a good intuition of the measure, in practice its annualised version is often computed. It assumes that daily returns follow the Wiener pr ocess distribution, hence to obtain annualised values, the daily Sharpe values are multiplied by √ 252 - the annual number of trading days. It should be noted that su ch an approach might overestimate the resulting Sharpe ratios as returns auto-correlations might be present, violating the original assumption [ 55]. Automating the trading through machine learning efforts is the identiﬁcation of a market state in which a trade is proﬁtable, and automatically performs the transaction at t hat stage. Such a system is normally tailored for a speciﬁc instrument, analysing unique patterns to improve the chara cterisation. One such effort focusing on Forex markets is, Dempster & Leemans [ 24]. In this work, a technique using reinforcement learning is proposed, to learn market behaviours. Reinforcement learning is an area of machine le arning concerned with how software agents ought to take actions in an environment to maximise the notion of cumulative reward. This is achieved by assigning positive rewards to desired actions and negative rewards to undesired action s, leading to an optimisation towards actions that incremen t rewards. In ﬁnancial markets, this naturally corresponds t o proﬁtable trades. Using this approach, the authors can characterise when to trade, analyse associated risks, and a utomatically make decisions based on these factors. 2.3 Backtesting To test trading, strategy evaluation is performed to assess proﬁtability. Whilst it is possible to do so on trading live market, it is more favourable to do so on the historical data ﬁ rst to get the results on a large timeline and avoid any ﬁnancial risks. The notion is that a strategy that would have worked poorly in the past will probably work poorly in the future, and conversely. But as you can see, a key part of ba cktesting is the weak assumption that past performance predicts future performance [ 39, 5, 46]. Several approaches exist to perform backtesting and different things can be assessed. Beyond trading strategies testing, backtesting can show how positions are opened and the likeli hood of certain scenarios taking place within a trading period [ 39]. The more common approach is to implement the backtesting w ithin the trading software platform, as this has the advantage that the same code as live trading can b e used. Almost all platforms allow for simulations of historical data, although one operates on data pre-process ed by the proprietary software platform, making the pipelin e partially opaque. For more ﬂexibility, one can implement their backtesting sy stem in languages such as C# or Python [ 62]. This speciﬁc approach enables the same code pipeline that is training the classiﬁer to also test the data, allowing for much smoother 5 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 testing. However, some limitation of this type of backtesti ng is that it doesn’t include a lack of order book queues as well as the latency simulation, both of which are present in t he live trading setting. Consequently, slippages (the differ- ence between where the order is submitted by the algorithm an d the actual market entry/exit price) cannot be modelled accurately. Moreover, the modelling approaches and assump tions vary between the backtesting engines, hampering comparability. Nevertheless, backtesting is a commonly ad opted practise among the ﬁnancial market practitioners, and being used with care, gives a good estimation of the A TP qu ality. It is crucial to highlight that backtesting is only possible when all the components of the A TP are in place, making it barely suitable for assessing individual components separ ately. 2.4 Machine learning algorithms in ﬁnancial contexts There is a wide range of techniques for machine learning, ran ging from very simple such as regression to techniques used for deep learning such as neural networks. Consequentl y, it’s important to choose an algorithm that is most suited to the problem one wishes to tackle. However, there is no unif orm rule on how to make the most optimal choice and it is often empirically driven [ 51]. In A TPs one of the possible roles of machine learning is to ide ntify situations in which it is proﬁtable to trade, de- pending on the strategy, for example, if using a ﬂat strategy the intent is to identify when the market is ﬂat. In these circumstances, and due to the potentially high ﬁnancial imp lications of false negatives understanding the prediction is key. Understanding the prediction involves the process o f being able to understand why the algorithm made this decision. This is a non-trivial issue and something very dif ﬁcult to do for a wide range of techniques, neural networks being the prime example (although current advances are bein g made [87, 31] . 2.4.1 Algorithms Perhaps one of the simplest yet highly-effective technique s is known as Support V ector Machines (SVM) [ 64, 45]. SVMs are used to identify the hyperplane that best separates a binary sampling. If we imagine a set of points mapped onto a 2d plane, the SVM will ﬁnd the best line that divides the two different classiﬁcations in half. This technique can easily be expanded to work on higher-dimensional data, and s ince it is so simple, it becomes intuitive to see the reason behind a classiﬁcation. However, this technique whilst pop ular for usage in ﬁnancial forecasting [ 79, 43], suffers from the drawback that it is very sensitive to parameter tuni ng, making it harder to use, and also does not work with categorical features directly, making it less suited to com plex analysis [14]. Another popular approach is decision trees, as they have bee n around since the 1960s [ 57]. The reason tree-based approaches are hugely popular is that they are directly inte rpretable. To improve the efﬁcacy of this technique, severa l different trees are trained and used in unison to come up with the result. A popular case of this is Random Forest [ 11]. Random Forest operates by constructing a multitude of decis ion trees at training time and outputting the classiﬁcation of the individual trees. However, this suffers from the fact that the different trees are not weighted and contribute equally, which might lead to inaccurate results [ 35]. Moreover, since the data is randomly sampled for individu al trees, it is hard to expect the model to learn the most optimal data representation [ 35]. One class of algorithms that have seen mass popularity for its increases in robustness, effectiveness and clarity is boost- ing algorithms [73]. Boosters create several classiﬁcations that can be combi ned to reduce overﬁtting and improve the prediction. Initially, a weak classiﬁer is trained, and the n the subsequent classiﬁer is trained with the additional weights of the initial classiﬁer, putting further consider ation on misclassiﬁed entries, consequently forcing the su bse- quent classiﬁer to put more effort into classifying the resu lts that are misclassiﬁed by the other classiﬁer. After the s et of classiﬁers is trained the results are aggregated with mor e weight being put on the more accurate learners [ 40]. The ﬁrst usage of boosting using a notion of weakness was intr oduced by AdaBoost [ 34], this work presented the concept of combining the output of the boosters into a weight ed sum that represents the ﬁnal output of the boosted classiﬁer. This allows for adaptive analysis as subsequent weak learners are tweaked in favour of those instances misclassiﬁed by previous classiﬁers. Following on from thi s technique two other techniques were introduced XG- Boost [ 18] and LightGBM [ 47], both libraries gained a lot of traction in the machine lear ning community for their efﬁcacy, and are widely used. In this category, the most rece nt algorithm is CatBoost. CatBoost [ 67] is highly efﬁcient and less prone to bias than its predecessors, it is quickly be coming one of the most used approaches, in part due to its high ﬂexibility. CatBoost was speciﬁcally proposed to expa nd issues in the previous approaches which lead to target leakage, which sometimes led to overﬁtting. This was achiev ed by using ordered boosting, a new technique allowing independent training and avoiding leakage [ 67]. This also allows for better performance on categorical fe atures. 6 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 2.4.2 Feature and prediction analysis Feature analysis is the evaluation of the input data to asses s their effectiveness and contribution to the prediction. T his may also take the form of creating new features using domain k nowledge to improve the data. The features in the data will directly inﬂuence the predictive models used and t he results that can be achieved. Intuitively, the better the chosen and prepared features, the better the results that ca n be achieved. However, this may not always be the case for every scenario, as it may lead to overﬁtting due to a too large dimensionality of the data. The process of evaluating and selecting the best features is referred to as feature sel ection []. One of the methods supporting feature engineerin g is feature importance evaluation. The simplest way to achie ve this is by feature ranking [ 38], in essence, a heuristic is chosen and each feature is assigned a score based on this he uristic, ordering the features in descending order. This approach however may be problem-speciﬁc and require domain knowledge. Another common approach is the usage of correlations, to evaluate how the features relate to the output [86]. This approach intends to evaluate the dependency between the features and the result, which intuitively migh t lead to a feature that contributes more to the output [ 8]. However, these approaches evaluate the feature as a single c omponent, in relation to the output, independent of the other features. Realistically one would want to understand their features a s a whole and see how they contribute to a prediction as a group. Compared to previously discussed approaches thi s starts from the result of the model and goes back to the feature to see which ones contributed to the predictio n (referred to as post-hoc explanations) [ 1]. This has advantages over the pure feature analysis approaches as it c an be applied to all the different predictors individually a nd gives insights into the workings of the predictor. Recent ad vances in this approach, namely SHAP (SHapleyAdditive exPlanations) [56], can provide insight into a prediction scoring of each feat ure. This innovative technique can allow the step-through assessment of features throughout the dif ferent predictions, providing guided insight which can als o be averaged for an overall assessment. This is very useful fo r debugging an algorithm, assessing the features and understanding the model decisions, making the approach par ticularly relevant for the current work. 2.5 Statistical reproducibility To evaluate the results of our research, answer the research questions, add explainability and increase the reproducib il- ity of our study, we make use of several statistical techniqu es. 2.5.1 Effect sizes The ﬁrst step that has to be done is quantifying the effectiveness of the approach in relation to control. Statistically, this can be done using effect sizes [ 28]. Effect size is a measure for calculating the strength of a s tatistical claim. A larger effect size indicates that there is a larger difference betw een the treatment (method) and the control sample. Reportin g effect sizes is considered a good practice when presenting e mpirical research ﬁndings in many ﬁelds [ 77, 41, 85]. Two types of effect sizes exist: relative and absolute. Absolut e ones provide a raw difference between the two groups and are usually used for quantifying the effect of a particular u se case. Relatives are obtained by normalising the differen ce by the absolute value of the control group. Depending on the s etting, when computing effect sizes one might look at differences in variances explained, differences in mean, a nd associations in variables [ 48]. Differences in variance explained assess the proportion to which a mathematical model accounts for the variation. One of the most common ways to do this is by making use of Pearson Co rrelation [49]. Pearson correlation is deﬁned as the covariance of the two variables, divided by the product of th eir standard deviations. This normalises the measurement of the covariance, such that the result always has a value bet ween -1 and 1. A further commonly used measure is known as r-squared, taking the Pearson correlation and squa ring it. By doing this, we can measure the proportion of variance shared by the two variables. The second approach is instead to look at the differences in population means, using a standardisation factor. Popular approaches include Cohen’s d [20], which calculates the difference between two sample means with pooled standard deviation as t he standardisation factor. However, it was found that the standard deviation may be biased as the standardisation factor, meaning that when the two means are compared and standardised by division as follows f racu1 − u2SD, if the standard deviation SD is used it may cause some bias and alternative standardisations may be preferred. This is rectiﬁed in Hedge’s g [42] method, which corrects the bias using a correction factor when computing the pooled standar d deviation. A further extension that can be added on top of this correction is to use av or rather an average variance instead of variance, this is mo re powerful when applied to two correlated samples, and uses the average standard dev iation instead, once again the corrected Cohen’s dav is referred to as Hedge’s gav [22, 53]. The ﬁnal type of effect size is categorical variable assoc iations, which checks the inter-correlation of variables, and can evaluate the proba bility of variables being dependent on one another, example s of this are the chi-squared test [ 33], also effective on ordinal variables. 7 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 2.5.2 Inferential statistics Another core component of a statistical assessment is Infer ential Statistics. With inferential statistics, one aims t o determine whether the ﬁndings are generalisable to the popu lation. It is also used to determine if there is a signiﬁcant difference between the means of two groups, which may be rela ted to certain features. The most popular approaches fall under the general linear model [ 59]. The general concept is that we want to use a null hypothesis to test the probabilistic difference between our sample population and another population. Popular approaches include t-test [ 78], ANOV A [36], Wilcoxon [ 84], and many more, depending on the considered setting. A t-te st is a type of inferential statistic used to determine if there is a signiﬁcant differe nce between the means of two groups, which may be related to certain features. The basic functioning is that you take a sample from two groups, and establish the null hypothesis for which the sample means are equal, it then calculates the m ean difference, standard deviations of the two groups and number of data values of two groups and attempts to reject the null hypothesis. If the null hypothesis is rejected it means that the mean difference is statistically signiﬁca nt. However the t-test relies on several assumptions: 1) tha t the data is continuous, 2) that the sample is randomly collec ted from the total populations, 3) that the data is normally distributed, and 4) that the data variance is homogeneous [ 80]. This makes the t-test not suited to the analysis of small samples, where normality and other sample properties are hard to assess reliably. An approach that doesn’t face the same limitations is the Wilcoxon test [ 84]. The advantage of this approach is that instead of comparin g means, it repeatedly compares the samples to check if the mean ranks differ, this means it will check the arithmetic average of the indexed position within a list. This type of comparison is ap plicable for paired data only and done on individual paired subjects, increasing the power of the comparison. However, a downside of this approach is that it is non-parametric. A parametric test can better observe the full distribution a nd is consequently able to observe more differences and speciﬁc patterns, however as we saw with t-tests they rely on stronger assumptions and are sometimes impractical. 2.5.3 Correction for multiple comparisons The more inferences are made, the more likely erroneous infe rences are to occur. Multiple comparisons arise when a statistical analysis involves multiple simultaneous sta tistical tests, each of which has the potential to produce th e discovery, of the same dataset or dependent datasets. Hence , the overall probability of the discovery increases. This increased chance should be corrected. Some methods are more speciﬁc but there exist a class of general signiﬁcance level α adjustments. Examples of these are the Bonferroni Corrections [9] and ˇSid´ ak Corrections [75]. The general idea follows from the following: given that the p-value establis hes that if the null hypothesis holds what is the likelihood of getting an effect at least as large in your sample. Then if t he p-value is small enough you can conclude that your sample is inconsistent with the null hypothesis and reject i t for the population. So the idea of the corrections is that to retain a prescribed signiﬁcance level α in an analysis involving more than one comparison, the signi ﬁcance level for each comparison must be more stringent than the initial α. In the case of Bonferroni corrections, if for some test performed out of the total n we ensure that its p-value is less than 1.0 − α/n, then we can conclude, as previously, that the associated null hypothesis is rejected. 2.6 Methodologies for evaluation of A TP components Below, we overview several works on trading pattern identiﬁ cation, design and trading from the methodological per- spective. In the work by Chen & Chen [ 17], a pattern recognition model is proposed and evaluated for its performance. The performance is evaluated in two phases, model training and m odel testing. In the ﬁrst phase, the authors perform optimisation of the pattern parameters to the current marke t conditions, in the second - perform pattern recognition and backtesting. The same approach is taken in the work by Par racho et al [ 66]. In the work by Cervello et al [ 16], the authors thoroughly assess the proposed approach for tradin g pattern recognition based on A TP proﬁtability for a range of take proﬁts and stop losses. An elegant approach to computational ﬁnance is proposed by C anelas et al [ 13]. It uses a symbolic approximation of the ﬁnancial time series together with a genetic algorithm t o ﬁnd patterns and trading rules from the approximation. The results are reported in measures speciﬁc to this particu lar study, which do not allow direct comparison to other studies. A statistical approach is taken in a paper published two deca des ago [ 54]. Namely, the authors introduce the null hypothesis in a form of the performance of a random-choice mo del and run a t-test on daily A TP proﬁts to test the proposed method. This is a good ﬁrst step in a statistically s ound approach to ﬁnancial markets. However, it falls short of justifying the choices within the methodology, reportin g statistical results, and reporting measures that would al low the comparability. Moreover, the way the null hypothesis is formulated and evaluated limits the ability of a practitioner to test a particular A TP component, as discussed in Section 2.3. 8 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 Concluding, there is no uniform dataset for reporting the re sults, and neither there is a uniform trading strategy. More - over, all the considered studies assess multiple A TP compon ents at once. The lack of uniformity and comparability highlights the demand for the current study. 3 Material and methods In the section, we ﬁrst describe the datasets and pre-proces sing procedures. Then, the proposed methodology is applied (Figure 2), separately assessing the model performance and proﬁtabi lity, as well as statistically approaching the research questions and performing model analysis. Data Pre-processing Entries Labelling ML Problem Formulation Feature Space Design Model Evaluation & Analysis Research Questions & Hypotheses Formulation Statistical Tests Answering Research Questions Correction for Multiple Comparisons Trading Strategy Formulation Backtesting Figure 2: The methodology proposed for proﬁtability, perfo rmance and statistical evaluation of the research question s in the ﬁeld of ﬁnancial markets. The bottom elements are opti onal and are not required to answer the RQs The resulting experiment design comprises entries labelli ng and formulating the machine learning classiﬁcation prob - lem, designing features, evaluating model performance, ev aluating its statistical signiﬁcance, explaining the mode l and, ﬁnally, backtesting. We propose a price-action-based way of deﬁning the price lev els and performing their classiﬁcation. Concretely: we identify local price extrema and predict whether the price w ill reverse (or ’rebound’) or continue its movement (also called ’crossing’). For the demonstration purposes, we set up a simplistic trading strategy, where we are trading a price reversal after a discovered local extremum is reached as shown in Fig. 3. We statistically assess our choices of the feature space and feature extraction method. In the simu lated trading, we limit our analysis to backtesting and do not perform any live trading. In the Discussion section we address the limitations of such an approach. Also , we share the reproducibility package for the study [ 76]. It is implemented in Python, we also share the trained mode ls. 3.1 Data In the study, we use S&P500 E-mini CME futures contracts ES(H -Z)2017, ES(H-Z)2018 and ES(H-U)2019. Which correspond to ES futures contracts with expiration in March (H), June (M), September (U) and December (Z). We operate on ticks data which includes Time&Sales records sta tistics, namely: bid and ask volumes and numbers of trades, as well as the largest trade volumes per tick. We cons ider a tick to incorporate all the market events between the two price changes by a minimum price step. For the conside red ﬁnancial instrument the tick size is $0.25. 3.2 Data pre-processing We sample the contract data to the active trading periods by c onsidering only the nearest expiring contracts with the conventionally accepted rollover dates. The samples end on the second Thursday of the expiration month - on that day the active trading is usually transferred to the following c ontract. This decision ensures the highest liquidity, and, due to the double-auction nature of the ﬁnancial markets, stabl e minimum bid-ask spreads [ 44]. In the current study, we consider the two simplest scenarios of the price behaviour after it reaches the local extremum - reversal and extremum crossing. When labelling the entrie s, we require up to 15 ticks of price movement as a reversal (or rebound) and only 3 ticks for the extremum cross ing. The labelling approach allows us to study a range 9 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 Figure 3: The ﬁgure illustrates what data we use for the 2-ste p feature extraction: price level (PL) and market shift (MS) components. It also demonstrates peaks, peak widths, a s well as rebound and crossing labelling. of conﬁgurations of the reversals and investigate how the co nﬁgurations affect the performance of the models. At the same time, these ranges are well within the boundaries of the intraday price changes. An essential part of the proposed automated trading system i s the detection of the price extrema. The detection is performed on a sliding window of the streamed ticks with a win dow size of 500. We capture peaks with widths from 100 to 400. The selected widths range serves three purposes: i) ensures that we do not consider high-frequency trading (HFT) scenarios which require more modelling assumptions a nd different backtesting engines; ii) allows us to stay in intraday trading time frames and have a large enough number o f trades for analysis; iii) makes the price level feature values comparable across many of the entries. 3.3 Classiﬁcation task To incorporate machine learning into the automated trading system, we design a binary classiﬁcation task, where the labels correspond to price reversals (positives) and cross ings (negatives). Due to the labelling design, we are more ﬂexible with taking proﬁts and stopping losses when trading reversals (up to 15 ticks versus 3 ticks) - this explains their positive labelling. 3.4 Feature design To perform the extrema classiﬁcation, we obtain two types of features: i) designed from the price level ticks (called price level (PL) features), and ii) obtained from the ticks r ight before the extremum is approached (called market shift (MS) features) as we illustrate in Fig. 3. We believe (and statistically test it) that it is beneﬁcial to perform the 2-step collection since the PL features contain properties of the e xtremum, and the MS features allow us to spot any market changes that happened between the time when the extremum was formed and the time we are trading it. Considering different extrema widths, varying dimensiona lity of the data does not allow to use it directly for clas- siﬁcation - most of the algorithms take ﬁxed-dimensional ve ctors as input. We ensure the ﬁxed dimensionality of a classiﬁer input by aggregating per-tick features by price. We perform the aggregation for the price range of 10 ticks below (or above in case of a minimum) the extremum. This price range is ﬂexible - 10 ticks are often not available within ticks associated with the price level (red dashed rec tangle in Fig. 3) in this case we ﬁll the empty price features with zeros. We assume that the further the price from the extr emum the less information relevant for the classiﬁca- tion it contains. Considering the intraday volatility of ES , we expect that the information beyond 10 ticks from the 10 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 extremum is unlikely to improve the predictions. If one cons iders larger time frames (peak widths), this number might need to increase. PL features are obtained from per-tick features by grouping by price with the sum, max or count statistics. For instance: if one is considering volumes, it is reasonable to sum all the aggressive buyers and sellers before comparing them . Of course, one can also compute mean or consider max and min volumes per tick. If following this line of reasoning, the feature space can be increased to very large dimensions. We e mpirically choose a feature space described in Tables 1 and 2 for Price Level and Market Shift components, respectively. Deﬁning the feature space we aim to make the feature selection step computationally feasible. Too large featur e space might be also impractical from the optimisation poin t of view, especially if the features are correlated. Table 1: Price level feature space component was used in the s tudy. These features are obtained when the price level is formed. When discussed, features are referred to by the co des in the square brackets at the end of descriptions. Price level (PL) features Equation Description ∑p=|P L− t| t (Vb + Va) Bid and ask volumes summed across all the ticks for t ∈ [0, 1, 2] [PL0]∑p=|P L− t| t Vb Bid volumes summed across all the ticks for t ∈ [0, 1, 2] [PL1]∑p=|P L− t| t Va Ask volumes summed across all the ticks for t ∈ [0, 1, 2] [PL2] ∑p=|P L− t| t Tb Number of bid trades summed across all the ticks for t ∈ [0, 1, 2] [PL3] ∑p=|P L− t| t Ta Number of ask trades summed across all the ticks for t ∈ [0, 1, 2] [PL4] M(T p = |P L − t|)b Maximum bid trade across all the ticks for t ∈ [0, 1, 2] [PL5] M(Tp=|P L− t|)a Maximum ask trade across the ticks for t ∈ [0, 1, 2] [PL6]∑p=|P L− t| t 1 Number of ticks at price for t ∈ [0, 1, 2] [PL7] ∑p=|P L− t| t Vb ∑p=|P L− t| t Va PL1 divided by PL2, for t ∈ [0, 1, 2] [PL8] ∑p=|P L− t| t Tb ∑p=|P L− t| t Ta Feature PL3 divided by feature PL4 [PL9] ∑p=|P L− t| t M (T )b ∑p=|P L− t| t M (T )a Feature PL5 divided by feature PL6 [PL10] ∑p=|P L− t| t (Vb +Va) ∑p=|P L− t| t 1 Total volume at price |P L − t| divided by the number of ticks [PL11] ∑10 t=0 ∑p=|P L− t| t Va Total Ask V olume [PL12] ∑10 t=0 ∑p=|P L− t| t Vb Total Bid V olume [PL13] ∑10 t=0 ∑p=|P L− t| t Ta Total Ask Trades [PL14] ∑10 t=0 ∑p=|P L− t| t Tb Total Bid Trades [PL15] ∑10 t=0 ∑p=|P L− t| t (Va + Vb) Total V olume [PL16] - Peak extremum - minimum or maximum [PL17] - Peak width in ticks described in the Background section [PL 18] - Peak prominence - described in the Background section [PL1 9] - Peak width height - described in the Background section [PL 20] ∑p=|P L− t| t∈[0,1,2] Vb ∑p=|P L− t| t∈[3..9] Vb Bid volumes close to extremum divided by ones which are further [PL21] ∑p=|P L− t| t∈[0,1,2] Va ∑p=|P L− t| t∈[3..9] Va Ask volumes close to extremum divided by ones which are further [PL22] ∑p=|P L− t| t∈[0,1,2] Vb ∑p=|P L− t| t∈[0,1,2] Va Sum bid volume close to the price extremum divided by the close ask volume [PL23] ∑p=|P L− t| t∈[3..9] Vb ∑p=|P L− t| t∈[3..9] Va Sum bid volume far from the price extremum divided by the far ask volume [PL24] Key OB - order book T - trades t - ticks N - total ticks p - price w - tick window PL - extremum price V - volume b - bid a - ask PN - price level neighbours until distance M(X) - Max value in se t X To track the market changes, for the MS feature component we u se 237 and 21 ticks and compare statistics obtained from these two periods. Non-round numbers help avoid interf erence with the majority of manual market participants who use round numbers [ 23]. We also choose the values to be comparable to our expected t rading time frames. No optimisation was made on them. We obtain the MS features bein g 2 ticks away from the price level to ensure that our modelling does not lead to any time-related bias where on e cannot physically send the order fast enough to be executed on time. 11 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 Table 2: Market shift feature space component used in the stu dy. These features are obtained right before the already formed price level is approached. When discussed, features are referred to by the codes in the square brackets at the end of descriptions. Market Shift (MS) features Equation Description ∑w=237 t,b (Vb ) ∑w=237t,a (Va ) Fraction of bid over ask volume for last 237 ticks [MS0] ∑w=237 t,b (Tb ) ∑w=237t,a (Ta ) Fraction of bid over ask trades for last 237 ticks [MS1] ∑w=237 t Vb∑w=237 t Va − ∑w=21 t Vb∑w=21 t Va Fraction of bid/ask volumes for long minus short periods [MS2] ∑w=237 t Tb∑w=237 t Ta − ∑w=21 t Tb∑w=21 t Ta Fraction of bid/ask trades for long minus short periods [MS3 ] ∑w=237 t M (T )b∑w=237 t M (T )a − ∑w=21 t M (T )b∑w=21 t M (T )a Max bid trade divided by ask for long periods minus short periods [MS4] RSI(z ∈ S) Technical indicator RSI with the stated periods z [M S5X ] MACD(lp ∈ S; sp = lp/2) Technical indicator MACD with the stated long & short periods lp, sp [M S6X ] Key T - trades N - total ticks w - tick window V - volume b - bid a - ask PN - price level neighbours until distance M(X) - Max value in set X S - ranges [20,40,80,120,160,200] t - ticks z - time period 3.5 Model evaluation After the features are designed and extracted, the classiﬁc ation can be performed. As a classiﬁer, we choose the CatBoost estimator. We feel that CatBoost is a good ﬁt for the task since it is resistant to over-ﬁtting, stable in terms of parameter tuning, efﬁcient and one of the best-perf orming boosting algorithms [ 67]. Finally, being based on decision trees, it is capable of correctly processing zer o-padded feature values when no data at price is available. Other types of estimators might be comparable in one of the as pects and require much more focus in the other ones. For instance, operating on a relatively small number of tabu lar data entries with a temporal component, we withhold from applying deep learning models due to evidence suggesti ng that boosting trees works better off-the-shelf in the considered setting [ 10]. In this study we use precision as the main scoring function ( S): S = T P T P + F P , (2) where TP is is the number of true positives and FP the number of false positives. All the statistical tests are run on the precision scores of the samples. This was chosen as the ma in metric since by design every FP leads to losses, and a false negative ( FN) means only a lost trading opportunity. To give a more compre hensive view of the model performance, we build confusion matrices, and compute F1 sc ores, PR-AUC (precision-recall area under the curve) and ROC-AUC (receiver-operating characteristic area under the curve) metrics. We report model performances for the 2-step feature extraction approach as well as for each of the feature extraction steps separately. To avoid large bias in the base classiﬁer probability, we int roduce balanced class weights into the model. The weights are inversely proportional to the number of entries per clas s. The contracts for training and testing periods are select ed sequentially - training is done on the active trading phase o f contract N , testing - on N + 1, for N ∈ [0, B − 1], where B is the number of contracts considered in the study. We apply a commonly accepted ML community procedure for input feature selection and model parameter tuning [52]. Firstly, we perform the feature selection step using a Recursive Feature Elimination with the cross-validation (RFECV) method. The method is based on the gradual removal of feature s from the model input starting from the least important ones (based on the model’s feature importance) and measurin g the performance on a cross-validation dataset. In the current study on each RFECV step, we remove 10% of the least im portant features. Cross-validation allows robust assessment of how the model performance generalises into un seen data. Since we operate on the time series, we use time series splits for cross-validation to avoid the look-a head bias. For the feature selection, the model parameters a re left default, the only conﬁguration we adjust is class label s balancing as our data is imbalanced. Secondly, we optimise the parameters of the model in a grid-search fashion. Even th ough CatBoost has a very wide range of parameters that can be optimised, we choose the parameters common for bo osting tree models for the sake of feasibility of the 12 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 optimisation and leaving the possibility of comparing the o ptimisation behaviour to the other boosting algorithms. Th e following parameters are optimised: 1) Number of iterations , 2) Maximum depth of trees , 3) has time parameter set to True or False , and 4) L2 regularisation. For the parameter optimisation, we use a cross-validation dataset as well. We perform training and cross-validation within a single contract and the backtesting of the strategy on the subsequent one to ensure the relevance of the optimised model. 3.6 Statistical evaluation Here we formalise the research questions by proposing null a nd alternative hypotheses, suggesting statistical tests f or validating them, as well as highlighting the importance of t he effect sizes. The effect sizes are widely used in empirical studies in soci al, medical and psychological sciences [ 53]. They are a practical tool allowing to quantify the effect of the treat ment (or a method) in comparison to a control sample. Moreover, they allow the generalisation of the ﬁndings to th e whole population (unseen data in our case). Finally, effect sizes can be compared across studies [ 53]. We believe that introduction of the effect sizes into the ﬁ nancial markets domain contributes to the research reproducibilit y and comparability. In the current study, we report Hedge’s gav - an unbiased measure designed for paired data. In the supple mentary data, the effect sizes are provided in a form of forest plots w ith .95 conﬁdence intervals (CIs), representing the range where the effect size for the population might be found with t he .95 probability. We correct the conﬁdence intervals for multiple comparisons by applying Bonferroni correctio ns. When testing the hypotheses, the samples consist of the test precisions on the considered contracts, leading to equal sample sizes in both groups, and entries are paired as the sam e underlying data is used. Comparing a small number of paired entries and being unsure about the normality of the ir distribution, we take a conservative approach and for hypothesis testing use the single-tailed Wilcoxon signed- rank test. This test is a non-parametric paired difference t est, which is used as an alternative to a t-test when the data does n ot fulﬁl the assumptions required for the parametric statistics. When reporting the test outcomes, we support th em with the statistics of the compared groups. Namely, we communicate standard deviations, means and medians. We set the signiﬁcance level of the study to α = .05. Also, we account for multiple comparisons by applying Bonferroni corrections inside of each experiment family [ 15]. We consider research questions as separate experiment families. 3.7 Model analysis We perform the model analysis in an exploratory fashion - no r esearch questions and hypotheses are stated in advance. Hence, the outcomes of the analysis might require additiona l formal statistical assessment. We use SHAP local explanations to understand how models end up with the partic ular outputs. Through the decision plot visualisations, we aim to ﬁnd common decision paths across entries as well as i nformally compare models with small and large numbers of features. The reproducibility package contains the code snippets as well as the trained models, which allow repeating the experiments for all the models and contr acts used in the study. 3.8 Backtesting The trading strategy is deﬁned based on our deﬁnition of the c rossed and rebounded price levels, and schematically illustrated in Fig. 4. It is a ﬂat market strategy, where we expect a price reversal from the price level. Backtrader Python package 1 is used for backtesting the strategy. Backtrader does not al low taking bid-ask spreads into account, that is why we are minimising its effects by excluding HFT trading opportunities (by limiting peak widths) and limiting ourselves to the actively traded contracts only. Since ES is a very liquid trading instrument, its bid-ask spreads are usually 1 tick, which however does not always hold during ext raordinary market events, scheduled news, or session starts and ends. We additionally address the impact of sprea ds as well as order queues in the Discussion section. In our backtests, we evaluate the performance of the models w ith different rebound conﬁgurations and ﬁxed take- proﬁt parameters, and varying take-proﬁts with a ﬁxed rebou nd conﬁguration to better understand the impact of both variables on the simulated trading performance. 1Available at: https://www.backtrader.com/ 13 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 end Figure 4: The block diagram illustrates the steps of the trad ing strategy. 3.9 Approaching research questions In the current subsection, we continue formalising the rese arch questions by proposing the research hypotheses. The hypotheses are aimed to support the ﬁndings of the paper, mak ing them easier to communicate. For both research questions, we run the statistical tests on the precision met ric, as justiﬁed above. In the current study, we encode the hypotheses in the followi ng way: H 0X and H1X correspond to null and alternative hypotheses, respectively, for research question X. CatBoost versus no-information model (RQ1) In the ﬁrst research question, we investigate whether it is f easible to improve the baseline performance for the extrema dataset s using the chosen feature space and CatBoost classiﬁer. We consider the baseline performance to be the precision of a n always positive class output estimator. The statistical test is performed on the following hypothesis: H11: CatBoost estimator allows classiﬁcation of the extracted e xtrema with a precision better than the no-information approach. H01: CatBoost estimator allows classiﬁcation of the extracted e xtrema with a worse or equal precision in comparison to the no-information approach. 2-step versus single-step feature extraction (RQ2) The second research question assesses if the proposed 2-ste p feature extraction gives any statistically signiﬁcant pos itive impact on the extremum classiﬁcation performance. Th e statistical test addresses the following hypothesis: H12: 2-step feature extraction leads to an improved classiﬁcati on precision in comparison to using features extracted from any of the steps on their own. 14 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 H02: 2-step feature extraction gives equal or worse classiﬁcati on precision than features extracted from any of the steps on their own. In the current setting, we are comparing the target sample (t he 2-step approach) to the two control samples (MS and PL components). We are not aiming to formally relate the MS an d PL groups, hence only comparisons to the 2-step approach are necessary. To reject the null hypothesis, the t est outcomes for both MS and PL components should be signiﬁcant. 4 Results In the current section, we communicate the results of the stu dy. Namely: the original dataset and pre-processed data statistics, model performance for all the considered conﬁg urations, statistical evaluation of the overall approach a nd the 2-step feature extraction, and, ﬁnally, simulated trad ing and model analysis. An evaluation of these results is presented in Sec. 5. Further analysis is provided in Supplementary Materials for completeness. 4.1 Raw and pre-processed data The considered data sample and processed datasets are provided in Tab.3. We provide the numbers of ticks per contract in the ﬁrst columns. The contracts are sorted by the expirati on date from top to bottom ascendingly. The number of ticks changes non-monotonically - while the overall trend i s rising, the maximum number of ticks is observed for the ESZ2018 contract. And the largest change is observed betwee n ESZ2017 & ESH2018. We perform the whole study on 3 different rebound conﬁgurati ons: 7, 11 and 15 ticks price movement required for the positive labelling. We communicate the numbers of posit ively labelled and total numbers of entries used in the classiﬁcation tasks in Table 3. As one can see, the numbers of the extracted extrema do not st rictly follow the linear relation with the numbers of ticks per contract. Considerin g the numbers of positively labelled entries, the numbers decrease for the larger rebound sizes. Table 3: The table communicates the numbers of reconstructe d ticks per contract, numbers of positive labels, as well as total numbers of entries per contract. ’Reb.’ correspond s to the rebound - the required number of ticks for the positive labelling. Rebound columns show numbers of positi vely labelled entries. Contract No. Ticks Reb. 7 Reb. 11 Reb. 15 Total ESH2017 1271810 896 804 703 4911 ESM2017 1407792 951 881 756 4181 ESU2017 1243120 858 812 693 3446 ESZ2017 1137427 689 640 518 12317 ESH2018 2946336 2014 1983 1953 11537 ESM2018 2919757 1965 1936 1868 6534 ESU2018 1825417 1271 1226 1095 16331 ESZ2018 3633969 2677 2620 2565 11718 ESH2019 3066530 1990 1949 1883 9743 ESM2019 2591000 1711 1692 1630 10389 ESU2019 2537197 1761 1735 1704 6191 4.2 Price Levels 4.2.1 Automatic extraction The ﬁrst step of the pipeline was detecting peaks, which is do ne automatically, the same way as shown in Fig. 3. We mark peaks with grey circles and the associated peak widths a re depicted with solid grey lines. In our setting some of the peaks are not automatically discovered as they were no t satisfying the conditions of the algorithm by having insufﬁcient widths or being not prominent enough (see Secti on 2.1.2 for the deﬁnitions of both). 4.2.2 Classiﬁcation of the extrema For all the considered models we performed feature selectio n and parameter tuning. We made the optimisation results available as a part of the reproducibility package. The mode l precision obtained on a per-contract basis for the 2-step feature extraction, PL and MS feature spaces, and no-inform ation model is reported in Table 4. The relative changes in the precision across contracts are preserved across the labelling conﬁgurations. We also provide the confusion matrices for the 2-step feature extraction as aggregate performance across all the contracts in Figure 5. We report the rest of the metrics for the 2-step feature extra ction method, PL and MS feature in the supplementary data, in Tables S2, S2, S3, respectively. 15 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 Table 4: Precisions of CatBoost classiﬁer with the 2-step fe ature extraction (’2-step’) and always-positive output classiﬁer (’Null’). As well as Precisions of the Market Shif t (MS) and Price Level (PL) feature spaces. For 7,11 and 15 ticks rebounds. Contract Rebound 7 Rebound 11 Rebound 15 2-step Null MS PL 2-step Null MS PL 2-step Null MS PL ESH2017 .20 .19 .20 .19 .20 .18 .19 .17 .15 .15 .15 .15 ESM2017 .22 .21 .24 .21 .23 .19 .20 .19 .19 .17 .16 .18 ESU2017 .25 .20 .25 .23 .15 .19 .23 .17 .18 .15 .15 .19 ESZ2017 .17 .16 .18 .16 .17 .16 .16 .16 .19 .16 .16 .15 ESH2017 .19 .17 .19 .17 .18 .17 .18 .18 .17 .16 .17 .16 ESM2018 .21 .19 .22 .19 .21 .19 .21 .20 .18 .17 .18 .17 ESU2018 .17 .16 .17 .15 .16 .16 .17 .16 .16 .16 .16 .15 ESZ2018 .18 .17 .18 .17 .17 .17 .17 .18 .16 .16 .17 .16 ESH2019 .18 .18 .19 .18 .18 .17 .18 .17 .18 .17 .17 .17 ESM2019 .18 .17 .18 .18 .17 .17 .18 .17 .17 .16 .18 .16 0 1 Prediction 01 Ground Truth 48674 26546 9730 6157 Rebound 7 0 1 Prediction 46815 28818 9201 6273 Rebound 11 0 1 Prediction 45668 30774 8428 6237 Rebound 15 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 35000 40000 45000 Figure 5: Confusion matrices for all the rebound conﬁgurati ons, built for the 2-step feature extraction method. 4.2.3 Price Levels, CatBoost versus No-information estima tor (RQ1) Below we present the effect sizes with .95 conﬁdence interva ls (CIs) (Table 5) associated with the research question. Concretely, we use precision as the measurement variable fo r comparing the no-information model and the CatBoost classiﬁer. No conﬁgurations were showing signiﬁcant effec t sizes. The largest effect size was observed for the 15 tick rebound labelling. Large CIs were observed partially due to the small sample size. We tested the null hypothesis for rejection for the 3 conside red conﬁgurations. The original data used in the tests are provided in Table 4 - ’2-step’ and ’Null’ columns. We reported test outcomes in a form of test statistics and p-values in Table 5. Additionally, in the same table, the sample statistics are included. We illustrate the performance of the compared groups in the supplementary materials, in Figure S3. There was no skew in any of the labelling conﬁgu- rations - medians and means do not differ within the groups. W e saw around 2 times larger standard deviations for the CatBoost model in comparison to the no-information mode l. The potential reasons and implications are discussed in sections 5.2 and 5.6, respectively. There are 3 tests run in this experiment fami ly, hence after applying Bonferroni corrections for multiple comparisons, the corrected signi ﬁcance level was α = .05/3 = .0167. 4.2.4 Price Levels, 2-step feature extraction versus its co mponents (RQ2) We display the effect sizes related to the second research qu estion in Table 4 - ’2-step’, ’PL’, ’MS’ columns. We report them separately for PL and MS components versus the 2-step. T here were no signiﬁcant effects observed for any of the labelling conﬁgurations. Moreover, for the considered sample MS effect sizes were negative for rebounds 7 and 16 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 11 (Tab. 5). The negative effect size in the considered setting meant t hat the MS compound performs better than the 2-step approach. This effect was insigniﬁcant and hence doe s not generalise to the population. We performed statistical tests to check if the null hypothes is H 02 could be rejected. The original data used in the tests are provided in Table 4, for the target (2-step) and control groups (MS and PL), resp ectively. We communicate the test outcomes in Table 5. For the sake of reproducibility, in the same table, we repor ted the compared groups’ standard deviations, means and medians. We interpreted the results of the tests in section 5.3. Finally, to support the reader, we plot the performance of the considered groups in the supplementary data, Figure S4. There are 6 tests run in this experiment family, hence after applying Bo nferroni corrections, the corrected signiﬁcance level was α = .05/6 = .0083. Table 5: Statistics supporting the outcomes of the Wilcoxon test which assessed whether the CatBoost estimator with the 2-step feature extraction (’CB’ column) lead to a better classiﬁcation performance than the always-positive outpu t classiﬁer (’Null’ column) and whether the CatBoost estimat or with the 2-step feature extraction (’2-step’ column) lea d to a better classiﬁcation performance than each of the singl e-step feature extraction (’PL’ and ’MS’ columns) . The result is reported for the rebound labelling conﬁgurations of 7, 11 and 15 ticks. Statistics Test Groups Rebound 7 RQ1 RQ2 PL MS One-tailed Wilcoxon test p-value < . 001 .0049 .96 Test Statistics 55.0 52.0 11.0 Effect Size (Hedges gav ) 0.64 ± 1.02 0.57 ± 1.15 − 0.1 ± 1.07 CB Null 2-step PL 2-step MS Mean (Precision) .19 .18 .19 .18 .19 .20 Median (Precision) .18 .17 .18 .18 .18 .19 Standard Deviation (Precision) .025 .0151 .025 .018 .025 .028 Rebound 11 RQ1 RQ2 PL MS One-tailed Wilcoxon test p-value .053 .080 .58 Test Statistics 44.0 42.0 26.0 Effect Size (Hedges gav ) 0.38 ± 0.96 0.6 ± 1.16 − 0.02 ± 1.06 CB Null 2-step PL 2-step MS Mean (Precision) .18 .17 .18 .18 .18 .19 Median (Precision) .18 .17 .18 .18 .18 .18 Standard Deviation (Precision) .022 .0112 .022 .012 .022 .017 Rebound 15 RQ1 RQ2 PL MS One-tailed Wilcoxon test p-value .0049 .052 .35 Test Statistics 52.0 44.0 32.0 Effect Size (Hedges gav ) 1.05 ± 1.16 0.8 ± 1.22 0 .2 ± 1.07 CB Null 2-step PL 2-step MS Mean (Precision) .17 .16 .17 .16 .17 .17 Median (Precision) .17 .16 .17 .16 .17 .17 Standard Deviation (Precision) .012 .0055 .012 .006 .012 .010 4.3 Model analysis Here we show the exploratory analysis of the trained models. We choose two models trained on the same contract but with different labelling conﬁgurations. Namely, we report the analysis of the models trained on the ESH2019 contract, with rebounds 7 and 11. The choice is motivated by very differ ent numbers of features after the feature selection step. The core analysis is done on the decision plots, provided in F ig. 6. Since no pattern was observed when plotting the whole sample, we illustrate a random subsample of 100 entrie s from the top 1000 entries sorted by the per-feature contribution. There are 29 features in the model trained on t he rebound 11 conﬁguration, and 8 features in the one trained on the rebound 7 labels. 7 features are present in bot h models: PL23, MS6 80, MS0, PL24, MS2, MS6 20, MS6 200. Contributions from the features in the rebound 7 model a re generally larger, also, the overall conﬁdence of the model was higher. We noticed that the most impactful feat ures were coming from the Market Shift features. In Figure 6 one can see two general decision patterns: one ending up at ar ound 0.12-0.2 output probability and another one consisting of several misclassiﬁed entries ending up at around 0.8 output probability. In the ﬁrst decision path, most of the MS features contributed consistently towards th e negative class, however, PL23 and PL2 often pushed the probability in the opposite direction. In the second decisi on path, PL23 had the most persistent effect for the positive class, which was opposed by MS6 80 in some cases and got almost no contribution from MS0 and MS 6 200 features. 17 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.6 0.8 0.8 1.0 1.0 Model output value PL24 MS2 PL2, t=1 PL23 MS6_80 MS6_20 MS6_200 MS0 Figure 6: Feat. contributions to the output on a per-entry ba sis for the CatBoost model, trained on ESH2019, rebound 7 conﬁguration. The X-axis shows the strength of the contrib ution either towards a positive class (when the change is >0) or towards the negative one. blue corresponds to the negat ive class (crossing) and red - to the positive (rebound). Misclassiﬁed entries are depicted with dashed lines. Further analysis of ESH2019, rebound 11 conﬁguration (omit ted for brevity) showed that there was a skew in the output probabilities towards the negative class. Contribu tions from the PL features were less pronounced than for the rebound 7 model - the top 8 features belonged to the MS feature extraction step. There was no obvious decision path with misclassiﬁed entries. At the same time, we saw strong co ntributions toward negative outputs from MS6 20 and MS6 40. 4.4 Simulated trading In the current section, we report the cumulative proﬁts for t he 3 different labelling conﬁgurations in Fig. S6. In addition to the cumulative proﬁts, we report annualised Sha rpe ratios with a 5% risk-free annual proﬁt. These results are reported for 15 ticks take proﬁt, as shown in Fig. 4. There was a descending trend in the Sharpe ratios across all the conﬁgurations. However, the behaviour of rebound 15 dif fered from the rest by performing worse until Oct 2018, then had a proﬁtable period which was not observed for the oth er conﬁgurations. We also ran experiments with altered take proﬁts for 15 ticks rebound labelling and found out that decreasing take proﬁt led to slightly worse cumulative proﬁts and comparable Sharpe ratios (Figure 7). It seems that the proﬁtability period after Oct 2018 relie d on the take proﬁt value and vanished if the take proﬁt is reduced. When computing the net outcomes of the trades, we add $4.2 per -contract trading costs based on our assessment of current broker and clearance fees. We did not set any slippag e in the backtesting engine, since ES liquidity is large. However, we execute the stop-losses and take-proﬁts on the t ick following the close-position signal to account for order execution delays and slippages. This allowed for taki ng into account uncertainty rooting from large volatilitie s and gaps happening during the extraordinary market events. The backtesting was done on the tick data therefore there are no bar-backtesting assumptions made. 18 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 2 0 Sharpe Ratio 2017-01-282017-08-162018-03-042018-09-202019-04-082019-10-25 Date 1000 500 0 Cum. profit, [ticks] Figure 7: Cumulative proﬁt curves for the rebound of 15 ticks and take-proﬁts of 7, 11 and 15 ticks for the years 2017- 2019 with the corresponding annualised rolling Sharpe rati os (5% risk-free income). The trading fees are already included. 5 Discussion This section breaks down and analyses the results presented in Sec. 4. Results are discussed in relation to the overall pattern extraction and model performance, then research qu estions, model analysis and, ﬁnally, simulated trading. Also, we discuss the obtained results in the context of the pr oposed methodology, as well as the limitations of every component and how they can be addressed. Finally, we present our view on implications for practitioners and our intuition of potential advancements and future work in this area. 5.1 Pattern extraction The numbers of price levels and ticks per contract followed t he same trend (Table 3). Since the number of peaks was proportional to the number of ticks, we can say that the mean p eak density is preserved over time to a large extent. In this context, the peak pattern can be considered stationary and appears in various market conditions. 5.2 Price Levels, CatBoost versus No-information estimato r (RQ1) The precision improvement for the CatBoost over the no-info rmation estimator varied a lot across contracts (Table 4). At the same time, the improvement was largely preserved across the labelling conﬁgurations. This might have been due to the original feature space, whose effectiveness relied a lot on the market state - in certain market states (and period s) the utility of the feature space dropped and the drop was cons istent across the labelling conﬁgurations. Extensive research of the feature spaces would be necessary to make fur ther claims. The overall performance of the models was weak on an absolute scale, however, it is comparable to th e existing body of knowledge in the area of ﬁnancial markets [25]. Effect sizes in RQ1 Table 5 were not signiﬁcant. The signiﬁcance here means that the cho sen feature space with the model signiﬁcantly contributed to the performance improve ment with respect to the no-information model. A positive but insigniﬁcant effect size meant that there is an improvem ent that is limited to the considered sample and is unlikely to generalise to the unseen data (population). Assessing the results of the statistical tests, we used the s igniﬁcance level corrected for the multiple comparisons. Tests run on the rebound 7 and 15 conﬁgurations resulted in si gniﬁcant p-values, whilst rebound 11 was insigniﬁ- 19 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 cant (Table 5). Hence, we rejected the null hypothesis H 01 for the labelling conﬁgurations of 7 and 15 ticks. This outcome was not supported by the effect sizes. This divergen ce between the test and effect sizes indicated that the proposed trading pattern cannot be efﬁciently used in the ma chine learning setting with the considered feature space. Interestingly, standard deviations differ consistently b etween the compared groups across the conﬁgurations. While no-information model performance depends solely on the fra ction of the positively labelled entries, CatBoost perfor- mance additionally depends on the suitability of the featur e space and model parameters - this explains higher standard deviations in the CatBoost case. 5.3 Price Levels, 2-step feature extraction versus its comp onents (RQ2) For the effect sizes in Table 5 we compared the 2-step feature extraction approach to its co mponents - PL and MS. We did not see any signiﬁcant effects showing supremacy of any o f the approaches. Negative effect sizes in the case of the Market Shift component mean that in the considered sampl e MS performs better than the 2-step approach. This result did not generalise to the unseen data as its conﬁdence intervals cross the 0-threshold. The possible explanation of the result is the much larger feature space of the 2-step ap proach (consisting of PL and MS features) than the MS compound. In case PL features were generally less useful tha n MS, which was empirically supported by our model analysis, this meant they might have had a negative impact du ring the feature selection process by introducing noise. For assessing the statistical tests we used the signiﬁcance level corrected for 6 comparisons. The p-values from Table 5 show that there was no signiﬁcant outcome and the null hypoth esis H 02 could not be rejected. While the 2-step approach did not bring any improvement to the pipelin e, there is no evidence that it signiﬁcantly harmed the performance either. It might have been the case that if PL fea tures were designed differently, the method could have beneﬁted from them. In this study, we withheld from iterativ ely tweaking the feature space to avoid any loss of statistical power. We ﬁnd this aspect interesting for futur e work, however, it would require increasing the sample size to be able to account for the increased number of comparisons . 5.4 Simulated trading In the simulated trading, we observed an interesting result - data labelling conﬁguration had more impact on the proﬁtability than the take proﬁts (Figures 7,S6). We hypothesise that the reason for this is that the simplis tic trading strategy is overused by the trading community in various con ﬁgurations. In contrast, the labelling conﬁguration is les s straightforward and had more impact on proﬁtability. Note t hat the obtained precision (Table 4) could not be directly related to the considered trading strategy as there might be multiple price levels extracted within the time interval of a single trade. Consequently, there might have been extrema w hich were not traded. It is hard to expect consistent proﬁtability considering th e simplicity of the strategy and lack of optimisation of the feature space, however, even in the current setting one can s ee proﬁtable episodes (Fig S6). The objective of the study was not to provide a ready-to-trade strategy, but rather to s howcase the proposed methodology. We believe that the demonstrated approach is generalisable to other trading st rategies. 5.5 Methodology The point we have highlighted in this study is that by looking at the machine learning model performance or simulated trading results on their own, one might be drawn into believi ng that the considered trading pattern and the feature extraction method might work. This, consequently, would le ad to additional time, effort and ﬁnancial risks until one discovers that the applications of the proposed pattern are limited. On the other hand, using the proposed methodology, one could withhold further development at the point of computing the effect sizes and the conﬁdence intervals. Not only does t he proposed methodology optimises the whole automated trading platform component design approach, but it also all ows uniform and comparable reporting of the component design. As it was shown in Section 2.6, proﬁtability is often used as a measure of success when eval uating trading patterns and trading strategies. The proﬁtability of the price level s pattern might look promising for certain intervals of the considered timeline (Figure 7), especially considering that the trading fees are taken in to account. However, being guided by the proposed methodology, it becomes clear that th e considered pattern does not warrant attention in the considered setting. This is a common example of how the proﬁt ability metric itself might be misleading if reported on its own. 20 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 5.6 Limitations The proposed methodology is one of the many ways the ﬁnancial markets can be studied empirically. We encourage practitioners to adjust our proposed methodology to their n eeds and setting while keeping the interpretability and comparability of the study in mind. Depending on the data distributions, size of the data sample , etc., one might use different statistical tests and effect size measures without any loss of interpretability. For exa mple, while it is advised to use Glass’s ∆ in case of the signiﬁcantly different standard deviations between group s, this measure does not have corrections for the paired data . Hence, in our experiment design, we choose to stick to the Hed ge’s gav. For the sake of completeness, we veriﬁed the results using Glass’s ∆ - and 15 ticks rebound effect size becomes signiﬁcant in RQ1. In the backtesting we used the last trade price to deﬁne ticks , we do not take into account bid-ask spreads. In live trading, trades as executed by bid or ask price, depending on the direction of the trade. It leads to a hidden fee of the bid-ask spread per trade. This is crucial for intraday tr ading as average proﬁts per trade often lay within a couple of ticks. Moreover, when modelling order executions, we do n ot consider per-tick volumes coming from aggressive buyers and sellers (bid and ask). It might be the case that for some ticks only aggressive buyers (sellers) were present, and our algorithm executed a long (short) limit order. This l eads to uncertainty in opening positions - in reality, some of the proﬁtable orders may have not been ﬁlled. At the same ti me, losing orders would always be executed. Another limitation is that we do not model order queues, and, consequently cannot guarantee that our orders would have been ﬁlled if we submitted them live even if both bid and a sk volumes were present in the tick. This is crucial for high-frequency trading (HFT), where thousands of trades ar e performed daily with tiny take-proﬁts and stop-losses, but has less impact on the trade intervals considered in the s tudy. Finally, there is an assumption that our entering the market does not change its state signiﬁcantly. We believe it is a valid assumption considering the liquidity of S&P E-mini futures. 5.7 Implications for practitioners We provide a systematic approach to the evaluation of automa ted trading platform components. While large market participants have internal evaluation procedures, we beli eve that our research could support various existing pipeli nes. Considering the state of the matter with the lack of code and d ata publishing in the ﬁeld, we are conﬁdent that the demonstrated approach can be used towards improving the gen eralisability and reproducibility of research. Speciﬁc methods like extrema classiﬁcation and 2-step feature extr action can serve as a baseline for the effect sizes observed in the ﬁeld. 5.8 Future work While the proposed methodology is in an initial stage for the ﬁeld of ﬁnancial markets, we believe that it is ﬂexible enough to be incorporated into a python package for trading p attern design. That would signiﬁcantly boost its adoption by practitioners. In the current study, we evaluate the utility of the price lev els trading pattern. The next step would be to propose a more holistic pattern. We would aim to extend the market prop erties to volumes and volume proﬁles. Another direction is to assess the price levels for trading t rends (instead of reversals) - in this case, one would aim to classify price level crossings with a statistically signiﬁ cant improvement with respect to the no-information model. A different deﬁnition of the price crossing at the point of dat a labelling is necessary for that. In terms of improving the strategy, there is a couple of thing s that can be done. For instance: take-proﬁt and stop-loss offsets might be linked to the volatility instead of being co nstant. Also, ﬂat strategies usually work better at certain times of the day - it would be wise to interrupt trading before USA and EU session starts and ends, as well as scheduled reports, news and impactful speeches. Additionally, all th e mentioned parameters we have chosen can be looked into and optimised to the needs of the market participant. It would be interesting to investigate other means for featu re design instead of the manually deﬁned feature space. For instance, Deep Learning networks can be used to obtain ma rket representations at every moment of time [ 82]. It should be noted though that such an approach would substanti ally limit the transparency of the pipeline. In terms of the chosen model, it would be useful comparing the CatBoost classiﬁer to deep learning models like DA- RNN [ 69], as it makes use of the attention-based architecture desig ned based on the recent breakthrough in the area of natural language processing [ 70]. Moreover, it would be useful to consider model calibratio n approaches to obtain more realistic output class probabilities from the model [ 81]. 21 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 Finally, we see a gap in the available FLOSS (Free/Libre Open Source Software) backtesting tools. To the best of our knowledge, there is no publicly available backtesting engi ne taking into account bid and ask prices and order queues. While there are solutions with this functionality provided as parts of the proprietary trading platforms, they can only be used as a black box. An open-source engine would contribut e to transparency and has the potential to become the solution for both the research and industry worlds. 6 Conclusion Our work proposed a generic methodology for the systematic e valuation of APT components. Then, it showcased the proposed approach to the trading pattern and the feature spa ce design A TP components. Whilst extrema have been discussed as potentially high-per formance means for trading decisions, there has been no work proposing their automatic extraction and assessment f rom the statistical point of view. While the pattern is commonly used by practitioners in various settings and migh t be indeed useful for manual trading, its applications in the machine learning setting are only partially supported b y statistics. While the proposed 2-step feature extraction method is inspired by domain knowledge and market understan ding, there is no statistical evidence that it beneﬁts A TP . This paper has presented every single aspect of data process ing, feature extraction, feature evaluation and selection , machine learning estimator optimisation and training, as w ell as details of the trading strategy. Moreover, we statis- tically assessed the ﬁndings. We rejected the null hypothes is answering RQ1 - our approach performs statistically better than the baseline, however, the effect sizes stay non -signiﬁcant. We did not observe any signiﬁcant effect sizes for RQ2 and could not reject the null hypothesis. Hence, the u se of the 2-step feature extraction does not improve the performance of the approach for the proposed feature spa ce and the model. There is no evidence that it hurts the performance either. We hope that the proposed methodology a nd the showcased scenarios will enable the adoption of a more uniform and sound methodology in the ﬁeld of ﬁnancial m arkets. We conclude by providing samples of our code online [ 76]. Acknowledgement The research is supported by CRITiCaL - Combatting cRiminal s In The CLoud, under grant EP/M020576/1 and by AISEC: AI Secure and Explainable by Construction under gran t EP/T027037/1. The authors would like to thank Roberto Metere for his drawing contributions. Disclosures Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnanci al interests or personal relation- ships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper. References [1] Amina Adadi and Mohammed Berrada. Peeking inside the bla ck-box: a survey on explainable artiﬁcial intelli- gence (xai). IEEE access, 6:52138–52160, 2018. [2] Muhammad Aurangzeb Ahmad, Ankur Teredesai, and Carly Ec kert. Fairness, accountability, transparency in ai at scale: Lessons from national programs. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountabi lity, and Transparency, pages 690–690, 2020. [3] Michael Aitken and Alex Frino. The determinants of marke t bid ask spreads on the australian stock exchange: Cross-sectional analysis. Accounting & Finance, 36(1):51–63, 1996. [4] Mohsen Bahmani-Oskooee and Scott W Hegerty. Exchange ra te volatility and trade ﬂows: a review article. Journal of Economic studies , 2007. [5] David H Bailey, Jonathan M Borwein, Marcos L´ opez de Prad o, and Qiji Jim Zhu. Pseudomathematics and ﬁnancial charlatanism: The effects of backtest over ﬁtting on out-of-sample performance. Notices of the AMS , 61(5):458–471, 2014. [6] Luc Bauwens, Pierre Giot, Joachim Grammig, and David V er edas. A comparison of ﬁnancial duration models via density forecasts. International Journal of F orecasting, 20(4):589–609, 2004. 22 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 [7] Or Biran and Kathleen R McKeown. Human-centric justiﬁca tion of machine learning predictions. In IJCAI, volume 2017, pages 1461–1467, 2017. [8] E Chandra Blessie and E Karthikeyan. Sigmis: A feature se lection algorithm using correlation based method. Journal of Algorithms & Computational T echnology, 6(3):385–394, 2012. [9] Carlo Bonferroni. Teoria statistica delle classi e calc olo delle probabilita. Pubblicazioni del R Istituto Superiore di Scienze Economiche e Commericiali di Firenze , 8:3–62, 1936. [10] V adim Borisov, Tobias Leemann, Kathrin Seßler, Johannes Haug, Martin Pawelczyk, and Gjergji Kasneci. Deep neural networks and tabular data: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.01889 , 2021. [11] Leo Breiman. Random forests. Machine learning, 45(1):5–32, 2001. [12] Carey Caginalp and Gunduz Caginalp. Asset price volati lity and price extrema. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.04774, 2018. [13] Ant´ onio Canelas, Rui Neves, and Nuno Horta. A sax-ga ap proach to evolve investment strategies on ﬁnancial markets based on pattern discovery techniques. Expert systems with applications , 40(5):1579–1590, 2013. [14] Gavin C Cawley and Nicola LC Talbot. On over-ﬁtting in mo del selection and subsequent selection bias in performance evaluation. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 11:2079–2107, 2010. [15] Bonferroni Ce. Teoria statistica delle classi e calcol o delle probabilit. Pubblicazioni del R Istituto Superiore di Scienze Economiche e Commerciali di Firenze , 8:3–62, 1936. [16] Roberto Cervell´ o-Royo, Francisco Guijarro, and Karolina Michniuk. Stock market trading rule based on pattern recognition and technical analysis: Forecasting the djia i ndex with intraday data. Expert systems with Applica- tions, 42(14):5963–5975, 2015. [17] Tai-liang Chen and Feng-yu Chen. An intelligent patter n recognition model for supporting investment decisions in stock market. Information Sciences, 346:261–274, 2016. [18] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tr ee boosting system. In Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery an d data mining , pages 785–794, 2016. [19] Dave Cliff, Dan Brown, and Philip Treleaven. Technolog y trends in the ﬁnancial markets: A 2020 vision. 2011. [20] Jacob Cohen. A coefﬁcient of agreement for nominal scal es. Educational and psychological measurement , 20(1):37–46, 1960. [21] Harris Cooper. Reporting quantitative research in psychology: How to meet APA style journal article reporting standards. American Psychological Association, 2018. [22] Geoff Cumming. Understanding the new statistics: Effect sizes, conﬁdence intervals, and meta-analysis . Rout- ledge, 2013. [23] Marcos Lopez De Prado. Advances in ﬁnancial machine learning . John Wiley & Sons, 2018. [24] Michael AH Dempster and V asco Leemans. An automated fx t rading system using adaptive reinforcement learning. Expert Systems with Applications , 30(3):543–552, 2006. [25] Matthew Dixon, Diego Klabjan, and Jin Hoon Bang. Classi ﬁcation-based ﬁnancial markets prediction using deep neural networks. Algorithmic Finance, 6(3-4):67–77, 12 2017. [26] Pan Du, Warren A Kibbe, and Simon M Lin. Improved peak det ection in mass spectrum by incorporating continuous wavelet transform-based pattern matching. Bioinformatics, 22(17):2059–2065, 2006. [27] Alfonso Dufour and Robert F Engle. Time and the price imp act of a trade. The Journal of Finance, 55(6):2467– 2498, 2000. [28] Joseph A. Durlak. How to select, calculate, and interpr et effect sizes. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 34(9):917– 928, 2009. [29] David Easley, Marcos Lopez de Prado, and Maureen O’Hara . Discerning information from trade data. Journal of Financial Economics, 120(2):269–285, 2016. [30] David Easley, Marcos Lopez de Prado, Maureen O’Hara, an d Zhibai Zhang. Microstructure in the machine age. Available at SSRN 3345183 , 2019. [31] Fenglei Fan, Jinjun Xiong, and Ge Wang. On interpretabi lity of artiﬁcial neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.02522, 2020. [32] Stephen P Ferris, Robert A Haugen, and Anil K Makhija. Pr edicting contemporary volume with historic volume at differential price levels: Evidence supporting the disp osition effect. The Journal of Finance , 43(3):677–697, 1988. 23 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 [33] Cynthia Fraser. Association between two categorical v ariables: Contingency analysis with chi square. In Business Statistics for Competitive Advantage with Excel 2019 and JM P, pages 341–377. Springer, 2019. [34] Y oav Freund and Robert E Schapire. A decision-theoreti c generalization of on-line learning and an application to boosting. Journal of computer and system sciences , 55(1):119–139, 1997. [35] Robin Genuer, Jean-Michel Poggi, and Christine Tuleau -Malot. V ariable selection using random forests. Pattern recognition letters, 31(14):2225–2236, 2010. [36] Ellen R Girden. ANOVA: Repeated measures. Number 84. Sage, 1992. [37] Joachim Grammig and Marc Wellner. Modeling the interde pendence of volatility and inter-transaction duration processes. Journal of Econometrics, 106(2):369–400, 2002. [38] Isabelle Guyon and Andr´ e Elisseeff. An introduction t o variable and feature selection. Journal of machine learning research, 3(Mar):1157–1182, 2003. [39] Campbell R Harvey and Y an Liu. Backtesting. The Journal of Portfolio Management , 42(1):13–28, 2015. [40] Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, Jerome H Friedman, a nd Jerome H Friedman. The elements of statistical learning: data mining, inference, and prediction , volume 2. Springer, 2009. [41] D Hawkins, E Gallacher, M Gammell, et al. Statistical po wer, effect size and animal welfare: recommendations for good practice. Animal W elfare, 22(3):339–344, 2013. [42] Larry V Hedges. Distribution theory for glass’s estima tor of effect size and related estimators. journal of Educational Statistics, 6(2):107–128, 1981. [43] Wei Huang, Y oshiteru Nakamori, and Shou-Y ang Wang. For ecasting stock market movement direction with support vector machine. Computers & operations research, 32(10):2513–2522, 2005. [44] Giulia Iori and Carl Chiarella. A Simulation Analysis o f the Microstructure of Double Auction Markets. Quan- titative Finance, 2:346–353, 2002. [45] Padmavathi Janardhanan, Fathima Sabika, et al. Effect iveness of support vector machines in medical data mining. Journal of communications software and systems , 11(1):25–30, 2015. [46] Ronald N Kahn and Andrew Rudd. Does historical performa nce predict future performance? Financial analysts journal, 51(6):43–52, 1995. [47] Guolin Ke, Qi Meng, Thomas Finley, Taifeng Wang, Wei Che n, Weidong Ma, Qiwei Y e, and Tie-Y an Liu. Lightgbm: A highly efﬁcient gradient boosting decision tre e. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 3146–3154, 2017. [48] Ken Kelley and Kristopher J Preacher. On effect size. Psychological methods, 17(2):137, 2012. [49] Wilhelm Kirch, editor. Pearson’s Correlation Coefﬁcient, pages 1090–1091. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 2008. [50] Robert L Kissell. The science of algorithmic trading and portfolio managemen t. Academic Press, 2013. [51] Lars Kotthoff, Ian P Gent, and Ian Miguel. An evaluation of machine learning in algorithm selection for search problems. Ai Communications, 25(3):257–270, 2012. [52] Max Kuhn and Kjell Johnson. Feature engineering and selection: A practical approach fo r predictive models . Taylor & Francis Group, 2019. [53] Dani¨ el Lakens. Calculating and reporting effect size s to facilitate cumulative science: A practical primer for t-tests and ANOV As.Frontiers in Psychology, 4(NOV), 2013. [54] William Leigh, M Paz, and R Purvis. An analysis of a hybri d neural network and pattern recognition technique for predicting short-term increases in the nyse composite i ndex. Omega, 30(2):69–76, 2002. [55] Andrew W . Lo. The Statistics of Sharpe Ratios. Financial Analysts Journal, 58(4):36–52, 7 2002. [56] Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A uniﬁed approach to inte rpreting model predictions. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 4765–4774, 2017. [57] John F Magee. Decision trees for decision making . Harvard Business Review Brighton, MA, USA, 1964. [58] Simone Manganelli. Duration, volume and volatility im pact of trades. Journal of Financial markets , 8(4):377– 399, 2005. [59] Keith A McNeil, Isadore Newman, and Francis J Kelly. T esting research hypotheses with the general linear model. SIU Press, 1996. 24 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 [60] Nikolay Miller, Yiming Y ang, Bruce Sun, and Guoyi Zhang . Identiﬁcation of technical analysis patterns with smoothing splines for bitcoin prices. Journal of Applied Statistics , 46(12):2289–2297, 2019. [61] Michael C M¨ unnix, Takashi Shimada, Rudi Sch¨ afer, Francois Leyvraz, Thomas H Seligman, Thomas Guhr, and H Eugene Stanley. Identifying states of a ﬁnancial market. Scientiﬁc reports, 2:644, 2012. [62] QuantConnect Ryan H Pravin B Jimmie B Nick C Sam C Mattias S Michael H Mark M Madhan Paul R Nik M Scott Y BinaryExecutor.com Tadas T Matt B Binumon P Zyron Mi ke O TC Luigi Lester Z Andreas H Eu- gene K Hugo P Robert N Christofer O Ramesh L Nic. Quantconnect /lean: Lean algorithmic trading engine by quantconnect (python, c#). [63] Ahmet Murat Ozbayoglu, Mehmet Ugur Gudelek, and Omer Be rat Sezer. Deep learning for ﬁnancial applica- tions: A survey. Applied Soft Computing , 93:106384, 2020. [64] Mahesh Pal and Paul M Mather. Assessment of the effectiv eness of support vector machines for hyperspectral data. Future generation computer systems, 20(7):1215–1225, 2004. [65] Cheol-Ho Park and Scott H Irwin. What do we know about the proﬁtability of technical analysis? Journal of Economic surveys, 21(4):786–826, 2007. [66] Paulo Parracho, Rui Neves, and Nuno Horta. Trading in ﬁn ancial markets using pattern recognition optimized by genetic algorithms. In Proceedings of the 12th annual conference companion on Gene tic and evolutionary computation, pages 2105–2106, 2010. [67] Liudmila Prokhorenkova, Gleb Gusev, Aleksandr V orobe v, Anna V eronika Dorogush, and Andrey Gulin. Cat- boost: unbiased boosting with categorical features. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 6638–6648, 2018. [68] Stephen W Pruitt and Richard E White. The crisma trading system: who says technical analysis can’. Journal of Portfolio Management, 14(3):55, 1988. [69] Y ao Qin, Dongjin Song, Haifeng Cheng, Wei Cheng, Guofei Jiang, and Garrison W . Cottrell. A dual-stage attention-based recurrent neural network for time series p rediction. IJCAI International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 0:2627–2633, 2017. [70] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dari o Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019. [71] Inioluwa Deborah Raji, Andrew Smart, Rebecca N White, M argaret Mitchell, Timnit Gebru, Ben Hutchinson, Jamila Smith-Loud, Daniel Theron, and Parker Barnes. Closi ng the ai accountability gap: deﬁning an end-to-end framework for internal algorithmic auditing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pages 33–44, 2020. [72] Mitchell Ratner and Ricardo PC Leal. Tests of technical trading strategies in the emerging equity markets of latin america and asia. Journal of Banking & Finance , 23(12):1887–1905, 1999. [73] Greg Ridgeway. The state of boosting. Computing science and statistics , pages 172–181, 1999. [74] Omer Berat Sezer, Mehmet Ugur Gudelek, and Ahmet Murat O zbayoglu. Financial time series forecasting with deep learning: A systematic literature review: 2005–2019. Applied soft computing , 90:106181, 2020. [75] Zbynˇ ek ˇSid´ ak. Rectangular conﬁdence regions for the means of multivariate normal distributions. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 62(318):626–633, 1967. [76] Artur Sokolovsky and Luca Arnaboldi. A Generic Methodo logy for the Statistically Reproducible Evaluation of Automated Trading Platform Components, June 2022. [77] Roger Stern. Good statistical practice for natural resources research . CABI, 2004. [78] Student. The probable error of a mean. Biometrika, pages 1–25, 1908. [79] Benjamin Miranda Tabak and Mateus A Feitosa. An analysi s of the yield spread as a predictor of inﬂation in brazil: Evidence from a wavelets approach. Expert Systems with Applications , 36(3):7129–7134, 2009. [80] M Usman. On consistency and limitation of independent t -test kolmogorov smirnov test and mann whitney u test. IOSR Journal of Mathematics , 12(4):22–27, 2016. [81] Juozas V aicenavicius, David Widmann, Carl Andersson, Fredrik Lindsten, Jacob Roll, and Thomas Sch¨ on. Eval- uating model calibration in classiﬁcation. In The 22nd International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligen ce and Statistics, pages 3459–3467. PMLR, 2019. [82] Xing Wang, Yijun Wang, Bin Weng, and Aleksandr Vinel. St ock2vec: a hybrid deep learning framework for stock market prediction with representation learning a nd temporal convolutional network. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.01197, 2020. 25 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 [83] Maranke Wieringa. What to account for when accounting f or algorithms: A systematic literature review on al- gorithmic accountability. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pages 1–18, 2020. [84] Frank Wilcoxon. Individual comparisons by ranking met hods. In Breakthroughs in statistics , pages 196–202. Springer, 1992. [85] Leland Wilkinson. Statistical methods in psychology j ournals: Guidelines and explanations. American psychol- ogist, 54(8):594, 1999. [86] Lei Y u and Huan Liu. Feature selection for high-dimensi onal data: A fast correlation-based ﬁlter solution. In Proceedings of the 20th international conference on machin e learning (ICML-03), pages 856–863, 2003. [87] Bolei Zhou, David Bau, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba . Interpreting deep visual representations via network dissection. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intellig ence, 41(9):2131–2145, 2018. 26 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 Supplementary Materials Table S1: Model performance measures reported for the 2-ste p feature extraction, 3 different labelling conﬁgurations : 7, 11 and 15 ticks rebounds. Null-Precision corresponds to t he performance of an always-positive classiﬁer. Contract PR-AUC F1-score Precision ROC-AUC Null-Precision Rebound 7 ESH2017 .19 .26 .20 .51 .19 ESM2017 .25 .28 .22 .54 .21 ESU2017 .25 .29 .25 .56 .20 ESZ2017 .18 .16 .17 .52 .16 ESH2018 .19 .28 .19 .54 .17 ESM2018 .22 .32 .21 .55 .19 ESU2018 .17 .18 .17 .52 .16 ESZ2018 .18 .28 .18 .53 .17 ESH2019 .18 .24 .18 .51 .18 ESM2019 .17 .24 .18 .52 .17 Rebound 11 ESH2017 .19 .30 .20 .53 .18 ESM2017 .21 .14 .23 .54 .19 ESU2017 .18 .14 .15 .50 .19 ESZ2017 .17 .23 .17 .52 .16 ESH2018 .19 .27 .18 .53 .17 ESM2018 .21 .31 .21 .55 .19 ESU2018 .16 .17 .16 .50 .16 ESZ2018 .19 .27 .17 .52 .17 ESH2019 .18 .24 .18 .52 .17 ESM2019 .17 .25 .17 .52 .17 Rebound 15 ESH2017 .15 .20 .15 .51 .15 ESM2017 .18 .21 .19 .53 .17 ESU2017 .17 .17 .18 .54 .15 ESZ2017 .17 .11 .19 .51 .16 ESH2018 .17 .26 .17 .52 .16 ESM2018 .18 .28 .18 .53 .17 ESU2018 .16 .22 .16 .51 .16 ESZ2018 .17 .26 .16 .52 .16 ESH2019 .17 .26 .18 .51 .17 ESM2019 .17 .26 .17 .52 .16 27 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 Table S2: Model performance measures reported for the Price Level feature extraction component, 3 different labelling conﬁgurations: 7, 11 and 15 ticks rebounds. Null-Precision corresponds to the performance of an always-positive classiﬁer. Contract PR-AUC F1-score Precision ROC-AUC Null-Precision Rebound 7 ESH2017 .19 .24 .19 .50 .19 ESM2017 .21 .28 .21 .50 .21 ESU2017 .22 .25 .23 .53 .20 ESZ2017 .16 .19 .16 .49 .16 ESH2018 .18 .23 .17 .50 .17 ESM2018 .19 .25 .19 .49 .19 ESU2018 .16 .15 .15 .50 .16 ESZ2018 .18 .24 .17 .51 .17 ESH2019 .18 .26 .18 .51 .18 ESM2019 .18 .21 .18 .50 .17 Rebound 11 ESH2017 .17 .19 .17 .49 .18 ESM2017 .20 .18 .19 .51 .19 ESU2017 .18 .18 .17 .50 .19 ESZ2017 .16 .19 .16 .50 .16 ESH2018 .17 .23 .18 .51 .17 ESM2018 .19 .17 .20 .50 .19 ESU2018 .16 .22 .16 .50 .16 ESZ2018 .18 .20 .18 .52 .17 ESH2019 .18 .25 .17 .51 .17 ESM2019 .17 .22 .17 .50 .17 Rebound 15 ESH2017 .15 .20 .15 .50 .15 ESM2017 .17 .24 .18 .51 .17 ESU2017 .17 .16 .19 .53 .15 ESZ2017 .16 .13 .15 .50 .16 ESH2018 .16 .25 .16 .50 .16 ESM2018 .18 .21 .17 .51 .17 ESU2018 .15 .16 .15 .49 .16 ESZ2018 .16 .19 .16 .51 .16 ESH2019 .17 .24 .17 .50 .17 ESM2019 .16 .18 .16 .49 .16 28 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 Table S3: Model performance measures reported for the Marke t Shift feature extraction component, 3 different la- belling conﬁgurations: 7, 11 and 15 ticks rebounds. Null-Pr ecision corresponds to the performance of an always- positive classiﬁer. Contract PR-AUC F1-score Precision ROC-AUC Null-Precision Rebound 7 ESH2017 .20 .26 .20 .51 .19 ESM2017 .25 .28 .24 .55 .21 ESU2017 .25 .31 .25 .56 .20 ESZ2017 .17 .26 .18 .52 .16 ESH2018 .20 .29 .19 .54 .17 ESM2018 .21 .33 .22 .55 .19 ESU2018 .17 .23 .17 .51 .16 ESZ2018 .18 .28 .18 .52 .17 ESH2019 .19 .28 .19 .53 .18 ESM2019 .18 .27 .18 .53 .17 Rebound 11 ESH2017 .18 .24 .19 .51 .18 ESM2017 .21 .24 .20 .50 .19 ESU2017 .21 .31 .23 .56 .19 ESZ2017 .16 .12 .16 .50 .16 ESH2018 .20 .28 .18 .54 .17 ESM2018 .20 .32 .21 .55 .19 ESU2018 .17 .22 .17 .51 .16 ESZ2018 .17 .27 .17 .52 .17 ESH2019 .18 .26 .18 .52 .17 ESM2019 .18 .27 .18 .53 .17 Rebound 15 ESH2017 .15 .22 .15 .48 .15 ESM2017 .17 .20 .16 .50 .17 ESU2017 .16 .17 .15 .51 .15 ESZ2017 .16 .11 .16 .50 .16 ESH2018 .17 .27 .17 .53 .16 ESM2018 .18 .28 .18 .54 .17 ESU2018 .16 .22 .16 .51 .16 ESZ2018 .17 .27 .17 .52 .16 ESH2019 .17 .27 .17 .52 .17 ESM2019 .18 .27 .18 .53 .16 29 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 Hedge's gav Rebound 7 Rebound 11 Rebound 15 Figure S1: Hedge’s g av effect sizes quantify the improvement of the precision from using the CatBoost over the no-information estimator. The error b ars illustrate the .95 conﬁdence intervals, corrected for multiple comparisons (3 in this ca se). The dashed line corresponds to the signiﬁcance threshold. Rebounds accord to different la belling conﬁgurations, where 7, 11 and 15 are ticks required for the positive labelling of an ent ry. 0 1 2 Hedge's gav Rebound 7 Rebound 11 Rebound 15 P   1 0 1 Hedge's gav M  Figure S2: Hedge’s g av effect sizes quantify the improvement of the precision from using the 2-step feature extraction over each of the components (PL an d MS). The error bars illustrate the .95 conﬁdence intervals, corrected for multiple compar isons (6 in this case). The dashed line corresponds to the signiﬁcance threshold. Rebounds ac cord to different labelling conﬁgu- rations, where 7, 11 and 15 are ticks required for the positiv e labelling of an entry. 30 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 0.16 0.18 0.20 0.22 0.24 Rebound 7 0    0.18 0.20 0.22Precision Rebound 11 ESH2017 ESU2017 ESH2018 ESU2018 ESH2019 Contract 0.15 0.16 0.17 0.18 Rebound 15 Figure S3: The precision of the CatBoost model and the always-positive estimator. The plot shows the labelling conﬁgurations of 7, 11 and 15 ticks rebounds. 0.16 0.18 0.20 0.22 0.24 Rebound 7 0.16 0.18 0.20 0.22Precision Rebound 11 ESH2017 ESU2017 ESH2018 ESU2018 ESH2019 Contract 0.15 0.16 0.17 0.18 0.19 Rebound 15 Figure S4: The precision of the model which uses the 2- step feature extraction (MS+PL) versus the performance of the models using the single-step feature extraction (MS, PL). The plot shows the labelling conﬁgurations of 7, 11 and 15 ticks rebounds. 31 A PREPRINT - J UNE 22, 2022 1.5 1.0     1   SHAP value (impact on model output) PL24 MS2 PL23 PL2, t=1 MS6_200 MS6_20 MS0 MS6_80 Low Figure S5: SHAP summary plot of the model trained on ESH2019 c ontract, rebound 7 conﬁguration. Each marker is a classiﬁed entry. The X-axis quantiﬁes the contribution of the entries towards the positive or negative class output. 2 0 Sharpe Ratio 2017-01-282017-08-162018-03-042018-09-202019-04-082019-10-25 Date 1000 500 0 Cum. profit, [ticks] Figure S6: Cumulative proﬁt curves for all the rebound conﬁg urations and ﬁxed take proﬁt of 15 ticks for years 2017- 2019 with the corresponding annualised rolling Sharpe rati os (computed for 5% risk-free income). The trading fees are already included in the cumulative proﬁts. 32 This figure "test.png" is available in "png" format from: http://arxiv.org/ps/2009.09993v4