Analysis of the impact of maker-taker fees on the stock market using agent-based simulation Isao Yagi∗ Kanagawa Institute of Technology Atsugi, Kanagawa, Japan iyagi2005@gmail.com Mahiro Hoshino Kanagawa Institute of Technology Atsugi, Kanagawa, Japan Takanobu Mizuta SPARX Asset Management Co., Ltd. Minato, Tokyo, Japan mizutata@gmail.com ABSTRACT Recently, most stock exchanges in the U.S. employ maker-taker fees, in which an exchange pays rebates to traders placing orders in the order book and charges fees to traders taking orders from the order book. Maker-taker fees encourage traders to place many orders that provide market liquidity to the exchange. However, it is not clear how maker-taker fees affect the total cost of a taking order, including all the charged fees and the market impact. In this study, we investigated the effect of maker-taker fees on the total cost of a taking order with our artificial market model, which is an agent-based model for financial markets. We found that maker- taker fees encourage market efficiency but increase the total costs of taking orders. CCS CONCEPTS • Applied computing → Economics; • Computing method- ologies→ Multi-agent systems. KEYWORDS maker-taker fees, financial market, artificial market, multi-agent system agent-based simulation ACM Reference Format: Isao Yagi, Mahiro Hoshino, and Takanobu Mizuta. 2020. Analysis of the impact of maker-taker fees on the stock market using agent-based simu- lation. In ACM International Conference on AI in Finance (ICAIF ’20), Oc- tober 15–16, 2020, New York, NY, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 6 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3383455.3422523 1 INTRODUCTION These days, most equities exchanges in the U.S. are discussing maker-taker fees, in which an exchange pays rebates to makers who are traders placing orders in the order book and charges fees to takers who are traders taking orders from the order book [2, 7]. The merits of maker-taker fees are that market liquidity is provided for taking orders, improving liquidity may increase the exchange’s trading share, the bid-ask spread can be decreased by maker orders, and the market can be expected to be more efficient. There have been some previous reports on maker-taker fees [6, 8, 18]; however, Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. ICAIF ’20, October 15–16, 2020, New York, NY, USA © 2020 Association for Computing Machinery. ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7584-9/20/10. . . $15.00 https://doi.org/10.1145/3383455.3422523 it remains unclear how maker-taker fees affect the total cost of a taking order, including all the charged fees and the market impact. In this research, we investigated the effect of maker-taker fees on the market with our artificial market model, which is an agent- based simulation model for financial markets [3, 4, 13]. One method for dealing with situations that defy analysis by previous empirical research methods is an artificial market. In this case, it is difficult to investigate in empirical research the impact on the market caused by the amount of maker-taker fees that are not actually used, but if artificial markets are used, the effect of these fees on the market can be easily understood. Each agent is assigned a specific trading (i.e., buying or selling) rule and is then set to trade financial assets as an investor. The market can be observed in order to determine how the agents behave. Then, by modeling and incorporating certain restrictions on the market side (e.g., limitations to ensure market stability and efficiency such as a short selling regulation), it is possible to examine how investors behave, as well as what kinds of effect the restrictions have on the market. We constructed an artificial market with the maker-taker fee structure and analyzed the effect of maker-taker fees, i.e., the total cost of a taker’s trade, including the charged fee, on the market from the viewpoints of market impact and volatility. Furthermore, we checked the relationship between the total cost of a taker’s trade and market efficiency. 2 ARTIFICIAL MARKET MODEL In this research, we constructed an artificial market model on the basis of the artificial market model of Chiarella et al. [4] and Yagi et al. [22], because they built simple agents and a pricing mechanism which could reproduce the statistical characteristics of the kinds of long-term price fluctuations observed in empirical analyses. More- over, algorithm agents [14] and a position-based market maker [9] were added to our model. The normal agents used in the basis mod- els [4, 22] correspond to both takers and makers in real financial markets, where the algorithm agents correspond to takers and the position-based market makers correspond to makers. Only one risk asset is available for trading. Hereinafter, we refer to risk assets as simply assets, whereas we refer to non-risk assets as cash, because non-risk assets are equivalent to cash in the proposed artificial market. The numbers of normal agents and algorithm agents are𝑛 and 𝑚 (where 1≤ 𝑚 ≤ 𝑛), respectively. Each of the normal agents 𝑗 = 1,...,𝑛 places an order in sequence. After the final agent, agent 𝑛, has placed an order, the first agent, agent1, places the next order. Each time⌊𝑛/𝑚⌋ normal agents place orders, the algorithm agent places one order. Each of the algorithm agents 𝑘 = 1,...,𝑚 also arXiv:2010.08992v1 [q-fin.TR] 18 Oct 2020 ICAIF ’20, October 15–16, 2020, New York, NY, USA Yagi et al. places an order in sequence. There is one position-based market maker, which places a sell order and a buy order before either the normal agents or algorithm agents place orders. The time 𝑡 increases by 1 each time a normal agent or an al- gorithm agent places an order. Thus, the process moves forward one step even when a trade does not occur and this new order is placed in the order book. However, time𝑡 does not advance in the position-based market maker order. The mechanism for determining the price in this model being a continuous double auction (continuous trading session) means that if there are sell (buy) order prices in the order book that are lower (higher) than the buy (sell) order price of the agent, then the agent’s order is immediately matched to the lowest sell order (highest buy order) in the order book. We refer to this as a market order. If there are no such orders in the order book, then the order does not match any other order and remains in the order book. We refer to this order as a limit order. The remaining orders in the order book are canceled at time𝑡𝑐 (order effective period) after the order was placed. The tick size, which is the minimum unit for price, is Δ𝑃, and when orders are sell orders, fractional values smaller than Δ𝑃 are rounded up. On the other hand, when orders are buy orders, they are rounded down. Each agent sends one order each time. An agent can possess an unlimited amount of assets as the quantity of cash held by the agent is set to infinity. Agents can also short sell. 2.1 Maker-taker fee structure One of the exchange’s revenues is charging traders for the services that process their trades. Maker-taker fees provide a benefit for exchanges in that the exchanges can profit from the difference between the taker fee and the market maker rebate as follows: 𝑅𝐸𝑋 =𝐶𝑇−𝑅𝑀. (1) Let𝑅𝐸𝑋 ,𝐶𝑇 , and 𝑅𝑀 be the fee that the exchange receives, the taker fee, and the market maker rebate, respectively. In this study, 𝑅𝐸𝑋 is fixed (𝑅𝐸𝑋 = 0.100%), since𝑅𝐸𝑋 has essentially no effect on the relationship between the total cost of a taker’s trade, including the taker fee, and market efficiency. When𝑅𝑀 is positive, it means that a market maker receives the market maker rebate. When𝑅𝑀 is negative, it means that a market maker pays the market maker rebate. When𝐶𝑇 is positive, it means that a taker pays the taker fee. When𝐶𝑇 is negative, it means that a taker receives the taker fee. The values of 𝑅𝐸𝑋 , 𝑅𝑀, and 𝐶𝑇 are shown as ratios to the fundamental price𝑃𝑓 described later. 2.2 Normal agent Normal agents, who are assumed to be general investors in the real world, are designed for as simple a model which can reproduce the desired stylized facts. Normal agents have three trading strategies: fundamental strategy, technical strategy, and noise trading. The first two strategies are implemented in our model because many empirical studies have found that the fundamental strategy, techni- cal strategy, or both were used generally for any market and any time (e.g., Menkhoff et al. [12]). We also implement noise trading to model objectively investors’ desire for a better strategy through trial and error. 2.2.1 Order process. The order prices of normal agent 𝑗 by trans- action are determined as shown below. The rate of change of the price expected by agent𝑗 at time𝑡 (the expected return)𝑟𝑒𝑡 𝑗 is given by 𝑟𝑒𝑡 𝑗 = 1 𝑤1𝑡 𝑗+𝑤2𝑡 𝑗+𝑢𝑗  𝑤1𝑡 𝑗𝑟1𝑡 𝑗+𝑤2𝑡 𝑗𝑟2𝑡 𝑗+𝑢𝑗𝜖𝑡 𝑗  , (2) where𝑤𝑖𝑡 𝑗 is the weight of the𝑖-th term for agent𝑗 at time𝑡 and is set according to the uniform distribution between 0 and𝑤𝑖,𝑚𝑎𝑥 at the start of the simulation and then varied using the learning process described later herein. Furthermore,𝑢𝑗 , the weight of the third term in parentheses, is set according to the uniform distribu- tion between 0 and𝑢𝑚𝑎𝑥 at the start of the simulation and is kept constant thereafter. The first term in parentheses on the right-hand side of Eq. (2) represents the fundamental strategy. The form of the term indicates that an agent expects a positive (negative) return when the market price is lower (higher) than the fundamental price. The term𝑟1𝑡 𝑗 is the expected return of the fundamental strategy for agent 𝑗 at time 𝑡 and is given by𝑟1𝑡 𝑗 = log(𝑃𝑓/𝑃𝑡−𝑛), where𝑃𝑓 is the fundamental price, which is constant over time, and 𝑃𝑡 is the market price at time𝑡. The market price is set to the most recent price at the time if no trading is occurring. The initial market price is set to the fundamental price, i.e.,𝑃 0 =𝑃𝑓 . The second term represents the technical strategy. The form of this term indicates that an agent expects a positive (negative) return when the historical return is positive (negative). Here,𝑟2𝑡 𝑗 is the expected return of the technical strategy for agent𝑗 at time𝑡 and is given by𝑟2𝑡 𝑗 = log(𝑃𝑡−𝑛/𝑃𝑡−𝑛−𝜏 𝑗), where𝜏𝑗 is set according to the uniform distribution between 1 and𝜏𝑚𝑎𝑥 at the start of the simulation. The third term represents the noise strategy. Here,𝜖𝑡 𝑗 is a nor- mally distributed random error with mean zero and standard devia- tion𝜎𝜖. Based on the expected return𝑟𝑒𝑡 𝑗 , the expected price𝑃𝑒𝑡 𝑗 is found using the following equation: 𝑃𝑒𝑡 𝑗 =𝑃𝑡−1 exp(𝑟𝑒𝑡 𝑗). (3) The order price𝑃𝑜𝑡 𝑗 is a normally distributed random number with mean𝑃𝑒𝑡 𝑗 and standard deviation𝑃𝑡𝜎 , given by 𝑃𝑡 𝜎 =𝑃𝑒𝑡 𝑗·𝐸𝑠𝑡, (4) where𝐸𝑠𝑡(0 < 𝐸𝑠𝑡 ≤ 1) is the variation coefficient of the order price. The choice between buying and selling is determined by the relative sizes of the expected price𝑃𝑒𝑡 𝑗 and the order price𝑃𝑜𝑡 𝑗 . An agent places a buy order for one share if𝑃𝑒𝑡 𝑗 > 𝑃𝑜𝑡 𝑗 , while an agent places a sell order for one share if𝑃𝑒𝑡 𝑗 < 𝑃𝑜𝑡 𝑗 . 2.3 Learning process Previous studies using an artificial market have implemented vari- ous kinds of learning processes. For example, agents switch strate- gies and/or tune their strategy parameters based on their perfor- mance, market price, etc. [1, 11, 16]. The learning process in the present study is implemented to switch the strategy between the fundamental and technical strategies. Analysis of the impact of maker-taker fees on the stock market using agent-based simulation ICAIF ’20, October 15–16, 2020, New York, NY, USA We modeled the learning process as follows based on Yagi et al. [22]. For 𝑟𝑖𝑡 𝑗 , learning is performed by each agent immediately before the agent places an order. That is, when 𝑟𝑖𝑡 𝑗 and 𝑟𝑙𝑡 = log(𝑃𝑡/𝑃𝑡−𝑡𝑙) are of the same sign,𝑤𝑖𝑡 𝑗 is updated as follows: 𝑤𝑖𝑡 𝑗←𝑤𝑖𝑡 𝑗+𝑘𝑙|𝑟𝑙𝑡|𝑞𝑡 𝑗(𝑤𝑖,𝑚𝑎𝑥−𝑤𝑖𝑡 𝑗), (5) where𝑘𝑙 is a constant, and𝑞𝑡 𝑗 is set according to the uniform distri- bution between 0 and 1. When𝑟𝑖𝑡 𝑗 and𝑟𝑙𝑡 have opposite signs,𝑤𝑖𝑡 𝑗 is updated as follows: 𝑤𝑖𝑡 𝑗←𝑤𝑖𝑡 𝑗−𝑘𝑙|𝑟𝑙𝑡|𝑞𝑡 𝑗𝑤𝑖𝑡 𝑗. (6) Separately from the process for learning based on past performance, 𝑤𝑖𝑡 𝑗 is reset with a small probability𝑚, according to the uniform distribution between 0 and𝑤𝑖,𝑚𝑎𝑥 . 2.4 Algorithm agent Algorithm agents are assumed to be institutional investors who use an algorithmic trading strategy. Algorithmic trading is a process in which a big order is divided into small orders and automatically executed little by little. All algorithm agents always place buy mar- ket orders for one share. The purpose of incorporating algorithm agents into our artificial market is to use them to measure the market impact (MI) described later. When there is an order with the best ask price in the order book, an algorithm agent places a buy order at the best ask price plus tick size Δ𝑃. Otherwise, an algorithm agent does not place an order. 2.5 Position-based market maker A position-based market maker is assumed to be an institutional investor who takes a market maker strategy, which means the strategy of placing both a buy order and a sell order whose price exceeds the buy order price, to make a profit. Hereinafter, a positon- based market maker is simply called a market maker. If the previous sell, buy, or both orders of the market maker remain in the order book, the market maker cancels them and places new buy and sell limit orders. Generally, a market maker decides their own order price based on the best-bid, the best-ask, and the spread, which is equal to the amount of its own expected return per transaction. However, the order price of the market maker also depends on their position, which means the amount of an asset held by the market maker, as they act to keep their position neutral [9, 17]. That is, when the market maker has a long position, which means the agent buys and holds some amount of an asset, their buy and sell order prices are set lower so that their sell order matches an order from normal agents and algorithm agents easier than its buy order. On the other hand, when the market maker has a short position, which means the agent short-sells the asset, their buy and sell order prices are set higher so that their buy order matches an order from normal agents easier than their sell order. Let the base spread of the market maker and the coefficient of their position (its initial value is set based on Kusaka et al. [9] as 5.0× 10−8) be𝜃𝑀 and𝑤𝑀. Let the best-bid, the best-ask, and the basic order price, buy order price, sell order price at time 𝑡, and position between time𝑡 and𝑡+ 1 of the market maker be𝑃𝑏𝑏𝑡 ,𝑃𝑏𝑎𝑡 , 𝑃𝑏𝑣,𝑀𝑡 ,𝑃𝑏𝑜,𝑀𝑡 ,𝑃𝑠𝑜,𝑀𝑡 , and𝑠𝑀𝑡 , respectively. Then,𝑃𝑏𝑜,𝑀𝑡 ,𝑃𝑠𝑜,𝑀𝑡 , Table 1: Relationship between base spread 𝜃𝑀 and taker fee 𝐶𝑇 with respect to market maker rebate 𝑅𝑀 when 𝑅𝑒𝑀 = 0.300% and𝑅𝐸𝑋 = 0.100% 𝑅𝑀 𝜃𝑀 𝐶𝑇 -0.100% 0.500% 0.000% -0.075% 0.450% 0.025% -0.050% 0.400% 0.050% -0.025% 0.350% 0.075% -0.000% 0.300% 0.100% 0.025% 0.250% 0.125% 0.050% 0.200% 0.150% 0.075% 0.150% 0.175% 0.100% 0.100% 0.200% 0.125% 0.050% 0.225% 0.140% 0.020% 0.240% 0.145% 0.010% 0.245% and𝑃𝑏𝑣,𝑀𝑡 are as follows: 𝑃𝑏𝑜,𝑀𝑡 =𝑃𝑏𝑣,𝑀𝑡− 1 2𝑃𝑓·𝜃𝑀, (7) 𝑃𝑠𝑜,𝑀𝑡 =𝑃𝑏𝑣,𝑀𝑡+ 1 2𝑃𝑓·𝜃𝑀, (8) 𝑃𝑏𝑣,𝑀𝑡 =(1−𝑤𝑀(𝑠𝑡 𝑀)3)· 1 2(𝑃𝑏𝑏𝑡+𝑃𝑏𝑎𝑡). (9) When the sell (buy) order price of the market maker is lower (higher) than the best-bid (best-ask), the market maker’s order becomes a market order. Therefore, if the following conditions are satisfied, the buy and sell order prices of the market maker are changed [10]. That is, if𝑃𝑏𝑜,𝑀𝑡≥𝑃𝑏𝑎𝑡 , then 𝑃𝑏𝑜,𝑀𝑡 =𝑃𝑏𝑎𝑡− Δ𝑃, (10) 𝑃𝑠𝑜,𝑀𝑡 =(𝑃𝑏𝑎𝑡− Δ𝑃)+ 𝑃𝑓·𝜃𝑀. (11) If𝑃𝑠𝑜,𝑀𝑡≤𝑃𝑏𝑏𝑡 , then 𝑃𝑏𝑜,𝑀𝑡 =(𝑃𝑏𝑏𝑡+ Δ𝑃)− 𝑃𝑓·𝜃𝑀, (12) 𝑃𝑠𝑜,𝑀𝑡 =𝑃𝑏𝑏𝑡+ Δ𝑃. (13) is set in consideration of the market maker rebate. That is, 𝜃𝑀 =𝑅𝑒𝑀− 2𝑅𝑀, (14) where𝑅𝑒𝑀 means the expected return of the market maker per transaction. Note that𝑅𝑒𝑀 is shown as a ratio to the fundamental price𝑃𝑓 and is set to 0.300%. The reason why𝑅𝑀 has a factor of 2 in the equation is that the market maker may receive rebates when both a buy limit order and a sell limit order of the market maker are executed. Table 1 shows the relationship between 𝜃𝑀 and𝐶𝑇 by listing their values for various market maker rebates𝑅𝑀 under the above conditions. 3 SIMULATION AND RESULTS In this study, we checked the market impact and volatility by chang- ing the market maker rebate as shown Table 1.We set the initial values of the model parameters as follows: 𝑛 = 990, 𝑚 = 10, 𝑤1𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 1,𝑤2𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 10,𝑢𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 1,𝜏𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 10,000,𝜎𝜖 = 0.06, ICAIF ’20, October 15–16, 2020, New York, NY, USA Yagi et al. Table 2: Stylized facts(𝜃𝑝𝑚 = 0.300%) Kurtosis 17.54 Lag 1 0.045 Autocorrelation 2 0.045 coefficients 3 0.044 for squared returns 4 0.042 5 0.040 𝐸𝑠𝑡 = 0.003, Δ𝑃 = 1.0,𝑃𝑓 = 10,000,𝑡𝑙 = 10,000,𝑡𝑐 = 20,000,𝑘𝑙 = 4.0, 𝛿𝑙 = 0.01, and𝑤𝑝𝑚 = 0.00000005. We ran simulations from𝑡 = 0 to 𝑡 = 1,000,000 and defined the end time of simulations as𝑡𝑒. We now introduce the market impact𝑀𝐼 , defined as how much higher the price at which algorithm agents bought an asset is than the fundamental price𝑃𝑓 : 𝑀𝐼 = 1 𝑛buy 𝑛buy∑︁ 𝑗=1 𝑃𝑡 𝑗 buy−𝑃𝑓 𝑃𝑓 , (15) where𝑛buy is the amount of assets that algorithm agents bought and𝑃𝑡 𝑗 buy is the price at which algorithm agents bought assets at time𝑡𝑗 buy The market impact is also used to calculate the average price at which algorithm agents bought the asset. The market price 𝑃𝑡 becomes almost the same as the fundamental price𝑃𝑓 in the case without algorithm agents. Therefore, when orders of the algorithm agents do not have an impact on the price formation,𝑀𝐼 = 0 [15]. A larger𝑀𝐼 indicates that the orders have more impact on price formation. Volatility is defined as the standard deviation of the return ln(𝑃𝑡/𝑃𝑡−1). We define the market inefficiency 𝑀ie to measure the market efficiency as follows [21]: 𝑀ie = 1 𝑡𝑒 𝑡𝑒∑︁ 𝑡 =0 𝑃𝑡−𝑃𝑓 𝑃𝑓 . (16) The market inefficiency is defined as the actual difference between market and fundamental prices. If the market was perfect efficiency, then the market prices would be exactly same as the fundamental price, i.e.,𝑀ie = 0. A larger𝑀ie indicates a more inefficient market. 3.1 Validation of artificial market model As many empirical studies have mentioned [ 5, 19], a fat tail and volatility clustering appear in actual markets, which are two stylized facts of financial markets. Therefore, we set the artificial market parameters so as to replicate these features. Table 2 shows the sta- tistics for stylized facts in the case that the initial cash coefficient is 10 for which we calculated the price returns, i.e., ln(𝑃𝑡/𝑃𝑡−1), at intervals of 100 time units. As shown, both kurtosis and autocorre- lation coefficients for squared returns with several lags are positive, which means that the runs for all five patterns replicate a fat tail and volatility clustering. This indicates that the model replicates long-term statistical characteristics observed in real financial mar- kets. Since similar results were obtained for the other values of the Figure 1: Volatility as a function of the market maker rebate initial cash coefficient, those results are omitted here due to space limitations. A previous empirical study showed that kurtosis of returns and autocorrelation coefficients for squared returns with several lags are positive when a fat tail and volatility clustering appear in actual markets [20]. For example, the kurtoses of monthly log returns of U.S. bonds, the S&P composite index of 500 stocks, and Microsoft are 4.86, 7.77, and 1.19, respectively. Note that kurtosis of returns depend on the kinds of financial assets. Likewise, autocorrelation coefficients for squared returns with several lags of the S&P com- posite index of 500 stocks are 0.0536, 0.0537, 0.0537, 0.0538, and 0.0538 when lags are from 1 to 5, respectively. It seems that the results of our model do not differ significantly from these results. Therefore, it can be confirmed that the proposed model is valid. 3.2 Results and discussion As a result of the simulations, we found that volatility, market impact, and market inefficiency decrease as the market maker rebate increases. 3.2.1 Volatility. Fig. 1 shows volatility as a function of the market maker rebate. Volatility decreases when the market maker rebate increases. The reason for this result is as follows. As the market maker rebate increases, the maker can offer orders with a narrower spread, because the expected return of the market maker depends on both the market maker rebate and the spread (refer to Eq. (14)). If the market maker narrows the spread between their orders, then it becomes easier for the normal agent’s order to execute the mar- ket maker orders. Therefore, the market price tends to converge between the market maker’s order prices and volatility decreases. 3.2.2 Market impact. Fig. 2 shows the market impact as a function of the market maker rebate. The market impact decreases as the market maker rebate increases. For the reasons mentioned , the market maker can offer orders with a narrower spread. Therefore, as the buy market order prices of algorithm agents match the sell limit orders of the market maker, the market price does not rise much and the market impact decreases. Analysis of the impact of maker-taker fees on the stock market using agent-based simulation ICAIF ’20, October 15–16, 2020, New York, NY, USA Figure 2: Market impact as a function of the market maker rebate Figure 3: Market inefficiency as a function of the market maker rebate 3.2.3 Market inefficiency. Fig. 3 shows the market inefficiency as a function of the market maker rebate. In the market with the maker- taker fee structure, the market maker offers orders with a narrower spread around the fundamental price. As the taker’s orders match the orders of the market maker, the market price converges to the fundamental price. Therefore, market inefficiency decreases, that is, market efficiency increases, when the market maker rebate increases. 3.2.4 Total cost of a taking order. Fig. 4 shows some cases of the total cost of a taking order. Generally, if the decrement of the market impact due to the maker-taker fees is larger than the increment of the taker fee due to the maker-taker fees, then the total cost of a taking order in the market with the maker-taker fee structure is lower than that of a taking order in the market without it (refer to case 2 in Fig. 4). This means that the algorithm agents in the market with the maker-taker fee structure can trade at lower transaction costs than those in the market without it. Note that Δ𝐶𝑇 is the increment of the taker fee due to the maker-taker fees and𝑀𝐼′ is Figure 4: Relationship between the market impact and the increment of the taker fee Figure 5: Total cost of the taking orders as a function of the market maker rebate market impact due to the maker-taker fees. On the other hand, the algorithm agents in the market with the maker-taker fee structure have to trade at higher transaction costs than those in the market without it, if the decrement of the market impact due to the maker- taker fees is less than the amount of the increment of the taker fee (refer to case 3 in Fig. 4). Fig. 5 shows a comparison of the total cost of a taking order between with and without the maker-taker fee structure in the market. Note that Fig. 5 shows the total cost of a taking order expressed as its ratio to the sum of it and the trading price. The total cost of a taking order in the market without the maker-taker fee structure is 0.327% (orange line in Fig. 5). On the other hand, the total cost of a taking order in the market with the maker-taker fee structure is generally higher than that in the market without the maker-taker fee structure. Therefore, we find that the maker-taker fee structure may create a disadvantageous environment for algorithm agents to trade in. ICAIF ’20, October 15–16, 2020, New York, NY, USA Yagi et al. 4 CONCLUSION In this study, we investigated the effect of maker-taker fees on the market from the viewpoints of volatility, market impact, and market efficiency by using an artificial market model. Furthermore, we also checked the relationship between the total costs of the taker’s trade and market efficiency. As a result, we found that maker-taker fees contributed to decreases in volatility and market impact and an increase in market efficiency. However, we also confirmed that it causes an increase in the total cost of the taking orders. Thus, if an exchange charges a high maker-taker fee, market makers are likely to make a profit, while other investors may leave the market due to higher transaction costs. Therefore, regulators should make regulations regarding the maker-taker fee structure in consideration of the above points, or at least avoid regulations that encourage exchanges to rebate market makers. In our future work, we plan to confirm the effect of maker-taker fees on a market in which algorithm agents who always place not a market buy order but a market sell order for one share participate. DISCLAIMER It should be noted that the opinions contained herein are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of SPARX Asset Management Co., Ltd. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 20K04977. REFERENCES [1] W Brian Arthur, John H Holland, Blake LeBaron, Richard Palmer, and Paul Tayler. 1996. Asset pricing under endogenous expectations in an artificial stock market. The economy as an evolving complex system II 27 (1996). [2] Robert Battalio, Shane A Corwin, and Robert Jennings. 2016. Can brokers have it all? On the relation between make-take fees and limit order execution quality. The Journal of Finance 71, 5 (2016), 2193–2238. [3] Shu-Heng Chen, Chia-Ling Chang, and Ye-Rong Du. 2012. Agent-based economic models and econometrics. The Knowledge Engineering Review 27, 2 (2012), 187– 219. [4] Carl Chiarella, Giulia Iori, and Josep Perelló. 2009. The impact of heterogeneous trading rules on the limit order book and order flows. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 33, 3 (2009), 525–537. [5] R. Cont. 2001. Empirical properties of asset returns: stylized facts and statistical issues. Quantitative Finance 1 (2001), 223–236. [6] Justin Cox, Bonnie Van Ness, and Robert Van Ness. 2019. Increasing the Tick: Examining the Impact of the Tick Size Change on Maker-Taker and Taker-Maker Market Models. Financial Review 54, 3 (2019), 417–449. [7] Stanislav Dolgopolov. 2012. Insider Trading: Informed Trading, and Market Making: Liquidity of Securities Markets in the Zero-Sum Game. Wm. & Mary Bus. L. Rev. 3 (2012), 1. [8] Thierry Foucault, Ohad Kadan, and Eugene Kandel. 2013. Liquidity cycles and make/take fees in electronic markets.The Journal of Finance 68, 1 (2013), 299–341. [9] Yuki Kusada, Takanobu Mizuta, Satoshi Hayakawa, and Kiyoshi Izumi. 2014. Impacts of position-based market makers on markets’ shares of trading volumes- an artificial market approach. In Social Modeling and Simulations+ Econophysics Colloquium 2014. [10] Yuki Kusada, Takanobu Mizuta, Satoshi Hayakawa, and Kiyoshi Izumi. 2015. Impact of Position-Based Market Makers to Shares of Markets’ Volumes - an Artificial Market Approach. Transactions of the Japanese Society for Artificial Intelligence 30, 5 (2015), 675–682. https://doi.org/10.1527/tjsai.30_675 (In Japan- ese). [11] Thomas Lux and Michele Marchesi. 1999. Scaling and criticality in a stochastic multi-agent model of a financial market. Nature 397, 6719 (1999), 498–500. [12] Lukas Menkhoff and Mark P Taylor. 2007. The obstinate passion of foreign exchange professionals: technical analysis. Journal of Economic Literature 45, 4 (2007), 936–972. [13] Takanobu Mizuta, Kiyoshi Izumi, Isao Yagi, and Shinobu Yoshimura. 2014. Reg- ulations’ effectiveness for market turbulence by large erroneous orders using multi agent simulation. In 2014 IEEE Conference on Computational Intelligence for Financial Engineering & Economics (CIFEr) . IEEE, 138–143. [14] Takanobu Mizuta, Shintaro Kosugi, Takuya Kusumoto, Wataru Matsumoto, and Kiyoshi Izumi. 2015. Effects of dark pools on financial markets’ efficiency and price discovery function: an investigation by multi-agent simulations. Evolution- ary and Institutional Economics Review 12, 2 (2015), 375–394. [15] Takanobu Mizuta, Shintaro Kosugi, Takuya Kusumoto, Wataru Matsumoto, Kiyoshi Izumi, Isao Yagi, and Shinobu Yoshimura. 2016. Effects of price regula- tions and dark pools on financial market stability: an investigation by multiagent simulations. Intelligent Systems in Accounting, Finance and Management 23, 1-2 (2016), 97–120. [16] Tomohiro Nakada and Keiki Takadama. 2013. Analysis on the number of XCS agents in agent-based computational finance. In 2013 IEEE Conference on Compu- tational Intelligence for Financial Engineering & Economics (CIFEr) . IEEE, 8–13. [17] Yoshihiro Nakajima and Yoshinori Shiozawa. 2004. Usefulness and feasibility of market maker in a thin market. In the International Conference Experiments in Economic Sciences: New Approaches to Solving Real-world Problems . 1000–1003. https://www.cc.kyoto-su.ac.jp/project/orc/execo/EES2004/proceedings.html. [18] Charles Roe. 2019. An Application of Agent-Based Modelling to Maker-Taker Exchange Fee Pricing. Ph.D. Dissertation. [19] M. Sewell. 2006. Characterization of financial time series. http://financ. emartinsewell.com/stylized-facts/ [20] Ruey S. Tsay. 2005.Analysis of financial time series (2. ed. ed.). Wiley-Interscience, Hoboken, NJ. [21] Tim Verheyden, Lieven De Moor, and Filip Van den Bossche. 2013. A tale of market efficiency. Review of Economic and Business Literature 58, 2 (2013), 139–156. [22] Isao Yagi, Yuji Masuda, and Takanobu Mizuta. 2019. Detection of Factors Influ- encing Market Liquidity Using an Agent-Based Simulation. In Network Theory and Agent-Based Modeling in Economics and Finance . Springer, 111–131.