Price response functions and spread impact in correlated ﬁnancial markets Juan C. Henao-Londono a, Sebastian M. Krause, and Thomas Guhr Fakult¨ at f¨ ur Physik, Universit¨ at Duisburg-Essen, Lotharstraße 1, 47048 Duisburg, Germany Received: date / Revised version: date Abstract Recent research on the response of stock prices to trading activity revealed long lasting eﬀects, even across stocks of diﬀerent companies. These results imply non-Markovian eﬀects in price formation and when trading many stocks at the same time, in particular trading costs and price correlations. How the price response is measured depends on data set and research focus. However, it is important to clarify, how the details of the price response deﬁnition modify the results. Here, we evaluate diﬀerent price response implementations for the Trades and Quotes (TAQ) data set from the NASDAQ stock market and ﬁnd that the results are qualitatively the same for two diﬀerent deﬁnitions of time scale, but the response can vary by up to a factor of two. Further, we show the key importance of the order between trade signs and returns, displaying the changes in the signal strength. Moreover, we conﬁrm the dominating contribution of immediate price response directly after a trade, as we ﬁnd that delayed responses are suppressed. Finally, we test the impact of the spread in the price response, detecting that large spreads have stronger impact. PACS. 89.65.Gh Econophysics – 89.75.-k Complex systems – 05.10.Gg Statistical physics 1 Introduction Financial markets use order books to list the number of shares bid or asked at each price. An order book is an electronic list of buy and sell orders for a speciﬁc security or ﬁnancial instrument organized by price levels, where agents can place diﬀerent types of instructions (orders). In general, the dynamics of the prices follow a random walk. There are two extreme models that can describe this behavior: the Eﬃcient Market Hypothesis (EMH) and the Zero Intelligence Trading (ZIT). The EMH states that all available information is included in the price and price changes can only be the result of unanticipated news, which by deﬁnition are totally unpredictable [6,8,24,34]. On the other hand, the ZIT assumes that agents instead of being fully rational, have “zero intelligence” and ran- domly buy or sell. It is supposed that their actions are interpreted by other agents as potentially containing some information [6,8,34,43]. In both cases the outcome is the same, the prices follow a random walk. Reality is some- where in-between [8,34], and non-Markovian eﬀects due to stategies or liquidity costs are not contained either. There are diverse studies focused on the price response [1,4,5,6,8,14,16,17,20,23,24,29,31,40,41,42,43]. In our opin- ion, a critical investigation of deﬁnitions and methods and how they aﬀect the results is called for. Regarding price self-response functions in Refs. [5,6,8], Bouchaud et al. found an increase to a maximum followed a e-mail: juan.henao-londono@uni-due.de by a decrease as the time lag grows. In Ref. [17], Gerig found that larger sized transactions have a larger absolute impact than smaller sized transactions but a much smaller relative impact. In Ref. [1], it is found that the impact of small trades on the price is, in relative terms, much larger than that of large trades and the impact of trading on the price is quasi-permanent. For price cross-responses functions, Refs. [4,43] revealed that the diagonal terms are on average larger than the oﬀ-diagonal ones by a factor ∼ 5. The response at posi- tive times is roughly constant, what is consistent with the hypothesis of a statistically eﬃcient price. Thus, the cur- rent sign does not predict future returns. In Ref. [43] the trends in the cross-responses were found not to depend on whether or not the stock pairs are in the same economic sector or extend over two sectors. Here, we want to discuss, based on a series of detailed empirical results obtained on trade by trade data, that the variation in the details of the parameters used in the price response deﬁnition modify the characteristics of the results. Aspects like time scale, time shift, time lag and spread used in the price response calculation have an in- ﬂuence on the outcomes. To facilitate the reproduction of our results, the source code for the data analysis is avail- able in Ref. [25]. We delve into the key details needed to compute the price response functions, and explore their correspond- ing roles. We perform a empirical study in diﬀerent time scales. We show that the order between the trade signs and the returns have a key importance in the price res- arXiv:2010.15105v1 [q-fin.ST] 28 Oct 2020 2 J. C. Henao-Londono et al.: Price response functions and spread impact in correlated ﬁnancial markets ponse signal. We split the time lag to understand the con- tribution of the immediate returns and the late returns. Finally, we shed light on the spread impact in the response functions for single stocks. The paper is organized as follows: in Sect. 2 we present our data set of stocks. We then analyze the deﬁnition of the price response functions and describe the physical and trade time in Sect. 3. We implement diﬀerent price re- sponses for several stocks and pairs of stocks in Sect. 4. In Sect. 5 we show how the relative position between trade signs and returns has a huge inﬂuence in the results of the computation of the response functions. In Sect. 6 we ex- plain in detail how the time lag τ behaves in the response functions. Finally, in Sect. 7 we analyze the spread impact in the price response functions. Our conclusions follow in Sect. 8. 2 Data set Modern ﬁnancial markets, are organized as a double con- tinuous auctions. Agents can place diﬀerent types of or- ders to buy or to sell a given number of shares, roughly categorized as market orders and limit orders. In this study, we analyzed trades and quotes (TAQ) data from the NASDAQ stock market. We selected NAS- DAQ because it is an electronic exchange where stocks are traded through an automated network of computers instead of a trading ﬂoor, which makes trading more ef- ﬁcient, fast and accurate. Furthermore, NASDAQ is the second largest stock exchange based on market capitaliza- tion in the world. In the TAQ data set, there are two data ﬁles for each stock. One gives the list of all successive quotes. Thus, we have the best bid price, best ask price, available volume and the time stamp accurate to the second. The other data ﬁle is the list of all successive trades, with the traded price, traded volume and time stamp accurate to the second. Despite the one second accuracy of the time stamps, in both ﬁles more than one quote or trade may be recorded in the same second. To analyze the response functions across diﬀerent stocks in Sects. 4, 5 and 6, we select the six companies with the largest average market capitalization (AMC) in three eco- nomic sectors of the S&P index in 2008. Table 1 shows the companies analyzed with their corresponding symbol and sector, and three average values for a year. To analyze the spread impact in response functions (Sect. 7), we select 524 stocks in the NASDAQ stock mar- ket for the year 2008. The selected stocks are listed in Appendix A. In order to avoid overnight eﬀects and any artifact due to the opening and closing of the market, we systemat- ically discard the ﬁrst ten and the last ten minutes of trading in a given day [8,14,20,43]. Therefore, we only consider trades of the same day from 9:40:00 to 15:50:00 New York local time. We will refer to this interval of time as the “market time”. The year 2008 corresponds to 253 business days. 3 Price response function deﬁnitions In Sect. 3.1 we introduce the fundamental quantities used in the price response deﬁnitions. In Sect. 3.2 we describe the physical time scale and the trade time scale. We in- troduce the price response functions used in literature in Sect. 3.3. 3.1 Key concepts Market orders are execute at the best available buy or sell price, limit orders set a maximum purchase price for a buy order, or a minimum sale price for a sell order. If the limit price is not matched, the order will not be carried out [14,15,22,34]. Limit orders often fail to result in an im- mediate transaction, and are stored in a queue called the limit order book [1,9,15,22]. The order book also identiﬁes the market participants behind the buy and sell orders, although some choose to remain anonymous. The order book is visible for all traders and its main purpose is to ensure that all traders have the same information on what is oﬀered on the market. The order book is the ultimate microscopic level of description of ﬁnancial markets. Buy limit orders are called “bids”, and sell limit or- ders are called “asks”. At any given time there is a best (lowest) oﬀer to sell with price a (t), and a best (highest) bid to buy with price b (t) [1,6,10,12,34]. The price gap between them is called the spread s (t) =a (t)−b (t) [6,7, 8,10,14,21,34]. Spreads are signiﬁcantly positively related to price and signiﬁcantly negatively related to trading vol- ume. Companies with more liquidity tend to have lower spreads [2,3,10,18]. The average of the best ask and the best bid is the midpoint price, which is deﬁned as [1,6,8,14,21,34] m (t) = a (t) +b (t) 2 (1) As the midpoint price depends on the quotes, it changes if the quotes change. The midpoint price grows if the best ask or the best bid grow. On the other hand, the midpoint price decreases if the best ask or the best bid decrease. Price changes are typically characterized as returns. If one denotesS (t) the price of an asset at timet, the return r(g) (t,τ ), at time t and time lag τ is simply the relative variation of the price from t to t +τ [6,11,26,27,28,33], r(g) (t,τ ) = S (t +τ)−S (t) S (t) (2) It is also common to deﬁne the returns as [4,6,11,13,14, 16,17,20,30,32] r(l) (t,τ ) = lnS (t +τ)− lnS (t) = lnS (t +τ) S (t) (3) Equations (2) and (3) agree if τ is small enough [6,11]. At longer timescales, midpoint prices and transaction prices rarely diﬀer by more than half the spread. The J. C. Henao-Londono et al.: Price response functions and spread impact in correlated ﬁnancial markets 3 T able 1. Analyzed companies. Company Symbol Sector Quotes 1 T rades2 Spread3 Alphabet Inc. GOOG Information Technology (IT) 164489 19029 0 .40$ Mastercard Inc. MA Information Technology (IT) 98909 6977 0 .38$ CME Group Inc. CME Financials (F) 98188 3032 1 .08$ Goldman Sachs Group Inc. GS Financials (F) 160470 26227 0 .11$ Transocean Ltd. RIG Energy (E) 107092 11641 0 .12$ Apache Corp. APA Energy (E) 103074 8889 0 .13$ 1 Average number of quotes from 9:40:00 to 15:50:00 New York time during 2008. 2 Average number of trades from 9:40:00 to 15:50:00 New York time during 2008. 3 Average spread from 9:40:00 to 15:50:00 New York time during 2008. midpoint price is more convenient to study because it avoids problems associated with the tendency of trans- action prices to bounce back and forth between the best bid and ask [14]. We deﬁne the returns via the midpoint price as r (t,τ ) = m (t +τ)−m (t) m (t) (4) The distribution of returns is strongly non-Gaussian and its shape continuously depends on the return period τ. Small τ values have fat tails return distributions [6]. The trade signs are deﬁned for general cases as ε (t) = sign (S (t)−m (t−δ)) (5) where δ is a positive time increment. Hence we have ε (t) = { +1, If S (t) is higher than the last m (t) −1, If S (t) is lower than the last m (t) (6) ε(t) = +1 indicates that the trade was triggered by a market order to buy and a trade triggered by a market order to sell yields ε(t) =−1 [6,8,20,29,37]. It is well-known that the series of the trade signs on a given stock exhibit large autocorrelation. A very plausible explanation of this phenomenon relies on the execution strategies of some major brokers on given markets. These brokers have large transactions to execute on the account of some clients. In order to avoid market making move- ments because of an inconsiderable large order, they tend to split large orders into small ones [11]. 3.2 Time deﬁnition A direct comparison between the trade time scale and the physical time scale is not possible. To compare them di- rectly we need to assume whether the midpoint price or the trade signs are on the same scale. We assume the mid- point prices in the trade time scale to be the same as the midpoint prices in physical time scale. Therefore, we have the time lag for both computations in seconds. This ap- proximation allow us to directly compare both scales to have an idea of the diﬀerence and similarities they have. In the other sections, as we are not directly comparing the time scales, the corresponding quantities of each time scale are not mixed. Thus physical time scale is measured in seconds and trade time scale is measured in trades. Due to the nature of the data, they are several options to deﬁne time for analyzing data. In general, the time series are indexed in calendar time (hours, minutes, seconds, milliseconds). Moreover, tick-by- tick data available on ﬁnancial markets all over the world is time stamped up to the millisecond, but the order of magnitude of the guaranteed precision is much larger, usu- ally one second or a few hundreds of milliseconds [7,11]. In several papers are used diﬀerent time deﬁnitions (calendar time, physical time, event time, trade time, tick time) [11, 19,36]. The TAQ data used in the analysis has the char- acteristic that the trades and quotes can not be directly related due to the time stamp resolution of only one sec- ond [43]. Hence, it is impossible to match each trade with the directly preceding quote. However, using a classiﬁca- tion for the trade signs, we can compute trade signs in two scales: trade time scale and physical time scale. The trade time scale is increased by one unit each time a transaction happens. The advantage of this count is that limit orders far away in the order book do not increase the time by one unit. The main outcome of trade time scale is its “smoothing” of data and the aggregational normality [11]. The physical time scale is increased by one unit each time a second passes. This means that computing the re- sponses in this scale involves sampling [19,43], which has to be done carefully when dealing for example with sev- eral stocks with diﬀerent liquidity. This sampling is made in the trade signs and in the midpoint prices. Facing the impossibility to relate midpoint prices and trade signs with the TAQ data in trade time scale, we will use the midpoint price of the previous second with all the trade signs of the current second. This will be our deﬁni- tion of trade time scale analysis for the response function analysis. For physical time scale, as we can sampling, we relate the unique value of midpoint price of a previous second with the unique trade sign value of the current second. 4 J. C. Henao-Londono et al.: Price response functions and spread impact in correlated ﬁnancial markets Trade time scale We use the trade sign classiﬁcation in trade time scale proposed in Ref. [43] and used in Refs. [38,39,42] that reads ε(t) (t,n ) =    sgn (S (t,n )−S (t,n− 1)), if S (t,n )⁄=S (t,n− 1) ε(t) (t,n− 1), otherwise (7) ε(t) (t,n ) = +1 implies a trade triggered by a market order to buy, and a valueε(t) (t,n ) =−1 indicates a trade triggered by a market order to sell. In the second case of Eq. (7), if two consecutive trades with the same trading direction did not exhaust all the available volume at the best quote, the trades would have the same price, and in consequence they will have the same trade sign. With this classiﬁcation we obtain trade signs for every single trade in the data set. According to Ref. [43], the average accuracy of the classiﬁcation is 85% for the trade time scale. The TAQ time step is one second, and as it is impossi- ble to ﬁnd the correspondences between trades and mid- point prices values inside a second step, We used the last midpoint price of every second as the representative value of each second. This introduce an apparent shift between trade signs and returns. In fact, we set the last midpoint price from the previous second as the ﬁrst midpoint price of the current second [43]. As we know the second in which the trades were made, we can relate the trade signs and the midpoint prices as shown in Fig. 1. For the trade time scale, there are in general, several midpoint prices in a second. For each sec- ond we select the last midpoint price value, and we relate it to the next second trades. In Fig. 1, the last midpoint price (circle) between the second −1 and 0 is related to all the trades (squares and triangles) in the second 0 to 1, and so on. In the seconds when the quotes do not change, the value of the previous second (vertical line over the physical time interval) is used. Thus, all the seconds in the open market time have a midpoint price value, and in consequence returns values. We assume that as long as no changes occurred in the quotes, the midpoint price remains the same as in the previous second. The methodology described is an approximation to compute the response in the trade time scale. A draw- back in the computation could come from the fact that the return of a given second is composed by the contribu- tion of small returns corresponding to each change in the midpoint price during a second. As we are assuming only one value for the returns in each second, we consider all the returns in one second interval to be positive or neg- ative with the same magnitude, which could not be the case. This could increase or decrease the response signal at the end of the computation. Figure 2 illustrate this point. Suppose there are three diﬀerent midpoint prices in one second interval and thus, Figure 1. Sketch of data processing for trade time scale. In the midpoint price time line, the vertical lines represent the change in price of the quotes and the circles represent the last price change in a quote in a second. In the trade signs time line, the squares represent the buy market orders and the triangles represent the sell market orders. The midpoint price time line and the trade sign time line are shifted in one second. Figure 2. Sketch of the return contributions from every mid- point price change in a second. The squares represent the rise of the price of the midpoint price and the triangles represent the decrease of the price of the midpoint price. We illustrate three cases: (top left) the changes of the midpoint prices and return are due to the rise of the prices, (top right) the changes of the midpoint prices and return are due to the decrease of the prices, and (bottom) the changes of the midpoint prices and return are due to a combination of rise and decrease of the prices. The blue vertical line represents the net return in each case. three diﬀerent returns for these three midpoint price val- ues. Furthermore, suppose that the volume of limit orders with the corresponding midpoint prices are the same in the bid and in the ask (the returns have the same mag- nitude). In the case of the top left (top right) sketch, all the changes are due to the rise (decrease) of the midpoint price, that means, consumption of the best ask (bid), so all the contributions of the individual returns in the sec- ond are positive (negative), and in consequence, the net return is positive (negative). In the case of the bottom, the changes are due to a combination of increase and de- crease of the midpoint price, so in the end, the individual returns sum up to a net return, which can be positive or negative, depending of the type of midpoint price values in the interval. Thus, in this case, we are assuming in the end J. C. Henao-Londono et al.: Price response functions and spread impact in correlated ﬁnancial markets 5 that all the returns were positive or negative, which prob- ably was not the case, and in consequence will increase or decrease the real value of the net return. In all cases, we choose the last change in the midpoint price in a second interval as described before in Fig. 1. We use this method knowing that the variation in one second of the midpoint price is not large (in average, the last midpoint price of a second diﬀer with the average midpoint of that second in 0 .007%), hence it can give us representative information on the response functions. Physical time scale We use the trade sign deﬁnition in physical time scale pro- posed in Ref. [43] and used in Refs. [38,42], that depends on the classiﬁcation in Eq. (7) and reads ε(p) (t) = { sgn (∑N (t) n=1 ε(t) (t,n ) ) , If N (t)> 0 0, If N (t) = 0 (8) where N (t) is the number of trades in a second interval. ε(p) (t) = +1 implies that the majority of trades in second t were triggered by a market order to buy, and a value ε(p) (t) =−1 indicates a majority of sell market orders. In this deﬁnition, they are two ways to obtain ε(p) (t) = 0. One way is that in a particular second there are no trades, and then no trade sign. The other way is that the addition of the trade signs (+1 and −1) in a second be equal to zero. In this case, there is a balance of buy and sell market orders. Market orders show opposite trade directions to limit order executed simultaneously. An executed sell limit or- der corresponds to a buyer-initiated market order. An ex- ecuted buy limit order corresponds to a seller-initiated market order. As the trade time scale, on the physical time scale we use the same strategy to obtain the midpoint price for every second, so all the seconds in the open market time have a midpoint price value. Even if there is no change of quotes in a second, it still has a midpoint price value and return value. Figure 3. Sketch of data processing for physical time scale. In the midpoint price time line, the horizontal lines between seconds represent the midpoint prices. In the trade signs time line, the horizontal lines between seconds represent the trade sign values. The midpoint price time line and the trade sign time line are shifted in one second. In this case we do not compare every single trade sign in a second, but the net trade sign obtained for every sec- ond with the deﬁnition, see Eq. (8). This can be seen in Fig. 3, where we related the midpoint price of the previous second with the trade sign of the current second. Accord- ing to Ref. [43], this deﬁnition has an average accuracy up to 82% in the physical time scale. 3.3 Response function deﬁnitions The response function measures price changes resulting from execution of market orders. In Refs. [5,6,8], Bouchaud et al. use a self-response function that only depends on the time lag τ. This function measures how much, on av- erage, the price moves up (down) at time τ conditioned to a buy (sell) order at time zero. They found for France Telecom that the response function increases by a factor 2 between τ = 1 and τ ≈ 1000 trades, before decreas- ing back. For larger τ, the response function decreases, and even becomes negative beyond τ≈ 5000. However, in some cases the maximum is not observed and rather the price response function keeps increasing mildly [6]. In Ref. [17], the price impact function, is deﬁned as the average price response due to a transaction as a func- tion of the transaction’s volume. Empirically the function is highly concave [17]. The curvature of the price impact function is entirely due to the probability that a transac- tion causes a nonzero impact. The larger the size of the transaction, the larger the probability. In Ref. [1], they found that the response function for three French stocks ﬁrst increases fromτ = 10s to a few hundred seconds, and then appears to decrease back to a ﬁnite value. In Ref. [4] they deﬁned a response function who mea- sures the average price change of a contracti at timet+τ, after experiencing a sign imbalance in contract j at time t. In this work τ is used in units of ﬁve minutes. In later works [20,43], Grimm et al. and Wang et al. use the logarithmic return for stock i and time lag τ, deﬁned via the midpoint price mi (t) to deﬁne a cross-response function. The response function measures how a buy or sell order at timet inﬂuences on average the price at a later time t +τ. The physical time scale was chosen since the trades in diﬀerent stocks are not synchronous (TAQ data). They found that in all cases, an increase to a maximum is followed by a decrease. The trend is eventually reversed. Finally, in Ref. [40], Wang et al. deﬁne the response function on a trade time scale (Totalview data), as the interest is to analyze the immediate responses. Here, the time lag τ is restricted to one trade, such that the price response quantiﬁes the price impact of a single trade. 4 Price response function implementations The main objective of this work is to analyze the price response functions. In general we deﬁne the self- and cross- response functions in a correlated ﬁnancial market as R(scale) ij (τ) = ⟨ r(scale) i (t− 1,τ )ε(scale) j (t) ⟩ average (9) where the index i and j correspond to stocks in the mar- ket, r(scale) i is the return of the stock i in a time lag τ 6 J. C. Henao-Londono et al.: Price response functions and spread impact in correlated ﬁnancial markets in the corresponding scale and ε(scale) j is the trade sign of the stock j in the corresponding scale. The superscript scale refers to the time scale used, whether physical time scale (scale = p) or trade time scale ( scale = t). Fi- nally, The subscript average refers to the way to average the price response, whether relative to the physical time scale (average = P ) or relative to the trade time scale (average =T ). We use the returns and the trade signs to deﬁne three response functions: trade time scale response, physical time scale response and activity response. To compare the three response functions, we deﬁne the following quantities Ej,d (t) = N (t)∑ n=1 ε(t) j,d (t,n ) = sgn (Ej,d (t))|Ej,d (t)| (10) ε(p) j,d (t) = sgn (Ej,d (t)) (11) where the subscript d refers to the days used in the res- ponse computation. We use Eq. (10) to make easier the comparison between the results, as all the deﬁned responses use the trade sign term. In Sect. 4.1 we analyze the responses functions in trade time scale, in Sect. 4.2 we analyze the responses functions in physical time scale and in Sect. 4.3 we deﬁne a response function to analyze the inﬂuence of the frequency of trades in a second. 4.1 Response functions on trade time scale We deﬁne the self- and cross-response functions in trade time scale, using the trade signs in trade time scale. For the returns, we select the last midpoint price of every sec- ond and compute them. We use this strategy with the TAQ data set considering that the price response in trade time scale can not be directly compared with the price response in physical time scale. In this case we relate each trade sign in one second with the midpoint price of the previous second. Then, to compute the returns, instead of using trades as the time lag (it would make no sense as all the midpoint price are the same in one second) we use seconds. Thus, we force the response in trade time scale to have a physical time lag, and then, be able to compare with the physical time scale response. This approximation is feasible considering the discussion in Sect. 3. The price response function in trade time scale is deﬁned as R(t) ij (τ) = ⟨ r(p) i (t− 1,τ )ε(t) j (t,n ) ⟩ T (12) where the superscript t refers to the trade time scale. We explicitly calculate the average in Eq. (12), R(t) ij (τ) = 1 ∑df d=d0 ∑tf t=t0Nj,d (t) df∑ d=d0 tf∑ t=t0 N (t)∑ n=1 r(p) i,d (t− 1,τ )ε(t) j,d (t,n ) (13) = df∑ d=d0 tf∑ t=t0 r(p) i,d (t− 1,τ ) ∑N (t) n=1 ε(t) j,d (t,n ) ∑df d=d0 ∑tf t=t0Nj,d (t) = df∑ d=d0 tf∑ t=t0 r(p) i,d (t− 1,τ ) sgn (Ej,d (t))w(t) j,d (t) (14) where w(t) j,d (t) = |Ej,d (t)| ∑df d=d0 ∑tf t=t0Nj,d (t) (15) is a weight function that depends on the normalization of the response. To compute the response functions on trade time scale, we used all the trade signs during a day in market time. As we can not associate an individual midpoint price with their corresponding trade signs, all the trade signs in one second are associated with the midpoint price of the pre- vious second. As τ depends on the midpoint price, even if we are using trade signs in trade time scale, the value of τ is in seconds. The results of Fig. 4 show the self- responses of the six stocks used in the analysis and the cross-responses for pairs of stocks representing three diﬀerent economic sec- tors. The self-response functions increase to a maximum and then slowly decrease. In some stocks this behavior is more pronounced than in others. For our selected tick- ers, a time lag of τ = 10 3s is enough to see an increase to a maximum followed by a decrease. Thus, the trend in the self-response functions is eventually reversed. On the other hand, the cross-response functions have smaller signal strength than the self-response functions. For our cross-response functions of stocks in the same sectors, some couples exhibit the increase-decrease behavior in- side a time lag of τ = 103s. Other couples seems to need a larger time lag to reach the decrease behavior. 4.2 Response functions on physical time scale One important detail to compute the market response in physical time scale is to deﬁne how the averaging of the function will be made, because the response functions highly diﬀer when we include or exclude ε(p) j (t) = 0 [43]. The price responses including ε(p) j (t) = 0 are weaker than the excluding ones due to the omission of direct inﬂuence of the lack of trades. However, either including or exclud- ingεp j (t) = 0 does not change the trend of price reversion J. C. Henao-Londono et al.: Price response functions and spread impact in correlated ﬁnancial markets 7 Figure 4. Self- and cross-response functions R(t) ij (τ) in 2008 versus time lag τ on a logarithmic scale in trade time scale. Self-response functions (left) of individual stocks and cross-response functions (right) of stock pairs from the same economic sector. versus the time lag, but it does aﬀect the response func- tion strength [42]. For a deeper analysis of the inﬂuence of the termε(p) j (t) = 0, we suggest to check Refs. [42,43]. We will only take in account the response functions excluding εp j (t) = 0. We deﬁne the self- and cross-response functions in phys- ical time scale, using the trade signs and the returns in physical time scale. The price response function on phys- ical time scale is deﬁned as R(p) ij (τ) = ⟨ r(p) i (t− 1,τ )ε(p) j (t) ⟩ P (16) where the superscript p refers to the physical time scale. The explicit expression corresponding to Eq. (16) reads R(p) ij (τ) = 1 ∑df d=d0 ∑tf t=t0η [ ε(p) j,d (t) ] df∑ d=d0 tf∑ t=t0 r(p) i,d (t− 1,τ )ε(p) j,d (t)η [ ε(p) j (t) ] (17) = df∑ d=d0 tf∑ t=t0 r(p) i,d (t− 1,τ ) ε(p) j,d (t)η [ ε(p) j,d (t) ] ∑df d=d0 ∑tf t=t0η [ ε(p) j,d (t) ] = df∑ d=d0 tf∑ t=t0 r(p) i,d (t− 1,τ ) sgn (Ej,d (t))w(p) j,d (t) (18) where η (x) = { 1, If x⁄= 0 0, otherwise (19) take only in account the seconds with trades and w(p) j,d (t) = η [sgn (Ej,d (t))] ∑df d=d0 ∑tf t=t0η [sgn (Ej,d (t))] (20) is a weight function that depends on the normalization of the response. The results showed in Fig. 5 are the self- and cross- response functions in physical time scale. For the self- response functions we can say again that in almost all the cases, an increase to a maximum is followed by a decrease. Thus, the trend in the self- and cross-response is eventu- ally reversed. In the cross-response functions, we have a similar behavior with the previous subsection, where the time lag in some pairs was not enough to see the decrease of the response. Compared with the response functions in trade time scale, the response functions in physical time scale are stronger. 4.3 Activity response functions on physical time scale Finally, we deﬁne the activity self- and cross-response func- tions in physical time scale, using the trade signs and the returns in physical time scale. We add a factor Nj,d (t) to check the inﬂuence of the frequency of trades in a sec- ond in the response functions. The activity price response function is deﬁned as R(p,a) ij (τ) = ⟨ r(p) i (t− 1,τ )ε(p) j (t)N (t) ⟩ P (21) where the superscript a refers to the activity response function. The corresponding explicit expression reads 8 J. C. Henao-Londono et al.: Price response functions and spread impact in correlated ﬁnancial markets Figure 5. Self- and cross-response functions R(p) ij (τ) excluding ε(p) j (t) = 0 in 2008 versus time lag τ on a logarithmic scale in physical time scale. Self-response functions (left) of individual stocks and cross-response functions (right) of stock pairs from the same economic sector. R(p,a) ij (τ) = 1 ∑df d=d0 ∑tf t=t0Nj,d (t) df∑ d=d0 tf∑ t=t0 r(p) i,d (t− 1,τ )ε(p) j,d (t)Nj,d (t) (22) = df∑ d=d0 tf∑ t=t0 r(p) i,d (t− 1,τ ) ε(p) j,d (t)Nj,d (t) ∑df d=d0 ∑tf t=t0Nj,d (t) = df∑ d=d0 tf∑ t=t0 r(p) i,d (t− 1,τ ) sgn (Ej,d (t))w(a) j,d (t) (23) where w(a) j,d (t) = Nj,d (t) ∑df d=d0 ∑tf t=t0Nj,d (t) (24) is a weight function that depends on the normalization of the response. AsEj,d (t) is the sum of +1 and−1 in one second and Nj,d (t) is the number of trades in a second, Nj,d (t)≥ Ej,d (t). Nj,d (t) = Ej,d (t) only when all the trades in a second are buys (+1). The trade weight w(t) j,d (t) reduces noises, The physi- cal weight w(p) j,d (t) gives every step the same weight, and the activity weightw(a) j,d (t) emphasizes seconds with large activity. In Fig. 6, we can see how the three responses have approximately the same shape, but the strength of the signal varies depending on the deﬁnition. The frequency of trades have a large inﬂuence in the responses. As predicted by the weights, the event response is weaker than the physical response, and the activity res- ponse is the strongest response. We propose a methodology to directly compare price response functions in trade time scale and physical time scale. Additionally, we suggest a new deﬁnition to measure the impact of the number of trades in physical time scale. In the three curves in the ﬁgure can be seen the increase- decrease behavior of the response functions. Our results are consistent with the current literature, where the results diﬀer about a factor of two depending on the time scale. We note that the activity response function implementation is only a test and was never deﬁned in previous works. That is why the diﬀerence of a factor of two can not be seen in Fig. 6 for R(p,a) ij (τ). 5 Time shift response functions The relative position between returns and trade signs di- rectly impact the result of the response functions. Shifting the values to the right or to the left either in trade time scale or physical time scale have approximately the same eﬀect. To test this claim, we used the deﬁnition of the res- ponse function from Ref. [43] and add a parameter ts that shifts the position between returns and trade signs. To see the impact of the time shift we analyzed the stocks showed in Table 1 in the year 2008. We used diﬀerent time shifts in the response function R(scale,s) ij (τ) = ⟨ r(scale) i (t−ts,τ )ε(scale) j (t) ⟩ average (25) where the index i and j correspond to stocks in the mar- ket, r(scale) i is the return of the stock i in a time lag τ with a time shift ts in the corresponding scale and ε(scale) j is the trade sign of the stock j in the correspond- ing scale. The superscript scale refers to the time scale used, whether physical time scale ( scale = p) or trade J. C. Henao-Londono et al.: Price response functions and spread impact in correlated ﬁnancial markets 9 Figure 6. Self- and cross-response functions R(scale) ij (τ) excluding ε(p) j (t) = 0 in 2008 versus time lag τ on a logarithmic scale. Self-response functions (left) of Goldman Sachs Group Inc. stock and cross-response functions (right) of Goldman Sachs Group Inc.-CME Group Inc. stocks. time scale (scale =t).R(scale,s) ij is the time shift price res- ponse function, where the superscript s refers to the time shift. Finally, The subscript average refers to the way to average the price response, whether relative to the physi- cal time scale (average =P ) or relative to the trade time scale (average =T ). We compute the response functions according to two cases. In one case we set τ to a constant value and vary ts, and in the other case we set ts to a constant value and varyτ. In Sect. 5.1 we analyze the inﬂuence of the time shift between the trade signs and returns in trade time scale and in Sect. 5.2 we analyze the inﬂuence of the time shift between the trade signs and returns in physical time scale. 5.1 Trade time scale shift response functions On the trade time scale we compute the response function R(t,s) ij (τ) = ⟨ r(t) i (t−ts,τ )ε(t) j (t) ⟩ t (26) In this case for r(t) i , we associate all the trade signs to a return value and create pseudo midpoint price values in trade time scale. Then, we shift the trade signs and the returns by trades. Hence, the time lag and time shift are in trade time scale. In Fig. 7, we show the response functions results for ﬁxed τ values while ts is variable. In the diﬀerent τ val- ues ﬁgures, the results are almost the same. The response functions are zero either if the time shift is larger than τ, or if the time shift is smaller than zero. However, related to the time lag, there is a zone where the signal is diﬀerent from zero. For values between zero and τ there is a peak in a position related to τ. The response function grows and decreases relatively fast. We tested the response function for ﬁxed time shift values while τ is variable. In Fig. 8 we use a time shift of 10 trades (left) and 100 trades (right). In both, self- and cross-response results are qualitatively the same. It can be seen that the response functions have a zero signal before the time shift. After the returns and trade signs ﬁnd their corresponding order the signals grow. In comparison with the values obtained in Fig. 4, it looks like the response function values with large time shift are stronger. How- ever, this is an eﬀect of the averaging of the functions. As the returns and trade signs are shifted, there are less val- ues to average, and then the signals are stronger. Anyway, the ﬁgure shows the importance of the position order be- tween the trade signs and returns to compute the response function. 5.2 Physical time scale shift response functions In the physical time scale we compute the response func- tion R(p,s) ij (τ) = ⟨ r(p) i (t−ts,τ )ε(p) j (t) ⟩ t (27) Similar to the results in Subsect. 5.1, Fig. 9 shows the responses functions for ﬁxed τ values while ts is variable. Again, the response functions are zero if the time shift is larger than the time lag, or if the time shift is smaller than zero. For every τ value, there is a peak. The peak grows and decay relatively fast. The response signal usu- ally starts to grow in zero or a little bit earlier and grows to a value around toτ. In this zone the response functions are diﬀerent to zero. The results for ﬁxed time shift values and variable time lag (ts = 10s andts = 100s) are shown in Fig. 10. The self- and cross-response results are qualitatively the same com- pared with the previous subsection. The response func- tions are zero before the time shift value. After the re- turns and the trade signs reach their order, the signals 10 J. C. Henao-Londono et al.: Price response functions and spread impact in correlated ﬁnancial markets Figure 7. Self-response functionsR(t,s) ii (τ) in 2008 versus shift for the Transocean Ltd. stock (top) and cross-response functions R(t,s) ij (τ) in 2008 versus shift for the Transocean Ltd.-Apache Corp. stocks (bottom) in trade time scale. Figure 8. Self- and cross-response functions R(t,s) ij (τ) in 2008 versus time lag τ on a logarithmic scale for diﬀerent shifts in trade time scale. Self-response functions (top) of individual stocks and cross-response functions (bottom) of stocks pairs from the same economic sector. We use time lag values τ = 10 trades (left) and τ = 100 (right). grow. The same eﬀect of the apparent stronger signal can be seen here, and again, it is due to the averaging values. The results in trade time scale and physical time scale can be explained understanding the dynamics of the mar- ket. A trade can or can not change the price of a ticker. Therefore, when a change in price happens, a change in midpoint price, and consequently in returns happens. Thus, it is extremely important to keep the order of the events and the relation between them. When we shift the trade signs and returns, this order is temporarily lost and as outcome the signal does not have any meaningful infor- mation. When the order is recovered during the shift, the signal grows again, showing response function values dif- ferent to zero. In this section we were interested only in the order (shift) and not in the responses values, which were analyzed in Sect. 4. A time shift smaller than zero J. C. Henao-Londono et al.: Price response functions and spread impact in correlated ﬁnancial markets 11 Figure 9. Self-response functions R(p,s) ii (τ) excluding ε(p) i (t) = 0 in 2008 versus shift for the Transocean Ltd. stock (top) and cross-response functions R(p,s) ij (τ) excluding ε(p) j (t) = 0 in 2008 versus shift for the Transocean Ltd.-Apache Corp. stocks (bottom) in physical time scale. does not have any useful information about the response. If the time shift is equal to zero, the signal is weak, due to the time needed by the market to react to the new information. On the other hand, a time shift larger than two steps shows the information is lost and the signal only grows when the original order is resumed. Then the question is what is the ideal time shift to compute the response functions. Our approach in Sect. 4 takes in account that the changes in the quotes are the ones that attract the agents to buy or sell their shares. Hence, they directly impact the trade signs. According to the results, the response can take up to two time steps in the corresponding scale to react to the change in quotes. Thus, a time shift larger than two time steps makes no sense. On the other hand, in the case of the physical time scale, where a sampling is used, to assure the selection of a midpoint price at the beginning of a second, it is a good strategy to use the last midpoint of the previous second as the ﬁrst midpoint price of the current second. In this case an apparent one second shift is used between returns and trade signs. 6 Time lag analysis Regarding Equation (2), we use a time lagτ in the returns to see the gains or loses in a future time. However, the strength of the return in the time lag should not be equal along its length. Then, we divide the full range time lag τ in an immediate time lag and in a late time lag as show in Fig. 11, where τ =τ ′ + (τ−τ ′) (28) for τ ′ <τ . This distinguish the returns depending on the time lag as the short (immediate) return τ ′ with the long returnτ−τ ′. This approach is similar to the concept used in Ref. [40], where the price impact for a single trade is estimated by the immediate response on an event time scale. In our case, we check all over the range of the time lag in the price response function on a physical time scale. To use the short and long time lag, we rewrite the returns in physical time scale as r(p,sl) i (t,τ ) = ln (mi (t +τ) mi (t) ) = ln [(mi (t +τ) mi (t +τ ′) )(mi (t +τ ′) mi (t) )] = ln (mi (t +τ) mi (t +τ ′) ) + ln (mi (t +τ ′) mi (t) ) ≈ mi (t +τ)−mi (t +τ ′) mi (t +τ ′) + mi (t +τ ′)−mi (t) mi (t) (29) where the superscript sl refers to short-long and the second term of the right part is constant with respect to τ. Replacing Eq. (29) in the price response function in physical time scale (Eq. (16)) we have R(p,sl) ij (τ) = ⟨ r(p,sl) i (t− 1,τ )ε(p) j (t) ⟩ P ≈ ⟨mi (t− 1 +τ)−mi (t− 1 +τ ′) mi (t− 1 +τ ′) ε(p) j (t) ⟩ P + ⟨mi (t− 1 +τ ′)−mi (t− 1) mi (t− 1) ε(p) j (t) ⟩ P (30) Where the ﬁrst term in the right side of Eq. (30) is the long response and the right term is the short response. Again, the right term of Eq. (30) is independent of τ. The results in Fig. 12 show the short response, the long response, the addition of the short response and long 12 J. C. Henao-Londono et al.: Price response functions and spread impact in correlated ﬁnancial markets Figure 10. Self- and cross-response functionsR(p,s) ij (τ) excludingε(p) j (t) = 0 in 2008 versus time lagτ on a logarithmic scale for diﬀerent shifts in physical time scale. Self-responses functions (top) of individual stocks and cross-response functions (bottom) of stocks pairs from the same economic sector. We use time lag values τ = 10 trades (left) and τ = 100 (right). Figure 11. τ value divided in short and long time lag. response (Sum), the original response, a random response and the value of τ ′. The main signal of the response function come from the short response. Depending on the stock and the value of τ ′ the long response can increase or decrease the short response signal, but in general the long response does not give a signiﬁcant contribution to the complete response. Beforeτ ′, the short response and long response are the same, as the self and cross-response deﬁnition do not de- ﬁne values smaller thanτ ′, so it is computed as the original response. In the ﬁgure, the curves of the short and long response are under the curve of the original response. After τ ′, the short response is a strong constant signal. On the other hand, the long response immediately fades, showing the small contribution to the ﬁnal response. To compare the signiﬁcance of the long response, We added a random response made with the trade signs used to compute the response but with a shuﬄe order. The long response and the random response are comparable, and show how the long response is not that representative in the ﬁnal res- ponse. If we add the short and long response, we obtain the original response. In Fig. 12, the original response (red line) has the same shape to the addition of the short and long response (green line). For the response functions that show the increase-decrease behavior in between the time lag τ = 10 3, the peak is usually between τ = 101 and τ = 102. In these cases the long response are always negative after theτ ′ value and is comparable in magnitude with the random signal. On the other hand, the response functions that requires a bigger time lag to show the increase-decrease behavior, have non negative long responses, but still they are comparable in magnitude with the random signal. According to our results, price response functions show a large impact on the ﬁrst instants of the time lag. We pro- posed a new methodology to measure this eﬀect and evalu- ate their consequences. The short response dominates the signal, and the long response vanishes. 7 Spread impact in price response functions When we calculate the price response functions, the sig- nal of the response depends directly on the analyzed stock. Thus, even if the responses functions are in the same scale, their values diﬀer from one to another. We choose the spread [35] to group 524 stocks in the NASDAQ stock market for the year 2008 in physical time scale, and check how the average strength of the price self-response func- tions in physical time scale behaved for this groups. For each stock we compute the spread in every second along J. C. Henao-Londono et al.: Price response functions and spread impact in correlated ﬁnancial markets 13 Figure 12. Self- and cross-response functions R(p,sl) ij (τ) excluding ε(p) j (t) = 0 in 2008 versus time lag τ on a logarithmic scale using a τ ′ = 40 in physical time scale. Self-response functions (left) of Alphabet Inc. stock and cross-response functions (right) of Alphabet Inc.-Mastercard Inc. stocks. the market time. Then we average the spread during the 253 business days in 2008. With this value we group the stocks. We used three intervals to select the stocks groups (s< 0.05$, 0.05$≤ s < 0.10$ and 0.10$≤ s < 0.40$). The detailed information of stocks, the spread and the groups can be seen in Appendix A. With the groups of the stocks deﬁned, we averaged the price response functions of each group. In Fig. 13 we show the average response functions for the three groups. The average price response function for the stocks with smaller spreads (more liquid) have in av- erage the weakest signal in the ﬁgure. On the other hand, the average price response function for the stocks with larger spreads (less liquid) have in average the strongest signal. According to the results described in Sect. 3 and 4, the average price response functions for all the groups follow the increment to a maximum followed by a decrease in the signal intensity. The strength of the price self-response function signals grouped by the spread can be explained knowing that the response functions directly depend on the trade signs. As long as the stock is liquid, the number of trade signs grow. Thus, at the moment of the averaging, the large amount of trades, reduces the response function signal. Therefore, the response function decrease as long as the liquidity grows, and as stated in the introduction the spread is neg- atively related to trading volume, hence, ﬁrms with more liquidity tend to have lower spreads. Finally, an interesting behavior can be seen in Fig. 13. Despite each stock has a particular price response accord- ing to the returns and trade signs, the average price res- ponse function for the diﬀerent groups seems to be quite similar. As all the analyzed stocks come from the same market we can infer that the general behavior of the mar- ket aﬀect all the stocks, inﬂuencing in average a group response. Figure 13. Average price self-response functions R(p) ii (τ) ex- cluding ε(p) i (t) = 0 in 2008 versus time lag τ on a logarithmic scale in physical time scale for 524 stocks divided in three rep- resentative groups. 8 Conclusion We went into detail about the response functions in corre- lated ﬁnancial markets. We deﬁne the trade time scale and physical time scale to compute the self- and cross-response functions for six companies with the largest average mar- ket capitalization for three diﬀerent economic sectors of the S&P index in 2008. Due to the characteristics of the data used, we had to classify and sampling values to ob- tain the corresponding quantities in diﬀerent time scales. The classiﬁcation and sampling of the data had impact on the results, making them smoother or stronger, but always keeping their shape and behavior. The response functions were analyzed according to the time scales. We proposed a new approach to compare price response functions from diﬀerent scales. We used the same midpoint prices in physical time scale with the correspond- ing trade signs in trade time scale or physical time scale. This assumption allowed us to compare both price res- 14 J. C. Henao-Londono et al.: Price response functions and spread impact in correlated ﬁnancial markets ponse functions and get an idea of how representative was the behavior obtained in both cases. For trade time scale, the signal is weaker due to the large averaging values from all the trades in a year. In the physical time scale, the response functions had less noise and their signal were stronger. We proposed an activity response to measure how the number of trades in every second highly impact the responses. As the response functions can not grow in- deﬁnitely with the time lag, they increase to a peak, to then decrease. It can be seen that the market needs time to react and revert the growing. In both time scale cases depending on the stocks, two characteristics behavior were shown. In one, the time lag was large enough to show the complete increase-decrease behavior. In the other case, the time lag was not enough, so some stocks only showed the growing behavior. We modify the response function to add a time shift parameter. With this parameter we wanted to analyze the importance in the order of the relation between re- turns and trade signs. In trade time scale and physical time scale we found similar results. When we shift the or- der between returns and trade signs, the information from the relation between them is temporarily lost and as out- come the signal does not have any meaningful information. When the order is recovered, the response function grows again, showing the expected shape. We showed that this is not an isolated conduct, and that all the shares used in our analysis exhibit the same behavior. Thus, even if they are values of time shift that can give a response function signal, empirically we propose this time shift should be a value betweents = (0, 2] time steps. We analyzed the impact of the time lag in the response functions. We divided the time lag in a short and long time lag. With this division we adapted the price response func- tion in physical time scale. The response function that depended on the short time lag, showed a stronger res- ponse. The long response function vanish, and depending on the stock could take negative and non-negative values comparable to a random signal. Finally, we checked the spread impact in price self- response functions. We divided 524 stocks from the NAS- DAQ stock market in three groups depending on the year average spread of every stock. The response functions sig- nal were stronger for the group of stocks with the larger spreads and weaker for the group of stocks with the smaller spreads. A general average price response behavior was spotted for the three groups, suggesting a market eﬀect on the stocks. 9 Author contribution statement TG proposed the research. SMK and JCHL developed the method of analysis. The idea to look the time shift and to analyze the spread impact was due to JCHL, and the idea of the time lag analysis was due to SMK. JCHL carried out the analysis. All the authors contributed equally to analyze the results and write the paper. We thank S. Wang for fruitful discussions. One of us (JCHL) acknowledges ﬁnancial support from the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) with the program “Research Grants - Doctoral Programmes in Germany” (Funding programme 57381412) Appendix A NASDAQ stocks used to analyze the spread impact We analyzed the spread impact in the response functions for 524 stocks from the NASDAQ stock market for the year 2008. In Tables 2, 3, 4 and 5, we listed the stocks in their corresponding spread groups. References 1. More statistical properties of order books and price im- pact. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applica- tions, 324(1):133 – 140, 2003. Proceedings of the Interna- tional Econophysics Conference. 2. Hee-Joon Ahn, Jun Cai, Yasushi Hamao, and Richard Y.K Ho. The components of the bid–ask spread in a limit-order market: evidence from the tokyo stock exchange. Journal of Empirical Finance , 9(4):399 – 430, 2002. 3. Yakov Amihud and Haim Mendelson. The eﬀects of beta, bid-ask spread, residual risk, and size on stock returns. The Journal of Finance , 44(2):479–486, 1989. 4. M Benzaquen, I Mastromatteo, Z Eisler, and J-P Bouchaud. Dissecting cross-impact on stock markets: an empirical analysis. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: The- ory and Experiment , 2017(2):023406, Feb 2017. 5. J. P. Bouchaud, J. Kockelkoren, and M. Potters. Random walks, liquidity molasses and critical response in ﬁnancial markets, 2004. 6. Jean-Philippe Bouchaud. The subtle nature of ﬁnancial random walks. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science, 15(2):026104, 2005. 7. Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, J. Doyne Farmer, and Fabrizio Lillo. How markets slowly digest changes in supply and demand. 2008. 8. Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, Yuval Gefen, Marc Potters, and Matthieu Wyart. Fluctuations and response in ﬁnancial markets: the subtle nature of “random” price changes. Quantitative Finance, 4(2):176–190, Apr 2004. 9. Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, Marc M´ ezard, and Marc Potters. Statistical properties of stock order books: empirical re- sults and models. Quantitative Finance, 2(4):251–256, Aug 2002. 10. Carolyn Callahan, Charles Lee, and Teri Yohn. Account- ing information and bid-ask spread. Accounting Horizons, 11:50–60, 01 1997. 11. Anirban Chakraborti, Ioane Toke, Marco Patriarca, and Fr´ ed´ eric Abergel. Econophysics: Empirical facts and agent- based models. arXiv.org, Quantitative Finance Papers , 09 2009. 12. Kee H Chung, Bonnie F [Van Ness], and Robert A [Van Ness]. Limit orders and the bid–ask spread. Journal of Financial Economics, 53(2):255 – 287, 1999. J. C. Henao-Londono et al.: Price response functions and spread impact in correlated ﬁnancial markets 15 T able 2. Information of the stocks in Group 1. Group 1 Symbol Company Spread 1 Symbol Company Spread 1 Symbol Company Spread 1 LUV Southwest Airlines Company 0 .01$ TSN Tyson Foods Inc. 0 .02$ F Ford Motor Company 0 .01$ BRCM Broadcom Inc. 0 .01$ CA CA Inc. 0 .02$ Q Qwest Communications Int. 0 .01$ TXN Texas Instruments Inc. 0 .01$ XEL Xcel Energy Inc. 0 .02$ ETFC E-Trade Financial Corp. 0 .01$ TER Teradyne Inc. 0 .01$ AA Alcoa Corp. 0 .02$ PFE Pﬁzer Inc. 0 .01$ MYL Mylan N.V. 0 .01$ KR Kroger Company 0 .02$ MOT Motus GI Holdings Inc. 0 .01$ HCBK Hudson City Bancorp 0 .01$ MRK Merck & Company Inc. 0 .02$ AMD Advanced Micro Devices 0 .01$ SPLS Staples Inc. 0 .01$ NSM Nationstar Mortgage Holdings 0 .02$ TLAB Tellabs Inc. 0 .01$ SGP Siamgas and Petrochemicals 0 .01$ WMT Walmart Inc. 0 .02$ INTC Intel Corp. 0 .01$ HST Host Hotels & Resorts Inc. 0 .01$ FITB Fifth Third Bancorp 0 .02$ TWX Time Warner Inc. 0 .01$ AES Aes Corp. 0 .01$ EK Eastman Kodak Company 0 .02$ CSCO Cisco Systems Inc. 0 .01$ KFT Kraft Foods Inc. 0 .01$ PHM PulteGroup Inc. 0 .02$ THC Tenet Healthcare Corp. 0 .01$ NTAP NetApp Inc. 0 .01$ JPM JP Morgan Chase & Co. 0 .02$ LSI Life Storage Inc. 0 .01$ BAC Bank of America Corp. 0 .01$ WAG Walgreen Co. 0 .02$ MU Micron Technology Inc. 0 .01$ HD Home Depot Inc. 0 .01$ SCHW Charles Schwab Corp. 0 .02$ EMC EMC Corp. 0 .01$ SOV Life Storage Inc. 0 .01$ RF Regions Financial Corp. 0 .02$ MSFT Microsoft Corp. 0 .01$ QLGC QLogic Corp. 0 .01$ ADBE Adobe Inc. 0 .02$ NOVL Novell Inc. 0 .01$ T AT&T Inc. 0 .01$ MAT Mattel Inc. 0 .02$ JAVA Sun Microsystems Inc. 0 .01$ GPS Gap Inc. 0 .01$ PAYX Paychex Inc. 0 .02$ ORCL Oracle Corp. 0 .01$ DIS Walt Disney Company 0 .01$ PGR Progressive Corp. 0 .02$ S Sprint Nextel Corp. 0 .01$ GM General Motors Company 0 .01$ HPQ HP Inc. 0 .02$ DELL Dell Technologies Inc. 0 .01$ JNPR Juniper Networks Inc. 0 .01$ DOW Dow Inc. 0 .02$ AMAT Applied Material Inc. 0 .01$ LOW Lowe’s Companies Inc. 0 .01$ TE TECO Energy Inc. 0 .02$ SLE Spark Energy Inc. 0 .01$ CBS CBS Corp. 0 .01$ BBBY Bed Bath & Beyond Inc. 0 .02$ SBUX Starbucks Corp. 0 .01$ CAG ConAgra Brands Inc. 0 .01$ JNJ Johnson & Johnson 0 .02$ DYN Dynergy Inc. 0 .01$ LLTC Linear Technology Corp. 0 .01$ IP International Paper Company 0 .02$ DUK Duke Energy Corp. 0 .01$ DTV DirecTV Group 0 .01$ RSH Respiri Ltd. 0 .02$ CMCSA Comcast Corp. 0 .01$ HBAN Huntington Bancshares Inc. 0 .01$ MER Mears Group PLC 0 .02$ IPG Interpublic Group of Co. 0 .01$ KG Kinross Gold Corp. 0 .01$ HAL Halliburton Company 0 .02$ BSX Boston Scientiﬁc Corp. 0 .01$ CMS CMS Energy Corp. 0 .01$ KO Coca-Cola Company 0 .02$ GE General Electric Company 0 .01$ ODP Oﬃce Depot Inc. 0 .01$ PBCT People’s United Financial Inc. 0 .02$ SYMC Symantec Corp. 0 .01$ NVLS Nivalis Therapeutics Inc. 0 .01$ WU Western Union Company 0 .02$ C Citigroup Inc. 0 .01$ WFC Wells Fargo & Company 0 .01$ USB U.S. Bancorp 0 .02$ CPWR Ocean Thermal Energy 0 .01$ MO Altria Group Inc. 0 .01$ MCHP Microchip Technology Inc. 0 .02$ NVDA Nvidia Corp. 0 .01$ VZ Verizon Communications 0 .01$ SO Southern Company 0 .02$ YHOO Yahoo Inc. 0 .01$ DHI D. R. Horton Inc. 0 .01$ BJS BJ’s Wholesale Club Holdings 0 .02$ BMY Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. 0 .01$ SNDK Sandisk Corp. 0 .01$ MAS Masco Corp. 0 .02$ ALTR Altair Engineering Inc. 0 .01$ CCE Coca-Cola Enterprises 0 .01$ NWL Newell Brands Inc. 0 .02$ GLW Corning Inc. 0 .01$ NI NiSource Inc. 0 .01$ M Macy’s Inc. 0 .02$ JDSU JDS Uniphase Corp. 0 .01$ EXPE Expedia Group Inc. 0 .01$ CVS CVS Health Corp. 0 .02$ NCC NCC Group 0 .01$ AIG American International 0 .01$ CTSH Cognizant Tech. Solutions 0 .02$ EBAY eBay Inc. 0 .01$ INTU Intuit Inc. 0 .01$ GNW Genworth Financial Inc. 0 .02$ EP El Paso Corp. 0 .01$ LTD Limited Brands Inc. 0 .01$ DFS Discover Financial Services 0 .02$ XRX Xerox Holdings Corp. 0 .01$ CNP CenterPoint Energy Inc. 0 .02$ KEY KeyCorp 0 .02$ WIN Windstream Holdings Inc. 0 .01$ QCOM Qualcomm Inc. 0 .02$ ADI Analog Devices Inc. 0 .02$ XLNX Xilinx Inc. 0 .01$ JBL Jabil Inc. 0 .02$ SYY Sysco Corp. 0 .02$ 1 Average spread from 9:40:00 to 15:50:00 New York time during 2008. 16 J. C. Henao-Londono et al.: Price response functions and spread impact in correlated ﬁnancial markets T able 3. Information of the stocks in Group 1. Group 1 Symbol Company Spread 1 Symbol Company Spread 1 Symbol Company Spread 1 TGT Target Corp. 0 .02$ MI Marshall and Lisley Corp. 0 .03$ WMB Williams Companies Inc. 0 .02$ VLO Valero Energy Corp. 0 .02$ AEP American Electric Power Co. 0 .03$ SE Sea Ltd American Dep. 0 .02$ MMC Marsh & McLennan Co. 0 .02$ NEM Newmont Corp. 0 .03$ PG Procter & Gamble Co. 0 .02$ CPB Campbell Soup Company 0 .02$ MRO Marathon Oil Corp. 0 .03$ CIEN Ciena Corp. 0 .02$ TYC Tyco International PLC 0 .02$ ITW Illionois Tool Works Inc. 0 .03$ LEN Lennar Corp. 0 .02$ MCD McDonald’s Corp. 0 .02$ FFIV F5 Networks Inc. 0 .03$ AKAM Akamai Technologies 0 .02$ HON Honeywell International Inc. 0 .02$ CVX Chevron Corp. 0 .03$ UNH UnitedHealth Group Inc. 0 .02$ DF Dean Foods Company 0 .02$ PCAR PACCAR Inc. 0 .03$ DD DuPont de Nemours Inc. 0 .02$ NWSA News Corp. 0 .02$ OMC Omnicom Group Inc. 0 .03$ KLAC KLA Corp. 0 .02$ URBN Urban Outﬁtters Inc. 0 .02$ XRAY DENTSPLY SIRONA Inc. 0 .03$ CIT CIT Group Inc. 0 .02$ RX Recylex 0 .02$ COP ConocoPhillips 0 .03$ LEG Leggett & Platt Inc. 0 .02$ BBY Best Buy Inc. 0 .02$ PCS MetroPCS Communications 0 .03$ WFMI Whole Foods Market Inc. 0 .02$ CCL Carnival Corp. 0 .02$ RHI Robert Half International Inc. 0 .03$ MS Morgan Stanley 0 .02$ WMI WMI Investment Corp. 0 .02$ SEE Sealed Air Corp. 0 .03$ VRSN VeriSign Inc. 0 .02$ POM Polymet Mining Corp. 0 .02$ COST Costco Wholesale Corp. 0 .03$ AN AutoNation Inc. 0 .02$ ERTS Electronic Arts Inc. 0 .03$ FIS Fidelity National Info. Services 0 .03$ RHT Red Hat Inc. 0 .02$ MBI MBIA Inc. 0 .03$ PKI PerkinElmer Inc. 0 .03$ CTXS Citrix Systems Inc. 0 .02$ ADM Archer-Daniels-Midland Co. 0 .03$ BMC BMC Software Inc. 0 .03$ MDT Medtronic plc. 0 .02$ PEP PepsiCo Inc. 0 .03$ RRD R.R. Donnelley & Sons Co. 0 .03$ NBR Nabors Industries 0 .02$ CBG CBRE Group Inc. 0 .03$ UTX United Technologies Corp. 0 .03$ MOLX Molex Inc. 0 .02$ IR Ingersoll Rand Inc. 0 .03$ D Dominion Energy Inc. 0 .03$ GILD Gilead Sciences Inc. 0 .02$ HNZ Heinz Company 0 .03$ PBI Pitney Bowes Inc. 0 .03$ CHK Chesapeake Energy 0 .02$ CTX Qwest Corp. 0 .03$ ACAS American Capital Ltd. 0 .03$ TJX TJX Companies Inc. 0 .02$ TSO Tesoro Corp. 0 .03$ K Kellogg Company 0 .03$ AMGN Amgen Inc. 0 .02$ IGT International Game Tech. 0 .03$ JCP J. C. Penney Company 0 .03$ SWY Safeway Inc. 0 .02$ WYN Wynnstay Group PLC 0 .03$ AMT American Tower Corp. 0 .03$ XOM Exxon Mobil Corp. 0 .02$ GT The Goodyear Tire & Rubber 0 .03$ ALL Allstate Corp. 0 .03$ STZ Constellation Brands 0 .02$ JCI Johnson Controls Int. 0 .03$ MWV MeadWestvaco Corp. 0 .03$ ADSK Autodesk Inc. 0 .02$ JWN Nordstrom Inc. 0 .03$ HRB H&R Block Inc. 0 .03$ LLY Eli Lilly and Company 0 .02$ FRX Fennec Pharmaceutical Inc. 0 .03$ NYT New York times Company 0 .04$ CTAS Cintas Corp. 0 .02$ FHN First Horizon National Corp. 0 .03$ RDC Redcape Hotel Group 0 .04$ LIZ Liz Claiborne Inc. 0 .02$ ABT Abbott Laboratories 0 .03$ PTV Pactiv Company 0 .04$ GCI Gannett Co. Inc. 0 .02$ ADP Automatic Data Processing 0 .03$ FISV Fiserv Inc. 0 .04$ AXP American Express Co. 0 .02$ PBG Paciﬁc Brands Ltd. 0 .03$ EXPD Expeditors Int.of Washington 0 .04$ TIE Titanium Metals Corp. 0 .02$ ROST Ross Stores Inc. 0 .03$ BBT BB&T Corp. 0 .04$ SAI SAIC Inc. 0 .02$ KBH KB Home 0 .03$ PCG Paciﬁc Gas & Electric Co. 0 .04$ PDCO Patterson Companies 0 .02$ YUM Yum! Brands Inc. 0 .03$ BIG Big Lots Inc. 0 .04$ WYE Wyeth Inc. 0 .02$ MAR Marriott International 0 .03$ KMX CarMax Inc. 0 .04$ COH Cochlear Ltd. 0 .02$ STJ St Jude Medical Inc. 0 .03$ TSS Total System Services Inc. 0 .04$ CVG Convergys Corp. 0 .02$ FDO Family Dollar Stores Inc. 0 .03$ BK The Bank of N. Y. Mellon Corp. 0 .04$ WDC Western Digital Corp. 0 .02$ ED Consolidated Edison Inc. 0 .03$ TEL Tellurian Inc. 0 .04$ AVP Avon Products Inc. 0 .02$ UNM Unum Group 0 .03$ KSS Kohl’s Corp. 0 .04$ A Agilent Technologies 0 .02$ ORLY O’Reilly Automotive Inc. 0 .03$ CAT Caterpillar Inc. 0 .04$ JNY Jones Apparel Group 0 .02$ SVU SUPERVALU Inc. 0 .03$ HSY The Hershey Company 0 .04$ SLM SLM Corp. 0 .02$ EMR Emerson Electric Company 0 .03$ GIS General Mills Inc. 0 .04$ 1 Average spread from 9:40:00 to 15:50:00 New York time during 2008. J. C. Henao-Londono et al.: Price response functions and spread impact in correlated ﬁnancial markets 17 T able 4. Information of the stocks in Group 1 and 2. Group 1 Symbol Company Spread 1 Symbol Company Spread 1 Symbol Company Spread 1 DOV Dover Corp. 0 .05$ CAM Corporate Actions Middleware 0 .06$ HAS Hasbro Inc. 0 .04$ VIAB Viacom Inc. 0 .05$ RAI Reynolds American Inc. 0 .06$ XTO XTO Energy Inc. 0 .04$ ABC AmerisourceBergen Corp. 0 .05$ NOC Northrop Grumman Corp. 0 .06$ PPL PPL Corp. 0 .04$ APC Anadarko Petroleum Corp. 0 .05$ PLL Piedmont Lithium Ltd. 0 .06$ HOG Harley-Davidson Inc. 0 .04$ CBE Cooper Industries 0 .05$ SYK Stryker Corp. 0 .06$ UPS United Parcel Service 0 .04$ FAST Fastenal Company 0 .05$ SRE Sempra Energy 0 .06$ HSP Hospira Inc. 0 .04$ MHP McGraw-Hill Companies Inc. 0 .05$ TIF Tiﬀany & Co. 0 .06$ CTL CenturyLink Inc. 0 .04$ AMZN Amazon.com Inc. 0 .05$ NUE Nucor Corp. 0 .06$ TDC Teradata Corp. 0 .04$ EQR Equity Residential 0 .05$ OXY Occidental Petroleum Corp. 0 .06$ BA Boeing Company 0 .04$ CL Colgate-Palmolive Company 0 .05$ FPL First Trust New Opportunities 0 .06$ BAX Baxter International Inc. 0 .04$ ECL Ecolab Inc. 0 .05$ ESRX Express Scripts Holding Co. 0 .06$ PGN Progress Energy Inc. 0 .04$ MKC McCormick & Company Inc. 0 .05$ AIV Apartment Investment Co. 0 .06$ DRI Darden Restaurants Inc. 0 .04$ AOC Aon Corp. 0 .05$ BHI Boulevard Holdings Inc. 0 .06$ JNS Janus Capital Group Inc. 0 .04$ TXT Textron Inc. 0 .05$ FCX Freeport-McMoRan Inc. 0 .06$ BMS Bristol-Myers Squibb 0 .04$ CSX CSX Corp. 0 .05$ APOL Apollo Group Inc. 0 .06$ RTN Raytheon Company 0 .04$ PNW Pinnacle West Capital Corp. 0 .05$ SCG Scentre Group Ltd. 0 .06$ CVC Cablevision Systems 0 .04$ KIM Kimco Realty Corp. 0 .05$ CB Chubb Limited 0 .06$ PWR Quanta Services Inc. 0 .04$ WPI Watson Pharmaceuticals 0 .05$ IBM Int. Business Machines Corp. 0 .06$ LXK Lexmark International 0 .04$ MET Metlife Inc. 0 .05$ GME GameStop Corp. 0 .06$ CELG Celgene Corp. 0 .04$ UST ProShares Ultra 0 .05$ DE Deere & Company 0 .06$ MMM 3M Company 0 .04$ TMO Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc Inc. 0 .05$ LNC Lincoln National Corp. 0 .06$ RSG Republic Services Inc. 0 .04$ HCP HCP Inc. 0 .05$ AVY Avery Dennison Corp. 0 .07$ DNR Denbury Resources Inc. 0 .04$ SIAL Sigma-Aldrich Corp. 0 .05$ MCK McKesson Corp. 0 .07$ MTW Manitowoc Company 0 .04$ FLIR FLIR Systems Inc. 0 .05$ PLD Prologis Inc. 0 .07$ NE Noble Corp. 0 .04$ EL Estee Lauder Companies 0 .05$ DGX Quest Diagnostics Inc. 0 .07$ NDAQ Nasdaq Inc. 0 .04$ AYE Allegheny Energy Inc. 0 .05$ CERN Cerner Corp. 0 .07$ CINF Cincinnati Financial 0 .04$ CI Cigna Corp. 0 .05$ IRM Irom Mountain Inc. 0 .07$ BIIB Biogen Inc. 0 .04$ NFLX Netﬂix Inc. 0 .05$ COL Rockwell Collins Inc. 0 .07$ KMB Kimberly-Clark Corp. 0 .04$ CHRW C.H. Robinson Worlwide Inc. 0 .05$ NU NeutriSci International Inc. 0 .07$ EIX Edison International 0 .04$ GENZ Genzyme Corp. 0 .05$ CVH Coventry Health Care Inc. 0 .07$ NRG NRG Energy Inc. 0 .04$ DDR DDR Corp. 0 .05$ WFR MEMC Electronic Materials 0 .07$ IVZ Invesco Ltd. 0 .04$ WFT West Fraser Timber Co. Ltd. 0 .05$ AGN Allergan PLC. 0 .07$ AEE Ameren Corp. 0 .04$ MHS Medco Health Solutions Inc. 0 .05$ GAS GAS 0 .07$ AAPL Apple Inc. 0 .04$ DTE DTE Energy Company 0 .05$ APH Amphenol Corp. 0 .07$ CAH Cardinal Health Inc. 0 .04$ TRV The Travelers Companies 0 .05$ EXC Exelon Corp. 0 .07$ MCO Moody’s Corp. 0 .04$ NYX NYSE Group IPO 0 .05$ WEC WEC Energy Group Inc. 0 .07$ Group 2 COF Capital One Financial Corp. 0 .06$ AFL AFLAC Inc. 0 .07$ Symbol Company Spread 1 WLP WellPoint Inc. 0 .06$ NOV National Oilwell Varco Inc. 0 .07$ HOT Hot Topic Inc. 0 .05$ TWC TWC Entreprises Ltd. 0 .06$ SUN Sunoco LP 0 .07$ GPC Genuine Parts Co 0 .05$ SWN Southwestern Energy Co. 0 .06$ BTU Peabody Energy Corp. 0 .07$ PEG Public Service Ent. 0 .05$ NSC Norfolk Southern Corp. 0 .06$ ROK Rockwell Automation Inc. 0 .07$ EFX Equifax Inc. 0 .05$ CMA Comerica Inc. 0 .06$ PCL Plum Creek Timber Co. Inc. 0 .07$ COV Covidien Ltd. 0 .05$ NKE Nike Inc. 0 .06$ JOYG Joy Global Inc. 0 .07$ AET Aetna Inc. 0 .05$ EQ Equillium Inc. 0 .06$ AMP Ameriprise Financial Inc. 0 .07$ XL XL Group Ltd. 0 .05$ CLX Clorox Company 0 .06$ TAP Molson Coors Beverage Co. 0 .07$ 1 Average spread from 9:40:00 to 15:50:00 New York time during 2008. 18 J. C. Henao-Londono et al.: Price response functions and spread impact in correlated ﬁnancial markets T able 5. Information of the stocks in Group 2 and 3. Group 2 Symbol Company Spread 1 Symbol Company Spread 1 Symbol Company Spread 1 ATI Allegheny Technologies Inc. 0 .09$ MUR Murphy Oil Corp. 0 .13$ GD General Dynamics Corp. 0 .07$ ETN Eaton Corp. 0 .09$ ROP Roper Technologies Inc. 0 .13$ CSC Computer Sciences Corp. 0 .07$ VTR Ventas Inc. 0 .09$ JEC Jura Energy Corp. 0 .13$ FII Federated Investors Inc. 0 .07$ Group 3 HES Hess Corp. 0 .13$ HIG Hartford Fin. Services Group 0 .07$ Symbol Company Spread 1 ETR Entergy Corp. 0 .13$ ITT ITT Inc. 0 .07$ HAR Harman Int. Industries Inc. 0 .10$ MON Monsanto Company 0 .14$ TROW T. Rowe Price Group Inc. 0 .07$ NFX Nasdaq Futures 0 .10$ DV Dolly Varden Silver Corp. 0 .14$ MDP Meredith Corp. 0 .07$ EQT EQT Corp. 0 .10$ VFC V.F. Corp. 0 .14$ GR Goodrich Corp. 0 .07$ HRS Harris Corp. 0 .10$ GWW W. W. Grainger Inc. 0 .14$ AKS AK Steel Holding Corp. 0 .07$ COG Cabot Oil & Gas Corp. 0 .10$ WHR Whirlpool Corp. 0 .15$ PFG Principal Financial Group 0 .07$ PPG PPG Industries Inc. 0 .10$ MOS Mosaic Company 0 .15$ HUM Humana Inc. 0 .07$ MEE Massey Energy Company 0 .10$ SPG Simon Property Group 0 .15$ STI SunTrust Banks Inc. 0 .07$ HP Helmerich & Payne Inc. 0 .10$ EOG EOG Resources Inc. 0 .15$ CMI Cummins Inc. 0 .08$ DVN Devon Energy Corp. 0 .10$ VMC Vulcan Materials Co 0 .16$ STR Questar Corp. 0 .08$ IFF Int. Flavors & Fragrances 0 .10$ X United States Steel Corp. 0 .16$ ZMH Zimmer Holdings Inc. 0 .08$ LH Laboratory Corp. 0 .10$ SHLD Sears Holding 0 .16$ FO Fortune Brands Inc. 0 .08$ UNP Union Paciﬁc Corp. 0 .10$ LLL L3 Technologies Inc. 0 .17$ SII Sprott Inc. 0 .08$ EW Edwards Lifesciences Corp. 0 .10$ WYNN Wynn Resorts Ltd. 0 .17$ HRL Hormel Foods Corp. 0 .08$ STT State Street Corp. 0 .10$ BXP Boston Properties Inc. 0 .17$ OI O-I Glass Inc. 0 .08$ RRC Range Resources Corp. 0 .10$ PSA Public Storaga 0 .17$ HCN Welltower Inc. 0 .08$ SJM J. M. Smucker Company 0 .10$ PCP Precision Castparts Corp. 0 .18$ ANF Abercrombie & Fitch Co. 0 .08$ SNA Snap-On Inc. 0 .11$ VNO Vornado Realty 0 .18$ LM Legg Mason Inc. 0 .08$ PNC PNC Fin. Services Group 0 .11$ DNB Dun & Bradstreet Corp. 0 .19$ FDX FedEx Corp. 0 .08$ CEG Constellation Energy Group 0 .11$ CLF Cleveland-Cliﬀs Inc. 0 .19$ PRU Prudential Financial Inc. 0 .08$ LMT Lockheed Martin Corp. 0 .11$ FLR Fluor Corp. 0 .20$ DHR Danaher Corp. 0 .08$ FTI TechnipFMC PLC 0 .11$ PCLN Priceline Group Inc. 0 .20$ WY Weyerhaeuser Company 0 .08$ CNX CNX Resources Corp. 0 .11$ MTB M&T Banc Corp. 0 .20$ OKE ONEOK Inc. 0 .08$ ARG Amerigo Resources Ltd. 0 .11$ AVB AvalonBay Comm. Inc. 0 .21$ SRCL Stericycle Inc. 0 .09$ DVA DaVita Inc. 0 .11$ BEN Franklin Resources Inc. 0 .21$ LUK Leucadia National Corp. 0 .09$ GS Goldman Sachs Group Inc. 0 .11$ DO Diamond Oﬀshore Drilling 0 .23$ BLL Ball Corp. 0 .09$ TMK Torchmark Corp. 0 .12$ CF CF Industries Holdings 0 .24$ FE FirstEnergy Corp. 0 .09$ EMN Eastman Chemical Co. 0 .12$ AZO AutoZone Inc. 0 .25$ SWK Stanley Black & Decker Inc. 0 .09$ RIG Transocean Ltd. 0 .12$ FLS Flowserve Corp. 0 .27$ ESV Ensco PLC 0 .09$ PX Pelangio Exploration Inc. 0 .12$ ICE Intercontinental Exc. Inc. 0 .28$ SHW Sherwin-Williams Company 0 .09$ RL Ralph Lauren Corp. 0 .12$ MA Mastercard Inc. 0 .38$ BDX Becton, Dickinson and Co. 0 .09$ R Ryder System 0 .12$ FSLR First Solar Inc. 0 .38$ VAR Varian Medical Systems Inc. 0 .09$ MIL Millipore Corp. 0 .12$ CMG Chipotle Mexican Grill 0 .38$ TEG Ten Ent. Group PLC 0 .09$ CRM Salesforce.com Inc. 0 .12$ PH Parker-Hanniﬁn Corp. 0 .09$ NTRS Northern Trust Corp. 0 .12$ ACE ACE Ltd. 0 .09$ APD Air Products and Chemicals 0 .12$ BNI Burlington Northern Santa Fe 0 .09$ ANR Alpha Natural Resources 0 .13$ ACS Aﬃliated Computer Services 0 .09$ NBL Noble Energy Inc. 0 .13$ PXD Pioneer Natural Resources 0 .09$ APA Apache Corp. 0 .13$ AIZ Assurant Inc. 0 .09$ FMC FMC Corp. 0 .13$ WAT Waters Corp. 0 .09$ BDK Black and Decker Corp. 0 .13$ 1 Average spread from 9:40:00 to 15:50:00 New York time during 2008. J. C. Henao-Londono et al.: Price response functions and spread impact in correlated ﬁnancial markets 19 13. Rama Cont. Empirical properties of asset returns: stylized facts and statistical issues. Quantitative Finance , 1:223– 236, 2001. 14. J. Doyne Farmer, L´ aszl´ o Gillemot, Fabrizio Lillo, Szabolcs Mike, and Anindya Sen. What really causes large price changes? Quantitative Finance, 4(4):383–397, 2004. 15. J. Doyne Farmer, Paolo Patelli, and Ilija I. Zovko. The predictive power of zero intelligence in ﬁnancial markets, 2003. 16. Xavier Gabaix, Parameswaran Gopikrishnan, Vasiliki Plerou, and H. Stanley. A theory of power-law distribu- tions in ﬁnancial market ﬂuctuations. Nature, 423:267–70, 06 2003. 17. Austin Gerig. A theory for market impact: How order ﬂow aﬀects stock price. arXiv.org, Quantitative Finance Papers, 04 2008. 18. Lawrence R Glosten and Lawrence E Harris. Estimating the components of the bid/ask spread. Journal of Finan- cial Economics, 21(1):123 – 142, 1988. 19. Jim E. Griﬃn and Roel C. A. Oomen. Sampling returns for realized variance calculations: Tick time or transaction time? Econometric Reviews, 27(1-3):230–253, 2008. 20. Stephan Grimm and Thomas Guhr. How spread changes aﬀect the order book: comparing the price responses of order deletions and placements to trades. The European Physical Journal B , 92:1–11, 2018. 21. Sebastian Krause, Jonas Fiegen, and Thomas Guhr. Emer- gence of stylized facts during the opening of stock markets. The European Physical Journal B , 2018. 22. Fabrizio Lillo. Introduction to market microstructure and heterogeneity of investors , pages 73–89. 2019. 23. Fabrizio Lillo, J Farmer, and Rosario Mantegna. Master curve for price-impact function. Nature, 421:129–30, 02 2003. 24. Fabrizio Lillo and J. Doyne Farmer. The long memory of the eﬃcient market. Studies in Nonlinear Dynamics & Econometrics, 8(3), 2004. 25. Juan Camilo Henao Londono. First release - price res- ponse functions and spread impact in correlated ﬁnancial markets code, 2020. 26. Michael C. M¨ unnix, Rudi Sch¨ afer, and Thomas Guhr. Compensating asynchrony eﬀects in the calculation of ﬁ- nancial correlations. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 389(4):767 – 779, 2010. 27. Michael C. M¨ unnix, Rudi Sch¨ afer, and Thomas Guhr. Impact of the tick-size on ﬁnancial returns and correla- tions. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applica- tions, 389(21):4828 – 4843, 2010. 28. Michael C. M¨ unnix, Rudi Sch¨ afer, and Thomas Guhr. Sta- tistical causes for the epps eﬀect in microstructure noise. International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance , 14(08):1231–1246, 2011. 29. Vasiliki Plerou, Parameswaran Gopikrishnan, Xavier Gabaix, and H. Eugene Stanley. Quantifying stock-price response to demand ﬂuctuations. Phys. Rev. E , 66:027104, Aug 2002. 30. Vasiliki Plerou, Parameswaran Gopikrishnan, Bernd Rosenow, Lu´ ıs A. Nunes Amaral, Thomas Guhr, and H. Eugene Stanley. Random matrix approach to cross cor- relations in ﬁnancial data. Phys. Rev. E , 65:066126, Jun 2002. 31. Vasiliki Plerou, H Eugene Stanley, Xavier Gabaix, and Parameswaran Gopikrishnan. On the origin of power-law ﬂuctuations in stock prices. Quantitative Finance, 4(1):11– 15, 2004. 32. Bernd Rosenow. Fluctuations and market friction in ﬁ- nancial trading. International Journal of Modern Physics C, 13(03):419–425, 2002. 33. Thilo A. Schmitt, Desislava Chetalova, Rudi Sch¨ afer, and Thomas Guhr. Non-stationarity in ﬁnancial time series: Generic features and tail behavior. EPL (Europhysics Let- ters), 103(5):58003, sep 2013. 34. Eric Smith, J Doyne Farmer, L´ aszl´ o Gillemot, and Supriya Krishnamurthy. Statistical theory of the continuous double auction. Quantitative Finance, 3(6):481–514, 2003. 35. Martin Theissen, Sebastian M. Krause, and Thomas Guhr. Regularities and irregularities in order ﬂow data. The Eu- ropean Physical Journal B , 90(218), 2017. 36. Ioane Muni Toke. “Market Making” in an Order Book Model and Its Impact on the Spread , pages 49–64. Springer Milan, Milano, 2011. 37. Bence T´ oth, Imon Palit, Fabrizio Lillo, and J. Doyne Farmer. Why is equity order ﬂow so persistent? Jour- nal of Economic Dynamics and Control , 51(C):218–239, 2015. 38. Shanshan Wang. Trading strategies for stock pairs regard- ing to the cross-impact cost, 2017. 39. Shanshan Wang and Thomas Guhr. Local ﬂuctuations of the signed traded volumes and the dependencies of de- mands: a copula analysis. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment , 2018(3):033407, mar 2018. 40. Shanshan Wang, Sebastian Neus¨ uß, and Thomas Guhr. Grasping asymmetric information in price impacts. The European Physical Journal B , 91(11):266, Nov 2018. 41. Shanshan Wang, Sebastian Neus¨ uß, and Thomas Guhr. Statistical properties of market collective responses. The European Physical Journal B , 91(8):191, Aug 2018. 42. Shanshan Wang, Rudi Sch¨ afer, and Thomas Guhr. Av- erage cross-responses in correlated ﬁnancial markets. The European Physical Journal B , 89(9):207, Sep 2016. 43. Shanshan Wang, Rudi Sch¨ afer, and Thomas Guhr. Cross- response in correlated ﬁnancial markets: individual stocks. The European Physical Journal B , 89(4), Apr 2016.