The Epps eﬀect under alternative sampling schemes Patrick Changa, Etienne Pienaar a, Tim Gebbie a aDepartment of Statistical Sciences, University of Cape Town, Rondebosch 7700, South Africa Abstract Time and the choice of measurement time scales is fundamental to how we choose to represent information and data in ﬁnance. This choice implies both the units and the aggregation scales for the resulting statistical measurables used to describe a ﬁnancial system. It also deﬁnes how we measure the relationship between diﬀerent traded instruments. As we move from high-frequency time scales, when individual trade and quote events occur, to the mesoscales when correlations emerge in ways that can conform to various latent models; it remains unclear what choice of time and sampling rates are appropriate to faithfully capture system dynamics and asset correlations for decision making. The Epps eﬀect is the key phenomenology that couples the emergence of correlations to the choice of sampling time scales. Here we consider and compare the Epps eﬀect under diﬀerent sampling schemes in order to contrast three choices of time: calendar time, volume time and trade time. Using a toy model based on a Hawkes process, we are able to achieve simulation results that conform well with empirical dynamics. Concretely, we ﬁnd that the Epps eﬀect is present under all three deﬁnitions of time and that correlations emerge faster under trade time compared to calendar time, whereas correlations emerge linearly under volume time. Keywords: Epps eﬀect, Hawkes process, Volume time, Trade time, Calendar time 1. Introduction The Epps eﬀect [18] is key phenomenology relating to high- frequency correlation dynamics in ﬁnancial markets. Central to the eﬀect is the relationship between correlations and the time scale of the sampling scheme. The Epps eﬀect is preva- lent and has been observed in a range of ﬁnancial markets ranging from stock markets to foreign exchange markets (see Mastromatteo et al. [29] and references therein). The Epps eﬀect is a long-studied phenomenon that still lacks a satisfactory and comprehensive explanation. The main sources that contribute towards this eﬀect include: (i) asynchrony, (ii) lead-lag, and (iii) tick-size (discretisation of ﬁnancial prices). We highlight a few studies by various schol- ars over the last few decades. Ren` o [35] explored the eﬀect of asynchrony under the presence of lead-lag. Precup and Iori [34] demonstrated that diﬀerent levels of asynchrony resulted in diﬀerent behaviours of the Epps eﬀect. T´ oth and Kert´ esz [40] derived an analytical expression that characterised the Epps eﬀect as a function of the rate parameter from Pois- son sampling. They extended this further by decomposing the correlation at a certain time scale ∆t as a function of the correlation at smaller time scales ∆t0 [41]. The analytic expression was then further extended by Mastromatteo et al. [29] who separated the eﬀect of asynchrony and that of lead- lag. Finally, M¨ unnix et al. [30] investigated the direct impact of tick-size on the Epps eﬀect. Email addresses: patrick.chang@eng.ox.ac.uk (Patrick Chang), etienne.pienaar@uct.ac.za (Etienne Pienaar), tim.gebbie@uct.ac.za (Tim Gebbie) Another strand of literature around the Epps eﬀect fo- cuses on estimators correcting for this decay in correlation. The canonical estimator that addresses this is the Hayashi– Yoshida estimator [24] which corrected the eﬀect of asyn- chrony by allowing for multiple contributions using a cumu- lative covariance estimator. Buccheri et al. [7] characterised the correction through the probability of ﬂat trading whereas M¨ unnix et al. [31] provided a correction that compensated for both the statistical cause of tick-size and asynchrony. Other notable estimators that address this include: the quasi- maximum likelihood estimator from A ¨ ıt-Sahalia et al. [1] and the multi-asset lagged adjustment estimator from Buccheri et al. [6]. Part of the reason why the phenomenon still lacks a satis- factory explanation is because these causes do not account for the entirety of the Epps eﬀect [29, 31, 41]. The Epps eﬀect is commonly understood as a bias that requires a correction [7, 43]. However, Chang et al. [15] speculated whether the Epps eﬀect is better understood as a fundamental property arising from the discrete nature of high-frequency ﬁnancial markets, and questioned whether diﬀusion processes are an appropriate underlying model representation. Nonetheless, all the aforementioned studies investigated the Epps eﬀect under calendar time sampling. Chang et al. [11] deviated from this by providing a preliminary investigation of the eﬀect under volume time sampling. Time and the choice of time scales is fundamental to how we choose to represent information and data. This implies both the units and the aggregation scales for the resulting statistical measurables used to describe ﬁnancial systems [9]. At low-frequency the measurement time scales conform well 1 arXiv:2011.11281v2 [q-fin.ST] 1 Aug 2021 with those convenient to human operators and researchers intuition — calendar time. However, as one moves into the world of heterogeneous inter-related individual events, before meaningful correlations have emerged, it becomes increas- ingly diﬃcult to uniquely provide global measures of event synchronisation to the system. The ﬁrst real attempt at linking the dynamics under dif- ferent deﬁnitions of time was by Derman [16]. Derman was able to derive the relationship between diﬀerent deﬁnitions of time by assuming that each stock has its own intrinsic time that has a linear map to calendar time based on the stock’s trading frequency. Under these assumptions, Derman was able to show that correlations are the same in calendar and intrinsic time. This linear assumption is problematic because the inter-arrivals of empirical events (market orders) are not homogeneous, but rather follows a Weibull distribution [9]. The goal of this paper is to explore the Epps eﬀect under alternative sampling schemes. This is similar to what has been done for the Realised Volatility (RV) [19, 22, 33]. We explore this by using the Malliavin–Mancino (MM) Fourier estimator [27, 28] to directly probe the relationship between measured correlations and time scale represented as frequen- cies: (i) the number of Fourier coeﬃcients N will deﬁne the sampling frequency, and (ii) the reconstruction frequency M. Here we are using integrated estimates and thus do not need to concern ourselves with the choice of M [10]. We will con- trast this with the well understood Hayashi–Yoshida (HY) estimator. This comparison is informative because both are designed to compute estimates in calendar time. However, the HY is based on the a priori assumption that the process has some underlying Brownian motion contribution and is constructed to be unbiased in this sense. The MM estimator has no such reliance on the speciﬁcation of bias with respect to the underlying process. Many estimation methods do not allow the precise extrac- tion of the correlations as a direct function of the sampling frequency independent of assumptions relating to the under- lying stochastic processes. Fourier methods provide the tech- nology to achieve this. In addition, the Fourier method allows direct extraction of correlations at a particular sampling time scale. This will enable us to eﬃciently probe correlations at diﬀerent high-frequency time scales. There are important caveats, one of which is captured by volume time. Volume time is an example of when we cannot explicitly use sampling to map a deﬁnition of time aggre- gated from local events into some global calendar time that preserves event synchronisation in both representations. This is because the rate of trading of each underlying stock is not well-deﬁned in calendar time which can lead to cases where trading assets may be synchronised in volume time, but only intermittently in calendar time. To simulate the order book events, in particular trans- actions, we need a time labelled 3-tuple with time, price, and volume: (t,p,v ). Using the event times deﬁned by the Hawkes process we are free to choose the distributional prop- erties of the prices and volumes associated with events. We know empirically that we can relate price changes ∆pt of transactions at some time t to the volumes at that time vt using a price impact function: ∆pt∝ f(vt). We could ex- ploit the price impact function to simulate a realistic order- book of transaction events [9]. Here we argue that one does not need to link the volumes to the price changes through price impact to recover realistic Epps curves under the vari- ous sampling schemes considered. Perhaps surprisingly, the ﬁne-to-coarse model introduced by Bacry et al. [2] conforms well with reality when combined with a power-law distribution for the volumes [9]. The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces the diﬀerent temporal metrics. Section 3 presents the esti- mators and their relationship to each other. Section 4 uses a multivariate Hawkes process to simulate an event-based price process which is used to investigate and compare cal- endar time sampling, transaction time sampling and a proxy for volume time sampling. Section 5 investigates and com- pares the various sampling methods for banking securities on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange using trade-and-quote data. Finally, Section 6 we conclude with some closing re- marks. The key contribution made is to demonstrate that the Epps eﬀect emerges with diﬀerent dynamics depending on the choice of time. In particular, volume time rescales the exponential emergence of correlation into a linear scale. 2. Temporal metrics In order to investigate the Epps eﬀect under alternative sampling schemes, we need to evaluate the various deﬁni- tions of time [9, 22, 33, 39]. First we have calendar time also known as physical time . This is the most natural way to perceive time as it is the way humans experience time at low-frequency and it is common to all investors and mar- kets. It is also the most common approach used to compute statistical properties of ﬁnancial time series because it can be deﬁned without reference to the system generating the data. Even though the passage of time is most natural to human operators under this deﬁnition, it is not without chal- lenges. These problems include: intraday seasonality, asyn- chrony across stocks, diﬀerent and often overlapping market calendars and time zones. However, calendar time can al- low coordinated sampling in a unique way independent of the data generation process. There are other methods to measure the passage of time, approaches that arise from the mechanics of the data gen- erating processes, and the technologies used to manage and make decisions in ﬁnancial systems. We can count events and use the event arrivals to increment a time. The most general being event time. For example, if we consider the full order book then one may increment event time by one unit when an order book event occurs. This may be a trade, a cancellation, an order modiﬁcation or any order book event that changes the order book in some way. This is related to the idea of decision time, but here we will use event time and decision time interchangeably because practically any event in the order book is the result of a decision. Some prudence should be exercised, more generally in an Economic system 2 this need not be the case, as many events can be truly ran- dom and exogenous relative to the strategic agents making decisions and taking actions that generate events. An out- come of using event time can be the “smoothing” of the data which is caused by bursts of activity being stretched out in the time series — as we have one event per time unit [9]. This can lead to the eﬀect that under calendar time there is signiﬁcant clustering, while under diﬀerent choices of event time the clustering eﬀect can be smoothed away. There can be diﬀerent types of event times. For example, when considering transaction prices, one may use trade time or transaction time. Using this count, time is increased by one unit each time a unique transaction occurs. The advantage of this count is that limit orders do not aﬀect the ﬂow of time. Additionally, aggregational normality is more clear in trade time [9]. However, this choice of time can exclude the many cascades and burst of order book changes that can in turn lead to the actual trading events. One can also use tick time . Using this count, time is in- creased by one unit each time the price changes. Griﬃn and Oomen [22] found that for the realised volatility, tick time sampling is superior to transaction time sampling, which are both an improvement on calendar time sampling [33], at least with respect to using a performance measure such as the mean squared error. There are many such possible choices for performance measures. Finally, one may use volume time [17] to incorporate the volume of transactions. Using this count, time is increased by one unit for each unit of volume transacted each time a single share or instrument is exchanged. The advantage of this count is that stocks can naturally be synchronised, ir- respective of their liquidity, directly in terms of sequence of comparable volumes traded. This is a practical data-science construct which is useful for the aggregation of real-time rel- ative risk measures such as VPIN [17]. However, mapping event times to calendar times can be problematic. For example, mapping volume time to a calen- dar or external clock does not always make sense because the mapping is highly nonlinear, intermittent and system depen- dent. In ﬁnance, an example where this can make sense could be the aggregation of transactions from trade time to bar data, so called OHLCV bars. These are typically aggregated at 1 minute, 5 minutes, and so on; it should be expected to require increments that may be correlated. 1 Moreover, trade time can also be problematic when one mixes data generating processes. For example, the aggregation of intraday trans- actions in trade time to low-frequency transactions sampled below one day. Here the data generating processes can be vastly incommensurate; intraday transactions represent prices 1It should be noted that mappings from trade events to bar data are still nonlinear mappings, but ones that may well be possible to faithfully represent using approximations that combine stochastic time and frac- tional process [21]. However, these are still deﬁned using continuous time limit representations without explicit coarse-grained sampling, and so may not be natural to a system that is fundamentally discrete at high-frequency [15]. arising from continuous-time double auctions and traders op- erating on these time scales. Whereas, market close prices are from an entirely diﬀerent market structure, speciﬁcally clos- ing auctions. These can be populated by diﬀerent trading agents with diﬀerent decision horizons and liquidity expec- tations. Sampling daily closing auction prices to even lower frequencies, such as weekly, monthly or even yearly, can also be problematic if key properties of the power spectrum are not preserved. Here we restrict ourselves to high-frequency and intraday day time scales, i.e., to the high-frequency and mesoscale. Here the intermediate mesoscale is deﬁned by time scales at which correlations are still emergent. For the purposes of our discussion, low-frequency ﬁnance has well-deﬁned cor- relations that can be well represented by traditional latent models. Here we conceptually associate low-frequency with anything sampled from daily closing auction data where agent decisions are synchronised by the mechanism of the auction process. Aside from what time scales can be appropriate for a given event process and the associated decisions being made from the resulting data, the question of whether these can be uniquely aggregated or mapped into various notions of global system time depends on how the correlations between these event processes emerge in the representations and the implicit ﬁltering that takes place on the underlying data. Any choice of time scale implies bounds on what can be measured and represented by those measures being computed from the re- sulting ﬁltered and sampled data. The choice of time carries implicit implications for the uncertainty relations that link var- ious measurables, particularly under averaging and sampling — the cardinal theorems of interpolation [26, 32, 36, 37, 38]. However, here it is the Whittaker-Shannon interpolation the- orems and the link to the Gabor limit theorems that is prob- ably of most interest. We may need to be particularly careful of the bandwidth versus time-limiting constraints [20] when making choices relating the sampling time scales near to the emergence of events themselves. The importance of this will not be discussed any further here, however, it is something that we would like to urge readers to remain cognisant of as it may provide constraints on the correlations and their dynamics as they emerge. The fundamental question remains unanswered: What choice of time is appropriate when we have chosen a partic- ular sampling time scale when computing cross-correlations between diﬀerent assets with vastly diﬀerent event genera- tion processes? Correlations have yet to emerge at small time scales near individual events. Whereas, at larger time scales, the aggregation of events impacts the nature of cross- correlations and how one measures the cross-impacts and re- lationships between event generation processes. 3. Estimators 3.1. Malliavin–Mancino Malliavin and Mancino [27, 28] introduced a Fourier esti- mator that expresses the Fourier coeﬃcients of the volatil- 3 ity process using the Fourier coeﬃcients of the price process Xi t = ln(pi t), where pi t is the generic asset price at time t for asset i. Following Malliavin and Mancino [28], by rescaling the transactions times between [0,T ] to [0, 2π] and using the Bohr convolution product, we have that for all k∈ Z andN samples: F(Σij)(k) = lim N→∞ 2π 2N + 1 ∑ |s|≤N F(dXi)(s)F(dXj)(k−s), (1) whereF(∗)(⋆) is the ⋆th Fourier coeﬃcient of the ∗ process. Using previous tick interpolation and a simple function ap- proximation for the Fourier coeﬃcients (see [28]), we obtain the Dirichlet representation of the integrated volatility/co- volatility estimator:2 ˆΣij n,N = 1 2N + 1 ni−1,nj−1∑ |s|≤N h=0,𝓁=0 eis(tj 𝓁−ti h)δi(Ih)δj(I𝓁), (2) whereUi ={ti h}ni h=0 andUj ={tj 𝓁}nj 𝓁=0 are the asynchronous transactions times observed between [0,T ] for each asset, and the price ﬂuctuations are: δi(Ih) =Xi ti h+1 −Xi ti h , δ j(I𝓁) =Xj tj 𝓁+1 −Xj tj 𝓁 for asset i andj respectively, andni is the sample dimension for pricepi andnj that of the price pj, which a priori can be diﬀerent. The advantage behind the estimator is its ability to investi- gate diﬀerent time scales through the choice of N [12]. The conversion is given as: N = ⌊1 2 ( T ∆t− 1 )⌋ . (3) This means that there is no need to re-sample the raw obser- vations onto a homogeneous grid using previous tick interpo- lation, such as in the case when using the RV estimator. 3.2. Hayashi–Yoshida Hayashi and Yoshida [24] introduced a cumulative covari- ance estimator deﬁned as: ˆΣij T = #Ui ∑ h=1 #Uj ∑ 𝓁=1 ( Xi ti h −Xi ti h−1 )( Xj tj 𝓁 −Xj tj 𝓁−1 ) wh𝓁, (4) where wh𝓁 = { 1 if ( ti h−1,ti h ] ∩ ( tj 𝓁−1,tj 𝓁 ] ⁄=∅, 0 otherwise. (5) 2Note that i ∈ C is such that Re(i) = 0 and Im(i) = 1 . It should not be confused with integer indices i, for example on the times ti h. Here Ui ={ti h}h∈Z is the set of asynchronous transactions observed between [0,T ] for asset i and #Ui = ni denotes the cardinality of set Ui. The advantage behind the estimator is its ability to ame- liorate the statistical cause of the Epps eﬀect arising from asynchrony. The weakness of this estimator is that it is un- able to investigate diﬀerent time scales, which is particularly problematic because asynchrony is only one of the various sources of the Epps eﬀect [15]. 3.3. Realised Volatility Both the Malliavin–Mancino and Hayashi–Yoshida estima- tor were designed to compute estimates in calendar time, while dealing with the issue of asynchronous arrival of trans- actions. Both estimators overcome the need to re-sample the process onto a synchronous and homogeneous grid, for exam- ple, by using previous tick interpolation. However, given that we plan to re-sample the process under diﬀerent deﬁnitions of time, it becomes useful to consider how the two estimators relate to the Realised Volatility (RV) estimator. In the case of the Hayashi–Yoshida estimator, when ti h and tj 𝓁 are synchronous and homogeneously spaced, we see that eq. (4) reduces to the RV estimator given as: ˆΣij T = n∑ h=1 ( Xi ti h −Xi ti h−1 )( Xj tj h −Xj tj h−1 ) . (6) In the case of the Malliavin–Mancino estimator, when ti h andtj 𝓁 are synchronous, homogeneously spaced and N =n/2 (the Nyquist frequency in the synchronous case, where n = ni = nj), then it was found in [11] that the estimate were numerically the same as the RV estimate. This will also be demonstrated and discussed in Section 4.4. 4. Experiments Here we are only interested in transactions, for this reason the remainder of the paper we will be using event time and transaction time interchangeably. We will be comparing two types of sampling for calendar and event time. First, when using the RV estimator, we will down sample a synchronous and homogeneous grid (obtained through previous tick interpolation) by skipping observations to investigate diﬀerent time scales. For example, if we have 28,200 samples that correspond to one second intervals in calendar time. This means we would drop half the samples by sampling every second observation to achieve two second intervals in calendar time. Second, when using the Malliavin– Mancino estimator, we will be sampling diﬀerent time scales through the Fourier domain by choice of N for the particular time deﬁnition. The Malliavin–Mancino estimator presents several advan- tages. First, it does not need to drop observations to inves- tigate diﬀerent time scales. For example, suppose we have a total of 100 events. To investigate two unit time scale in 4 event time, we would need to drop half the events when re- sampling for the RV estimator; whereas with the Malliavin– Mancino estimator, we would use the full set of samples, but compute fewer Fourier coeﬃcients to achieve the two unit time scale using the relation in eq. (3). Second, it has the ability to deal with asynchrony both in calendar and event time (see Section 4.3 demonstrating why event time can present asynchrony). Therefore, it does not require previous tick interpolation to synchronise the obser- vations. One must however be mindful that as a consequence of the sampling theorem that the Malliavin–Mancino estima- tor can only investigate time scales larger than the smallest interval between two transactions (in both event and calendar time) to prevent aliasing. Third, because it can deal with asynchrony, it uses the same ﬁxed observations when investigating diﬀerent time scales. This leads to more stable estimates at diﬀerent time scales [10]. On the other hand, observations are dropped when sam- pling at diﬀerent time scales for the RV estimator, therefore the time series changes slightly each time through the loss in resolution. These changes cause larger changes to the corre- lation estimate at each time scale, making the estimates less stable [10]. With regards to the Hayashi–Yoshida estimator, we include it as a baseline for calendar and event time. This is because the estimator corrects for the statistical cause of the Epps eﬀect arising from asynchrony. Therefore, it is of interest to see the baseline correlation level corrected for asynchrony under each deﬁnition of time. In the case of volume time, sampling in the Fourier domain with the Malliavin–Mancino estimator is not possible. This is because the diﬀerent time scales in volume time are deter- mined by the number of samples obtained, which depends on the size of the volume bucket, which determines how many shares will be aggregated to obtain a sample. This aggrega- tion changes the time series at diﬀerent time scales — it is not just a loss in resolution from skipping observations . 4.1. Hawkes process To generate a price process based on events, we will be using the class of multivariate point processes introduced by Hawkes [23] known as a Hawkes process. Concretely, we will use the ﬁne-to-coarse model introduced by Bacry et al. [2]. Let the bivariate log-price be: X1 t =X1 0 +N1(t)−N2(t), X2 t =X2 0 +N3(t)−N4(t), (7) where{Nm(t)}M m=1 is a 4-dimensional ( M = 4 ) mutually exciting Hawkes process with the associated intensity λ(t) = {λm(t)}M m=1 taking the form: λm(t) =µ + M∑ n=1 ∫ t −∞ φmn(t−s)dNn s. (8) The counting processes are coupled through: Φ =   0 φ(r) φ(c) 0 φ(r) 0 0 φ(c) φ(c) 0 0 φ(r) 0 φ(c) φ(r) 0  , (9) where φ(r) = α(r)e−βt1 t∈R+ and φ(c) = α(c)e−βt1 t∈R+. The parameters are (µ,α (r),α (c),β ) = (0.015, 0.023, 0.05, 0.11), borrowed from Bacry et al. [2]. The interpretation of eq. (9) is as follows: φ(r) achieves mean reversion, because an uptick in X1 byN1 will lead to an increased intensity in the down tick N2 — allowing the price level to revert (similarly for X2 through N3 and N4). While φ(c) induces a correlation between the prices by connecting the two prices, since an uptick in X1 by N1 will lead to an increased intensity in the uptick of X2 throughN3 (similarly for down ticks through N2 and N4).3 To ensure stability with stationary increments, the spec- tral radius of the branching matrix Γ must be strictly less than 1, i.e., the magnitude of the largest eigenvalue must be less than 1. For our exponential kernel, we have Γ = {αmn/βmn}M m,n=1. A key insight from Bacry et al. [2] is their formulation of the covariance matrix for the model under calendar time sampling with increment size ∆t: C11 ∆t ∆t =Λ +RC1 2G1 + RC2 2G2 +RC2G2 1e−∆tG2−C1G2 2 +Q1G2 2e−∆tG1−C2G2 1 2G2 2G2 1∆t , and C12 ∆t ∆t =−RC1 2G1 + RC2 2G2 + R ( C1G2 2−C2G2 1−C1G2 2e−G1∆t +C2G2 1e−G2∆t) 2G2 2G2 1∆t . Here the parameters are: Λ = µ 1− Γ12− Γ13 , R = βµ Γ12 + Γ13− 1, C1 = (2 + Γ12 + Γ13) (Γ12 + Γ13) 1 + Γ12 + Γ13 , C2 = (2 + Γ12− Γ13) (Γ12− Γ13) 1 + Γ12− Γ13 , Q1 =Q4 = −µ ( Γ2 12 + Γ12− Γ2 13 ) ( (Γ12 + 1)2− Γ2 13 ) (1− Γ12− Γ13) , Q2 =Q3 = −µΓ13( (Γ12 + 1)2− Γ2 13 ) (1− Γ12− Γ13) , 3The speciﬁcation of eq. (9) in the model is fully symmetric and thus there are no lead-lag eﬀects (see [2] and Remark 9 of [3]). 5 and G1 =β (1 + Γ12 + Γ13), G 2 =β (1 + Γ12− Γ13). The correlation is then given by: ρ12 ∆t = C12 ∆t C11 ∆t , (10) and the Epps eﬀect is present. Moreover, in the limit we have that [2]: lim ∆t→∞ ρ12 ∆t = 2Γ13 (1 + Γ12) 1 + Γ2 13 + 2Γ12 + Γ2 12 . (11) The experiments that will follow in the next few subsec- tions are conducted by simulating 100 pairs of eq. (7) for T = 72, 000 seconds. Each of the price pairs will be re- sampled into the appropriate format and correlations will be computed under each deﬁnition of time for sampling inter- vals between 1 to 100 units. The mean correlation estimate at each sampling interval will be plotted along with error rib- bons that contain 95% of the estimates at each sampling interval. These are computed from the 100 replications using the studentt-distribution with 99 degrees of freedom and the standard deviation of the estimates between the replications at each sampling interval. Moreover, to demonstrate how the sampling is achieved under each deﬁnition of time, we simulate a single pair of eq. (7) for T = 300 seconds. 4.2. Calendar time The calendar time sampling is relatively straightforward. When sampling for the RV estimator, we sample eq. (7) at equidistant and synchronous points between [0,T ] using a particular sampling interval. As an example, Figure 1a demonstrates the samples (given as bubbles) where the sam- pling the done using 10 unit intervals (corresponding to 10 seconds). For the Malliavin–Mancino (MM) and Hayashi– Yoshida (HY) estimator, the samples are when the events (in this case jumps) occurred. This is demonstrated in Fig- ure 1b where the bubbles are the samples. Notice that when the sampling interval increases for Figure 1a we lose more resolution into the price path which is present in Figure 1b. Figure 2 plots the correlation for the RV and MM estimates in calendar time measured at diﬀerent sampling intervals with the HY estimates provided as a baseline estimate. We see that the RV estimator recovers the theoretical Epps eﬀect which is expected as this was the estimator used to derive the covariance matrix in Bacry et al. [2]. The MM estimator does not quite recover the same theoretical curve but it captures a more pronounced the Epps eﬀect. This is because there is the eﬀect of asynchrony contributing towards the Epps eﬀect in this case. The HY estimates recover a rather strange estimate. This is because it was found that the correction achieved here depends on the inter-arrivals of the asynchronous events [15]. This fact was used by Chang et al. [15] to design experiments to detect if the system has emerging correlations as in the case of eq. (7) or if the system has correlations that exist at all sampling intervals such as a geometric Brownian motion. 4.3. Event time Event time is interesting because in theory, there is a one- to-one mapping between the event count h to calendar time th when considering one security. 4 Event time however be- comes slightly problematic when we want to compute the correlations between two securities. This is because each se- curity will have a diﬀerent number of events, therefore the event clock between securities are not comparable. Thus we need a method to unify the time between the securities. This can be achieved if the securities share the same event clock, where an event in either security will increase the time by one unit. Under this construction, the time series will be asyn- chronous but homogeneous, therefore we need to use previous tick interpolation to create the time series in event time for the RV estimator. Figure 3a demonstrates the samples in event time for the RV estimator where the sampling is done using one unit intervals. Figure 3b demonstrates the sam- ples in event time for the MM and HY estimator where the samples are asynchronous but live on a homogeneous grid. Comparing Figure 3 against Figure 1b, we see that event time indeed achieves a smoothing eﬀect as the bursts of activity in calendar time is stretched out. Figure 4 plots the correlation for the RV and MM estimates in event time measured at diﬀerent sampling intervals with the HY estimates provided as a baseline estimate. We see that both the MM and RV estimates present an Epps eﬀect in event time. Moreover, we see that correlations seem to emerge faster with a more pronounced concavity in the curves. The HY estimates in this case is particularly interesting, it actually recovers the same estimates as in cal- endar time as a result of how the event time is constructed (see a clearer comparison in Figure 8). This is because even though the time series is stretched out, the observations used in eq. (4) remain the same and because the events are asyn- chronous, the intervals where wh𝓁 is activated remains the same. The relationship between the MM and RV estimates un- der the two deﬁnitions of time remains unclear. Particularly for the MM estimator. This is because the shifting of events through stretching out the time series will alter the power spectrum. Thus the relationship is unclear. Related to this, the pronounced concavity in event time could potentially be related to the shifting and stretching of the time series which could induce potential lead-lag eﬀects. However, currently it is unclear how this mechanism could potentially explain the observed dynamics. The diﬃculty lies in that lead-lag is usually induced from a calendar time perspective through the shifting of observations (see the model in Mastromatteo et al. 4This mapping can be diﬃcult to ﬁnd because there is often mea- surement error associated with when events occur on an exchange. 6 (a) Sampled for RV (b) Sampled for MM and HY Figure 1: The Hawkes price model in calendar time. The ﬁgure demonstrates the two types of input samples (given as bubbles) for the diﬀerent estimators. (a) has synchronous and homogeneous samples with 10 unit intervals between observations. The synchronisation is achieved using previous tick interpolation. (b) has asynchronous samples based on when the events occurred. Figure 2: The correlation estimate at diﬀerent sampling intervals in calendar time for the MM (blue) and RV (red) estimates. The HY (brown) estimate is provided as a baseline. The theoretical Epps eﬀect from eq. (10) and the limiting correlation from eq. (11) are also provided. [29]), whereas here the time series is also stretched. More- over, the shifting and stretching here is contingent on the asynchronicity between the two time series. Nonetheless, the well understood concave Epps eﬀect remains present under both deﬁnitions of time. 4.4. Volume time The sampling of volume time is diﬀerent to that of calendar and event time. Although time in this deﬁnition is increased by one unit for each share traded, sampling it requires the use of volume buckets which determine the number of samples we get for each security. This method of sampling follows Easley et al. [17] which they used to compute VPIN. The sampling overcomes the problem of diﬀerent volumes traded between securities. The problem however with this sampling method and volume time in general is that there is no clear mapping back to calendar time. This is because prices be- tween transactions will be aggregated and multiple volume times will map back to the same calendar time. For exam- ple, suppose a transaction occurred with ﬁve shares traded. These ﬁve volume time counts would map back to the same instant in calendar time. To obtain a notion of sampling interval in volume time, we will use the number of samples obtained to get an idea of the equivalent sampling interval in calendar time. For example, if a sampling interval of 10 units translates to 30 samples in calendar time, in order to obtain a 10 unit sampling interval in volume time, we need to pick a volume bucket that allows us to obtain 30 samples. The sampling in volume time follows partly from appendix A1 from Easley et al. [17]. The transaction time series for a securityi is deﬁned by the tuple: (ti h,pi ti h ,vi ti h ), (12) where ti h is the transaction time, pi ti h is the transaction price and vi ti h is the transaction volume. Let n be the number of samples we want from the volume time sampling, then the volume bucket V is given as: V =⌊Vtot/n⌋, (13) where Vtot = ∑ hvi ti h is the total number of shares traded. Expand the number of observations by repeating each trans- action pi ti h as many times as vi ti h , generating Vtot number of observations. Looping through the expanded prices, create a sample in volume time after V shares by averaging the ex- panded prices, resulting in a total of n samples. In other words, averagepi ti h by its volume contribution to each bucket V for each volume time sample. Note that the last bucket is 7 (a) Sampled for RV (b) Sampled for MM and HY Figure 3: The Hawkes price model in event time where the securities share the same event clock. The ﬁgure demonstrates the two types of input samples (given as bubbles) for the diﬀerent estimators. (a) has synchronous and homogeneous samples with one unit intervals between observations. The synchronisation is achieved using previous tick interpolation. (b) has asynchronous samples on a homogeneous grid based on the ordering of when the events occurred. Figure 4: The correlation estimate at diﬀerent sampling intervals in event time for the MM (blue) and RV (red) estimates. The HY (brown) estimate is provided as a baseline. always incomplete or empty, thus these observations are dis- carded [17]. Under this sampling, we will have synchronous and homogeneous samples as each security will always have n samples. Crucially, Hawkes processes only model when the events occur; it does not provide us with information about the states of the features associated with these event times. Ad- ditional model assumptions are necessary to generate a real- istic tuple. A realistic model for the time series of transaction requires the model to account for the couplings between the tuples. First, the prices pi ti h and volumes vi ti h are coupled through market impact [5, 25]. 5 Second, the volumes vi ti h depend on 5Strictly speaking, market impact is the coupling between the mid- previous volumes as a large source of the order-ﬂow auto- correlation is found to be from order splitting [42]. Addition- ally, the price observations are fundamentally discrete events. Whether a continuous time representation using stochastic diﬀerential equations is suﬃcient remains an important open question [15]. There appears to be paucity of realistic models that are able to provide a convincingly realistic 3-tuple (ti h,pi ti h ,vi ti h ). Point processes like Hawkes processes provide good models for the time of the events ti h. Stochastic diﬀerential equations may provide good models for the prices pi ti h at low-frequency, and naturally provide long-memory [21]. There seems to be no consensus for a model speciﬁcation for the volume of market orders as the distributions varies widely with the product and market [9]. Solving these issues are beyond the scope of the paper. Our objective here is to highlight various concerns and what we do empirically know about the behaviour of collections of traded asset events at high-frequency under diﬀerent choices of time. For the purposes of investigating the Epps eﬀect, the Hawkes model in eq. (7) provides a good basis for the simulation because it deals with ti h andpi ti h in the tuple. Even though it has unrealistic price changes, the model naturally recovers microscopic properties such as the signature plot, mean reversion and the Epps eﬀect, and it can also naturally recover large scale diﬀusive properties [4]. To complete the tuple, we need a method of generating vi ti h . Empirically, it was found that the unconditional distri- bution of market orders follows a power-law behaviour [9]. price mt and volume. However, the transaction price pt is related to the mid-price as: pt = mt + st/2 for buyer-initiated transactions where st is the spread. Therefore, prices and volumes are coupled in how the transaction volume shifts the mid-prices through time. 8 (a) 10 unit sampling interval in volume time (b) 5 unit sampling interval in volume time Figure 5: The Hawkes price model with volumes samples from an IID power-law distribution given in eq. (14). The sampling interval was chosen to be the equivalent of (a) 10 unit and (b) 5 unit sampling interval in calendar time based on the number of samples obtained (relative to Figure 1). The samples in volume time are synchronous, homogeneous and requires diﬀerent sized volume buckets (for averaging) to achieve. Figure 6: The correlation estimate at diﬀerent sampling intervals in volume time for the MM (blue), RV (red) and HY (brown) estimates. Therefore, combining eq. (7) and a power-law for the volume samples, we have a toy model to investigate the Epps eﬀect in volume time. Even though the model does not account for the empirical form of measured price impact, we still ﬁnd that it recovers the empirical dynamics surprisingly well. In order to perform the simulation work for volume time, we will assume that the volume associated with each transac- tion is from an independent and identically distributed (IID) power-law where the probability density function is given as: f(x) = {αxα m xα+1 x≥xm 0 x<x m. (14) For the toy model, we set xm = 20 with exponent of 1 +α = 2.7 — the value found in Chakraborti et al. [9] for market orders. Note that the volume samples are rounded to an integer. Figure 7: The Epps eﬀect in volume time for diﬀerent distributions generating the volume samples. The estimates are obtained using the RV estimator. Figure 5 demonstrates the volume time samples of the Hawkes price models with volume samples from an IID power- law distribution. Figures 5a and 5b are 10 unit and 5 unit sampling intervals in volume time respectively. The sampling interval was chosen to be the equivalent interval in calendar time based on the number of samples. Each security has diﬀerent sized volume buckets (for a given sampling inter- val) to achieve the synchronous and homogeneous samples. The samples here are no longer the same as those in calen- dar time since these samples have gone through an averaging process. This is fundamentally diﬀerent to event time where the samples remain the same but smoothed. Figure 6 plots the correlation for the RV, MM and HY estimates in volume time measured at diﬀerent sampling in- tervals. Here we see that all the estimators recover the same estimates (see Section 3.3). 9 Figure 8: Comparison of the Epps curves from Figures 2, 4 and 6. We investigate calendar time (CT), event time (ET) and volume time (VT) using the RV, MM and HY estimator. The theoretical Epps eﬀect eq. (10) and limiting correlation eq. (11) from calendar time are also included. We see that the Epps eﬀect is present in volume time. However, something interesting happens here. The concavity of the Epps eﬀect is lost, here the correlations emerge linearly for larger sampling intervals and there is a signiﬁcant drop in the correlation achieved at larger intervals. This behaviour is not just an anomaly under simulation. We see that this is also the case with empirical data (see Figure 11). To try and further understand this eﬀect, Figure 7 com- putes the same Epps curves in volume time as Figure 6, but for a range of distributions generating the volume samples. We consider the additional uniform, normal and beta dis- tributions. The uniform distribution samples transaction vol- umes between 1 to 100 with equal probability. The normal distribution samples transaction volumes with a mean of 50 and standard deviation of 5. We consider three beta distri- butions with α =β but taking on values of 0.1, 0.2 and 2. 6 The distributions all have a mean of roughly 50 shares for each transaction volume. We see that regardless of the distribution, the Epps eﬀect is linear in volume time. The exact cause leading to a lin- ear Epps curve is not clear. However, from Figure 7 we see that the linear eﬀect does not seem to depend on the par- ticular distribution generating the volume samples as all the distributions present this linear eﬀect. 7 Finally, to end this section, we compare all the Epps curves from Figures 2, 4 and 6 together in Figure 8. We see that the Epps eﬀect is present under all three deﬁnitions of time. For calendar and event time, sampling in the time domain or 6The beta distribution samples values between 0 and 1. Therefore, the samples are multiplied by 100 before rounding to obtain a transaction volume. 7Unravelling potential lead-lag eﬀects is particularly diﬃcult for vol- ume time because lead-lag cannot be easily separated from shrinking and stretching as these are also mixed by the averaging required to construct volume bins. Fourier domain both result in an Epps eﬀect. Interestingly, the Epps eﬀect becomes linear under volume time. 5. Empirical We investigate the Epps eﬀect under diﬀerent deﬁnitions of time using transaction data from the Johannesburg Stock Ex- change (JSE) for ﬁve trading days ranging from 24/06/2019 to 28/06/2019. We consider Standard Bank Group Ltd. (SBK), Nedbank Group Ltd. (NED), Absa Group Ltd. (ABG) and FirstRand Ltd. (FSR). The data was extracted from Bloomberg Pro and is only reported up to an accuracy of seconds (hence the data has been eﬀectively re-sampled). Al- though the transactions were in the correct order, without an exact millisecond or nanosecond time stamp means that we cannot correctly order the events for event time sampling. 8 Therefore, we process the data by aggregating transactions (for each security) with the same time stamp using a volume weighted average. Correlations are computed separately for the trading days so that we do not have to worry about overnight returns. Therefore the correlations reported in the following subsec- tions are the average at each sampling interval aggregated across the ﬁve trading days. 5.1. Calendar time The continuous trading session on the JSE is between 09:00 and 16:50, this translates to a seven hour and 50 minute trading day or T = 28, 200 seconds. As before, we sample a synchronous and homogeneous grid at diﬀerent time scales using previous tick interpolation for the RV estimator. The MM and HY estimator use the samples from when the trans- actions occurred. The MM investigates diﬀerent time scales by sampling the Fourier domain through the relation in eq. (3) while the HY provides a baseline estimate after correcting for asynchrony. Figure 9 plots the Epps eﬀect in calendar time for the six correlation pairs for sampling intervals ranging from 1 to 300 units for the MM, RV and HY estimator in Figures 9a to 9c respectively. First, we see that the MM and RV estimates have yet to reach the limiting (asymptotic) correlation after 300 seconds. Second, we see that the RV estimates are less stable mov- ing from one sampling interval to the next. This is because sampling diﬀerent time scales using previous tick interpola- tion changes the samples (through the loss in resolution) for the estimator. This was not seen in Figure 2 because this instability was hidden away when averaging 100 correlation estimates; whereas here we are only averaging over ﬁve days of trading. 8Consider two securities which have 3 and 5 transactions that all occurred in the same second. It is not possible to order these events on a joint event count. 10 (a) MM (b) RV (c) HY Figure 9: The Epps eﬀect in calendar time for the six correlation pairs. The sampling interval ranges from 1 to 300 units. Figures 9a to 9c we have the MM, RV and HY estimates respectively. (a) MM (b) RV (c) HY Figure 10: The Epps eﬀect in event time for the six correlation pairs. The sampling interval ranges from 1 to 300 units. Figures 10a to 10c we have the MM, RV and HY estimates respectively. Figure 11: The Epps eﬀect in volume time for the six correlation pairs. The sampling interval ranges from 1 to 300 units. The ﬁgure only reports the RV estimates because the three estimators recover the same estimates under volume time (see Figure 6). 5.2. Event time Lining up the events in event time with empirical data is slightly problematic. The data set we have only reports time stamps up to the second, this means that we can have con- current events at the same time between a pair of securities (even after aggregating events on the same second using a volume weighted average). In theory, these should be two separate event counts when sharing the same event clock, however since there is no way to determine the ordering of these events, we allow them to happen simultaneously, i.e., they share the same event count. This was not a problem un- der simulation because we had a well-deﬁned point process. Figure 10 plots the Epps eﬀect in event time for the six correlation pairs for sampling intervals ranging from 1 to 300 units for the MM, RV and HY estimator in Figures 10a to 10c respectively. We see again that the Epps eﬀect is present and correla- tions seem to emerge faster in event time. Both the MM and RV estimator reaches the limiting (asymptotic) correla- tion after around 100 units in event time. Again, we also see that the HY estimate is exactly the same as the estimate in calendar time. This is due to how the events are lined up. Even though the time series is smoothed out in event time, the observations in eq. (4) remain the same and the intervals where wh𝓁 is activated remains the same. 5.3. Volume time Sampling in volume time is done by aggregating transac- tion prices over a certain number of shares determined by the volume bucket. As before, the sampling interval here is deﬁned by the number of samples obtained. The number of 11 (a) SBK/FSR (b) NED/ABG Figure 12: The Epps curves compared under diﬀerent deﬁnitions of time for (a) the SBK/FSR and (b) the NED/ABG pair. Included are the calendar time (CT), event time (ET) and volume time (VT) estimates for the range of 1 to 300 unit sampling intervals using the RV and MM estimator. The HY estimator is provided as a baseline. samples obtained is compared against the number of sam- pled obtained in calendar time to ﬁnd an equivalent sampling interval in volume time. Figure 11 plots the Epps eﬀect in volume time for the six correlation pairs for sampling intervals ranging from 1 to 300 units. Here we only report the RV estimates because the three estimators recover the same estimates in volume time (see Figure 6). We see that as in the case of our simulations, the Epps ef- fect is present in volume time. Moreover, correlations emerge linearly rather than exponentially for larger sampling intervals as in the case of calendar and event time; and there is a sig- niﬁcant drop in the correlations achieved for larger sampling intervals compared calendar and event time. Looking at the NED/FSR pair (purple line) in Figure 11, we see that the correlation becomes negative in volume time. This behaviour is possible under simulation with our toy model as the error bars in Figure 6 do go into the nega- tive region, meaning that this is possible. However, at this stage it remains unclear as to why this is occurs. 5.4. Comparison Figure 12 compares the various the Epps curves under dif- ferent deﬁnitions of time. This is done for two of the six correlations pairs SBK/FSR and NED/ABG in Figures 12a and 12b respectively. Comparing Figure 12 against Figure 8, we see that the empirical behaviours of the various Epps curves line up with what we have seen using the toy model under simulation. The event time correlations emerge faster than those in calendar time, while the Epps eﬀect is linear under volume time. Sam- pling in the time domain or Fourier domain both result in an Epps eﬀect under calendar and event time. In Appendix A, we provide the same comparison between uncorrelated asset pairs. The generalisation of these results is only conﬁrmed to hold for correlated asset pairs where the Epps eﬀect behaves as expected. Given that this relatively simple toy model captures the various empirical dynamics, it is unlikely that a more realistic simulation of the 3-tuple (ti h,pi ti h ,vi ti h ) would aﬀect the cor- relation estimates. In particular, intraday seasonality of the volatility, transactions, and volumes that are present with em- pirical data [8] does not alter the dynamics compared to the toy model which does not capture these seasonality eﬀects. A possible reason why the intraday seasonality eﬀects do not alter the dynamics is because the correlation estimates are integrated quantities.9 Perhaps these seasonality eﬀects may inﬂuence the dynamics diﬀerently if instantaneous correlation quantities were computed instead. 6. Conclusion In this paper, we compared the Epps eﬀect under three deﬁnitions of time: calendar time, trade time and volume time. We use a Hawkes process, speciﬁcally, the ﬁne-to- coarse model by Bacry et al. [2] as the basis for the simulation of price paths. Combining this with a power-law distribution for the volumes samples [9], we ﬁnd that the Epps eﬀect is present under all three deﬁnitions of time. Moreover, the simulations reveal diﬀerent rates of correla- tion emergence. First, we saw that the correlations emerge faster under trade time compared to calendar time. Second, correlations emerge linearly under volume time and do not seem to depend strongly on the distribution generating the volume samples. Under this setup, where the volumes and 9We speculate that intraday seasonality may alter the dynamic of the correlations in volume time, particularly when two assets have sig- niﬁcantly diﬀerent intraday volume curves. 12 prices are independent, we ﬁnd realistic results. These re- sults are found despite using a model that does not directly encode price impact or intraday seasonality of the volatility, transactions, and volumes. We then investigated the Epps eﬀect under these three deﬁnitions of time using transaction data from the Johan- nesburg Stock Exchange. We found that the empirical Epps curves conform well with what we observed under simulation for the various deﬁnitions of time. However, the results hold for the case of suﬃciently correlated asset pairs where the Epps eﬀect behaves as expected. This paper presents some anomalies that raise several un- resolved concerns. First, the underlying mechanisms that link the diﬀerent temporal deﬁnitions and sampling schemes that lead to the diﬀerent correlation dynamics remains unclear. Second, an analysis of the instantaneous correlation estimates could be performed for the diﬀerent deﬁnitions of time. This could potentially lead to a better understanding of how intra- day seasonality could impact the correlation dynamics under diﬀerent sampling schemes. Finally, to explore how market activity aﬀects the Epps eﬀect with diﬀerent time choices. This particularly relates to the observation made by T´ oth and Kert´ esz [40] where the Epps curves do not scale with market activity. Reproducibility of the Research The dataset can be found at [13]. The Julia code and instructions for replication can be found in our GitHub site [14]. Acknowledgements We would like to thank the two anonymous referees for thoughtful comments which helped us improve this paper. PC would like to thank Roger Bukuru for work done together and various discussions. Funding PC was supported by the Manuel & Luby Washkansky Scholarship and the South African Statistical Association [grant number 127931]. References [1] A ¨ ıt-Sahalia, Y., Fan, J., Xiu, D., 2010. High-Frequency Covariance Estimates With Noisy and Asynchronous Financial Data. Journal of the American Statistical Association 105, 1504–1517. doi: 10. 1198/jasa.2010.tm10163. [2] Bacry, E., Delattre, S., Hoﬀmann, M., Muzy, J.F., 2013a. Mod- elling microstructure noise with mutually exciting point processes. Quantitative Finance 13, 65–77. doi: 10.1080/14697688.2011. 647054. [3] Bacry, E., Delattre, S., Hoﬀmann, M., Muzy, J.F., 2013b. Some limit theorems for Hawkes processes and application to ﬁnancial statistics. Stochastic Processes and their Applications 123. [4] Bacry, E., Mastromatteo, I., Muzy, J.F., 2015. Hawkes processes in ﬁnance. Market Microstructure and Liquidity 01, 1550005. doi: 10. 1142/S2382626615500057. [5] Bouchaud, J.P., Gefen, Y., Potters, M., Wyart, M., 2004. Fluc- tuations and response in ﬁnancial markets: the subtle nature of “random” price changes. Quantitative Finance 4, 176–190. doi:10.1080/14697680400000022. [6] Buccheri, G., Corsi, F., Peluso, S., 2020. High-Frequency Lead-Lag Eﬀects and Cross-Asset Linkages: A Multi-Asset Lagged Adjust- ment Model. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 0, 1–22. doi:10.1080/07350015.2019.1697699. [7] Buccheri, G., Livieri, G., Pirino, D., Pollastri, A., 2019. A closed- form formula characterization of the Epps eﬀect. Quantitative Finance 20, 243–254. doi: 10.1080/14697688.2019.1659992. [8] Cartea, ´A., Jaimungal, S., Penalva, J., 2015. Algorithmic and High-Frequency Trading. [9] Chakraborti, A., Toke, I.M., Patriarca, M., Abergel, F., 2011. Econophysics review: I. Empirical facts. Quantitative Finance 11, 991–1012. doi: 10.1080/14697688.2010.539248. [10] Chang, P., 2020. Fourier instantaneous estimators and the Epps ef- fect. PLOS ONE 15, 1–24. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0239415. [11] Chang, P., Bukuru, R., Gebbie, T., 2019. Revisiting the Epps eﬀect using volume time averaging: An exercise in R. arXiv:1912.02416. [12] Chang, P., Pienaar, E., Gebbie, T., 2020a. Malliavin–Mancino Estimators Implemented with Nonuniform Fast Fourier Transforms. SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc Computing 42, B1378–B1403. doi: 10. 1137/20M1325903. [13] Chang, P., Pienaar, E., Gebbie, T., 2020b. The Epps eﬀect un- der alternative sampling schemes: Dataset. doi: 10.25375/uct. 13258811. [14] Chang, P., Pienaar, E., Gebbie, T., 2020c. The Epps eﬀect under alternative sampling schemes: Julia code. URL: https://github. com/CHNPAT005/PCRBTG-VT, doi: 10.25375/uct.13258931. [15] Chang, P., Pienaar, E., Gebbie, T., 2020d. Using the Epps eﬀect to detect discrete data generating processes. arXiv:2005.10568. [16] Derman, E., 2002. The perception of time, risk and return during periods of speculation. Quantitative Finance 2, 282–296. doi: 10. 1088/1469-7688/2/4/304. [17] Easley, D., Lopez de Prado, M., O’Hara, M., 2012. Flow toxicity and liquidity in a high frequency world. Review of Financial Studies 25. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.1695596. [18] Epps, T.W., 1979. Comovements in stock prices in the very short run. Journal of the American Statistical Association 74, 291–298. [19] Fukasawa, M., 2010. Realized volatility with stochastic sampling. Stochastic Processes and their Applications 120, 829 – 852. doi:10. 1016/j.spa.2010.02.006. [20] Gabor, D., 1946. Theory of communication. Journal of IEEE 93, 429–457. [21] Gatheral, J., Jaisson, T., Rosenbaum, M., 2018. Volatility is rough. Quantitative Finance 18, 933–949. doi: 10.1080/14697688.2017. 1393551. [22] Griﬃn, J.E., Oomen, R.C.A., 2008. Sampling Returns for Realized Variance Calculations: Tick Time or Transaction Time? Econo- metric Reviews 27, 230–253. doi: 10.1080/07474930701873341. [23] Hawkes, A.G., 1971. Spectra of some self-exciting and mutually exciting point processes. Biometrika 58, 83–90. [24] Hayashi, T., Yoshida, N., 2005. On covariance estimation of non- synchronously observed diﬀusion processes. Bernoulli 11, 359–379. doi:10.3150/bj/1116340299. [25] Lillo, F., Farmer, J.D., Mantegna, R., 2003. Master curve for price- impact function. Nature 421, 129–30. doi: 10.1038/421129a. [26] Luke, H.D., 1999. The origins of the sampling theorem. IEEE Communications Magazine 37, 106–108. [27] Malliavin, P., Mancino, M., 2002. Fourier series method for mea- surement of multivariate volatilities. Finance and Stochastics 6, 49–61. doi: 10.1007/s780-002-8400-6 . [28] Malliavin, P., Mancino, M., 2009. A Fourier transform method for nonparametric estimation of multivariate volatility. Ann. Statist. 37, 1983–2010. doi: 10.1214/08-AOS633. [29] Mastromatteo, I., Marsili, M., Zoi, P., 2011. Financial corre- lations at ultra-high frequency: theoretical models and empiri- cal estimation. The European Physical Journal B 80, 243–253. doi:10.1140/epjb/e2011-10865-y . 13 [30] M¨ unnix, M.C., Sch¨ afer, R., Guhr, T., 2010. Impact of the tick- size on ﬁnancial returns and correlations. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 389, 4828 – 4843. doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2010.06.037. [31] M¨ unnix, M.C., Sch¨ afer, R., Guhr, T., 2011. Statistical causes for the Epps eﬀect in microstructure noise. International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance 14, 1231–1246. doi: 10.1142/ S0219024911006838. [32] Nyquist, H., 1928. Certain topics in telegraph transmission theory. Transactions of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers 47, 617–644. [33] Oomen, R.C.A., 2006. Properties of Realized Variance under Al- ternative Sampling Schemes. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 24, 219–237. doi: 10.1198/073500106000000044. [34] Precup, O.V., Iori, G., 2007. Cross-correlation measures in the high-frequency domain. The European Journal of Finance 13, 319– 331. doi: 10.1080/13518470600813565. [35] Ren` o, R., 2003. A closer look at the Epps eﬀect. International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance 06, 87–102. doi: 10. 2139/ssrn.314723. [36] Robertson, H.P., 1929. The uncertainty principle. Phys. Rev. 34, 163–164. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.34.163. [37] Shannon, C.E., 1949. Communication in the presence of noise. Proceedings of the IRE 37, 10–21. [38] Shannon, C.E., 1998. Communication in the presence of noise. Proceedings of the IEEE 86, 447–457. [39] Toke, I.M., 2011. “Market Making” in an Order Book Model and Its Impact on the Spread. Econophysics of Order-driven Markets , 49–64doi:10.1007/978-88-470-1766-5_4 . [40] T´ oth, B., Kert´ esz, J., 2007. Modeling the Epps eﬀect of cross correlations in asset prices, in: Kert´ esz, J., Bornholdt, S., Man- tegna, R.N. (Eds.), Noise and Stochastics in Complex Systems and Finance, International Society for Optics and Photonics. SPIE. pp. 89 – 97. URL: https://doi.org/10.1117/12.727127, doi:10.1117/12.727127. [41] T´ oth, B., Kert´ esz, J., 2009. The Epps eﬀect revisited. Quantitative Finance 9, 793–802. doi: 10.1080/14697680802595668. [42] T´ oth, B., Palit, I., Lillo, F., Farmer, J.D., 2015. Why is equity order ﬂow so persistent? Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 51, 218–239. doi: 10.1016/j.jedc.2014.10.007. [43] Zhang, L., 2010. Estimating covariation: Epps eﬀect, microstruc- ture noise. Journal of Econometrics 160, 33–47. doi: 10.1016/j. jeconom.2010.03.012. 14 Appendix A. Uncorrelated assets (a) NED/AGL (b) NED/BTI Figure A.13: The Epps curves compared under diﬀerent deﬁnitions of time for (a) the NED/AGL and (b) the NED/BTI pair. Included are the calendar time (CT), event time (ET) and volume time (VT) estimates for the range of 1 to 300 unit sampling intervals using the RV and MM estimator. The HY estimator is provided as a baseline. We investigate whether the correlation dynamics found between the diﬀerent deﬁnitions of time hold in general for all asset pairs. To this end, Figure A.13 compares the Epps curves under diﬀerent sampling schemes for the asset pairs (a) NED and Anglo American plc (AGL), and (b) NED and British American Tobacco plc (BTI). The correlations are reported in the same way as Section 5 by computing the correlations separately for the ﬁve trading days and reporting the average at each sampling interval. From the ﬁgure it is suggested that the Epps eﬀect is not prominent in the case of uncorrelated assets — this is an unsurprising result. However, we still see that correlations emerge linearly and that there is are drop in the correlations achieved in volume time compared to calendar and event time. The correlation dynamics between calendar and event time becomes ambiguous. Here the Epps eﬀect itself starts to behave in an unexpected manner. The calendar time correlations for the NED/AGL pair start oﬀ positive and become negative for larger sampling intervals. A similar dynamic of the Epps eﬀect in calendar time has been reported between the FSR/AGL pair in Chang et al. [12]. However, to the best of our knowledge, this has not been reported in the boarder literature surrounding the Epps eﬀect. This is likely because the literature generally focuses on asset pairs with higher correlation levels where the Epps eﬀect then behaves as expected. Therefore, we conclude that our results only hold in the case of suﬃciently correlated assets. We speculate that this is due to the nature of diﬀerent types of trading agent activity on diﬀerent time scales. 15