Optimal trading without optimal control ∗ Bastien Baldacci† Jerome Benveniste‡ Gordon Ritter§ December 25, 2020 Abstract A hypothetical risk-neutral agent who trades to maximize the expected proﬁt of the next trade will approximately exhibit long-term optimal behavior as long as this agent uses the vector p = ∇V (t, x) as eﬀective microstructure alphas, whereV is the Bellman value function for a smooth relaxation of the problem. Eﬀective microstructure alphas are the steepest-ascent direction ofV, equal to the generalized momenta in a dual Hamiltonian formulation. This simple heuristics has wide-ranging practical implications; indeed, most utility-maximization problems that require implementation via discrete limit-order-book markets can be treated by our method. 1 Introduction Consider an investor whose preferences are described by a utility function of wealth,u(w), as per Arrow (1963) and Pratt (1964). LetwT denote the investor’s wealth at some known ﬁnal timeT. The investor attempts to maximize the expectation of utility of ﬁnal wealth,E[u(wT )], by trading ﬁnancial assets. The mechanism by which buyers meet sellers and trades occur is known as the market microstructure. In this work, the microstructure is assumed to be a continuous double auction electronic order book with time priority, although our methods could be generalized to include other kinds of market microstructure. In continuous limit-order-book microstructure, trades are eﬀected by submitting limit orders to an exchange’s matching engine. For each security being traded, the investor must determine the price levels at which to submit buy and sell orders and the associated share quantities attached to those orders. In real markets, the price levels are discrete; the minimum possible price increment is the quote resolution allowed by the exchange, known as the tick size. Alternatively, the investor may decide to refrain from placing any orders or cancel some existing orders. Other decision variables include order type and venue. Considering all of these details, we see that the instantaneous action space is an inconveniently large discrete space; we discuss ways of simplifying it later on. ∗Bastien Baldacci gratefully acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of the ERC Grant 679836 Staqamof and would like to thank Iuliia Manziuk (Ecole Polytechnique) for fruitful discussions. †École Polytechnique, CMAP, 91128, Palaiseau, France, bastien.baldacci@polytechnique.edu. ‡Courant Institute of Mathematical Science, New York University, 251 Mercer St., New York, NY 10012 §Courant Institute of Mathematical Science, New York University, 251 Mercer St., New York, NY 10012 (corre- sponding author), ritter@post.harvard.edu 1 arXiv:2012.12945v1 [q-fin.TR] 23 Dec 2020 Problem 1.The investor seeks the optimal dynamic strategy for choosing an actionat∈At at each timet, whereAt is the set of possible actions at timet, optimal in the sense of maximizing the expected utility of ﬁnal wealth,E[u(wT )]. Problem 1 is mathematically deep and perhaps intractable; it is essentially a stochastic optimal control problem over high-dimensional discrete action and state spaces. According to Cont and Kukanov (2017), “Although simultaneous optimization of order timing, type, and routing decisions is an interesting problem, it also appears to be intractable...” and even this is a special case of Problem 1. The purpose of the present paper is to give practically implementable methods which execution desks could start using right away to solve Problem 1 approximately. Our approximation method breaks the problem up into two parts. The ﬁrst part is to construct asmooth relaxation of the problem, which is essentially the continuous-time and continuous-space limit; the second part is to adjust our microstructure decisions to track the smooth relaxation optimally. The key feature of all smooth relaxations is that they hide microstructure details behind smooth cost functions meant to represent the average cost of trading at a given rate; they provide no guidance on microstructure-level decisions, eﬀectively assuming all executions use market orders. In particular, if we can predict the probability of a passive ﬁll at any given instant (e.g., based on order book imbalance), it is not clear how to use this information in the context of a smooth relaxation, whereas our model provides a very clear and obvious way for the implementor to take advantage of predictions of passive ﬁll completion. LetV (t,x ) denote the Bellman value function for the smooth relaxation, deﬁned to be the remaining expected-utility gain from timet obtained from following the best policy when the current state at timet isx. There is also, in principle, a value function for Problem 1 deﬁned in the same way, but the latter appears to be intractable. The present paper’s key idea is to exploit the value function of the smooth relaxation to provide eﬀective microstructure alphas that adjust the microstructure decisions toward long-term optimality. The vector p :=∇V (t,x )∈Rd (1.1) plays a central role in our approach, whered≥1 is the number of traded assets. As deﬁned,p is the direction of steepest ascent for the value function. In our heuristics, (1.1) encodes all of the information about the long-term utility function is needed to make the microstructure decision, so it provides the key link between the trading schedule and the order routing problem. In order to describe our policy for selecting the best microstructure action, we must ﬁrst introduce some more notation. WriteRi,t(v,a ) for the (random) proﬁt (or loss, if negative) from an order of quantityv on stocki using actiona over a short interval[t,t +δt]. The actiona includes the trader’s choice of whether to trade passively or aggressively. A trader’s expected proﬁtE[Ri,t(v,a )] depends on the trading cost associated with the pair(v,a ), and also on the trader’s views concerning the short-horizon midpoint price return rmid i = midi(t +δt)/midi(t)−1. With no subscript,rmid denotes thed-dimensional vector of all midpoint returns for all assets. Deﬁnition 1.1.The termeﬀective microstructure alphas, as used in this paper, will denote a set of parameters given to a microstructure trader in the place ofE[rmid], for the purpose of satisfying either a short-term goal or a long-term goal. 2 Microstructure alphas, as deﬁned, could be a simple prediction ofrmid, or, more interestingly, they could be purposely skewed to encourage trading to increase expected utility (ie. increase long-term alpha and reduce risk) as we shall suggest in Equation (1.3). Our heuristics is, at timet, for each security indexed by i ∈ {1,...,d}, choose an instantaneous action a⋆ i which solves the following maximization (over the ﬁnite setAt,i of possible actions on the asseti at timet): ai ⋆= argmax a∈At,i E[Ri,t(va,a )] for all i∈{1,...,d}, (1.2) where: E[rmid] =p :=∇V (t,x ), (1.3) and follow this action over the interval[t,t +δt). Hereva denotes the quantity associated with action a; for example “a = aggressive buy 100 shares” meansva = 100. Note also that rmid and p are n-vectors, so the equationE[rmid] =p expresses the trader’s views in alln assets. Thereisaverygoodintuitivejustiﬁcationfor(1.2)-(1.3). Weshowlaterthat, undercertainconditions, the optimal instantaneous trading rate at any timet in the smooth relaxation is given by argmax v {⟨p,v⟩−c(v)}, (1.4) where c(v) is the average cost of trading at ratev. The expression⟨p,v⟩−c(v) is the instantaneous analogue of expected proﬁt minus cost, if your expected return isp. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present an example of a long-term trading schedule, the Almgren-Chriss case, and how to compute the value functionV (t,x ) and its gradientp. We further show howpis related to the generalized momenta of the Hamiltonian approach. In Section 3, we derive the heuristics (1.2) by analogy with the smooth case and show how the trader can choose its short-term alpha in order to minimize the error with respect to the trading schedule. In Section 4, we present a general microstructure trading framework on a portfolio of cross-listed assets, taking into account long and short-term trading signals as well as many components of market microstructure (spread, imbalance, probability of ﬁlling etc.). We also show how this heuristics can be applied to the problem of multi-asset market-making. Finally, Section 5 shows a detailed numerical example which illustrates the dangers of separating portfolio construction from execution, and in which our method generates an improvement that is both statistically and economically signiﬁcant. 2 The long-term trading curve In this section, we recall the optimal portfolio liquidation framework of Almgren and Chriss (2001) in continuous time and show how to solve the problem using the Hamiltonian method. In the process, we introduce notation that is used in the rest of the paper. Variations of the Almgren-Chriss model are used in execution desks all over the world. Indeed it is safe to say that the Almgren-Chriss model (usually with some custom extensions) has been used to execute trillions of dollars’ worth of customer orders. We also believe that the Almgren-Chriss model, used in conjunction with the presented heuristics for microstructure decisions, is a reasonable choice if the trader has no alpha forecasts (with the possible exception of microstructure forecasts). Moreover, the computations we do here generalize in a straightforward way to extensions of the Almgren-Chriss model, such as to include long-term alpha. One of the key pieces of intuition that 3 allows us to generalize the model, we feel, comes from Theorem 1 which makes the connection between microstructure alpha, Hamilton’s generalized momentum, and the steepest-ascent direction of the long-term value function. For all of these reasons, we feel this is a useful example to do in detail. We consider a trader in charge of a portfolio ofd≥1 assets, of initial positionsq0 = (q1 0,...,qd 0)T where qi 0∈R for alli∈{1,...,d}. The trader wants to unwind this portfolio over the time horizon [0,T ], whereT > 0. Given a control process(vi t)t∈[0,T ] representing the trading rate on asseti, the inventory process of thei-th asset is given by qi t =qi 0− ∫t 0 vi sds, i ∈{1,...,d}. (2.1) For each stock, we consider Gaussian price dynamics: dSi t =σidWi t, where the Brownian motions(Wi t )t∈[0,T ] are such that(S1 t,...,S d t )t∈[0,T ] has a nonsingular covariance matrix Σ. We treat all temporary impact as instantaneous and permanent impact as linear, hence irrelevant in the continuous-time case. In the single-asset case, if we trade∆q dollars in some small time interval of length ∆t, and this costsλ∆q/∆t times traded notional for someλ >0, then the total cost in dollars per unit time is λ(δq/δt)2≡c(δq/δt), wherec(v) =λv2. However,c(·) does not need to be quadratic, merely convex. In the multi-asset case, we simply setc : Rd→R+. As an aside, we note that these impact assumptions are an approximation that is only ever assumed to be valid within a certain regime. For example, if we repeatedly aggress with medium to large order sizes within a short time-frame, it is unrealistic to assume that the impact will revert instantly. The trader attempts to maximize the expectation of utility of ﬁnal wealth. Due to the nonlinear nature of most utility functions, this is inconvenient to work with. If time is discrete and if the multi- period asset return vector follows an elliptical distribution, then there exists some constantκ>0 for which it is equivalent to maximize the mean-variance quadratic form: E[wT ]−κ 2 V[wT ], where wT is the trader’s wealth at terminal time. This is essentially the Markowitz prescription. Following Almgren and Chriss (2001), most authors and practitioners replace the variance of ﬁnal wealth V[wT ] with the integrated instantaneous variance, leading to the standard continuous-time approximation of the mean-variance form, ∫T 0  −κ 2qT t Σqt−c( ˙qt)  dt. We shall now recast the maximization of the mean-variance form of the utility function as a problem in the calculus of variations. As in classical mechanics, it has both a Lagrangian and a Hamiltonian formulation, which are convex duals to each other. The Hamiltonian is related to the Lagrangian by the Legendre-Fenchel transform. In the following, we deﬁne what we mean by the term “smooth relaxation” which is not standard terminology. 4 Deﬁnition 2.1.Let qT ∈Rd be a desired ﬁnal portfolio to be achieved at timeT. The smooth relaxation problemassociated toc(·), Σ,qT is deﬁned to be: V (0,q 0) = min q∈C2([0,T ],Rd) ∫T 0 L(qs, ˙qs)ds subject toq0 =q0,qT =qT, (2.2) where the (autonomous) Lagrangian is given by: L(q,v ) =c(v) + 1 2κ(q−qT )′Σ(q−qT ), (2.3) and κ>0 is the risk-aversion constant. The terminology of Deﬁnition 2.1 arises because Problem 1 is non-smooth and perhaps intractable, given that the action space of Problem 1 is discrete and quite large. In this sense (2.2) is a relaxation of the intractable problem to the space of twice-diﬀerentiable pathsC2([0,T ], Rd). In this paper, most of our results assume autonomous Lagrangians for simplicity. However, non-autonomous Lagrangians also arise in trading problems. For example, an alpha forecast which attenuates for larget entails a time-dependent linear term in (2.2). An application of the Euler-Lagrange formula to (2.2) leads to a system of second-order equations. By a standard trick, a ﬁrst-order system can be obtained if we introduce the so-called generalized momentap, deﬁned as p :=∂vL(q, ˙q). (2.4) If the conditions of the implicit function theorem are satisﬁed, we could solve (2.4) for˙q, obtaining ˙q =φ(q,p ), for some functionφdeﬁned implicitly by (2.4). The Euler equation then takes the form ˙p =∂qL(q, ˙q) =∂qL(q,φ(q,p ))≡ψ(q,p ), where this deﬁnesψ. As the functions φ,ψare algebraic (not involving derivatives), we have a system of2d ﬁrst-order ODEs given by ˙q =φ(q,p ), ˙p =ψ(q,p ) (2.5) These equations can be expressed more symmetrically by introducing the Hamiltonian H(q,p ) :=pφ(q,p )−L(q,φ(q,p )). Equations (2.5) are equivalently written in a form known asHamilton’s equations: ˙q =Hp(q,p ), ˙p =−Hq(q,p ). (2.6) Suppose c(v) = 1 2vTΛv where Λ = diag(λ1,...,λd) is a diagonal matrix. We assume that no trading is free of cost, soλi > 0 for alli. From (2.3) and (2.4), we see that the generalized momenta are p = Λ·q and hence algebraically solving, one hasφ(q,p ) = Λ−1p. The Hamiltonian is then H(q,p ) = 1 2pΛ−1p−1 2κqTΣq. Hamilton’s equations then become: ˙q = Λ−1p, ˙p =κΣq, (2.7) and some technical computations lead to the following proposition. 5 Lemma 2.2. The solution to(2.2) is given by q⋆ t = (C T)−1Ω ( eD 1 2 (T−t)−e−D 1 2 (T−t) )( eD 1 2T−e−D 1 2T )−1 Ω TC Tq0, (2.8) where Σ = CC T is the Cholesky decomposition ofC and ΩDΩ T is a spectral decomposition of the positive deﬁnite matrixκ 2C TΛ−1C. The trading curve (2.8) can be computed in advance, and corresponds to the order scheduling decision. We end this section by showing that the gradient of the value function (2.2) is equal to the generalized momentap. Theorem 1.LetV : [0,T ]×Rd→R be continuously diﬀerentiable in time and space such that: V (t,qt) =− min q∈C2([t,T ],Rd) ∫T t L(qs,vs)ds subject toq0 =q0,qT =qT (2.9) where for alls∈[0,T ], ˙qs = vs and L(q,v ) is separable.1 The functionV deﬁned in(2.9) satisﬁes the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman diﬀerential equation: ∂tV (t,q ) +H(q,∇V ) = 0, (2.10) whereH(q,p ) = supv{⟨p,v⟩−L(q,v )}, with the singular ﬁnal condition: V (T,q ) =  }  0, if q =qT ∞, if q⁄=qT. Proof. Let q⋆be the path that solves (2.9) on[t,T ] with initial conditionq⋆ t = q. By the dynamic programming principle, we have forh> 0 V (t,q ) =− ∫t+h t L(q⋆ s, ˙q⋆ s)ds +V (t +h,q⋆ t+h). (2.11) As V (t +h,q⋆ t+h) =V (t,q ) + ∫t+h t ( ∂tV (s,qs) +⟨∇V (s,qs)·˙q⋆ s⟩ ) ds, Equation (2.11) can be rewritten as 0 = ∫t+h t ( ∂tV (s,qs) +⟨∇V (s,qs)·˙q⋆ s−L(q⋆ s, ˙q⋆ s) ) ds. The conclusion follows from an application of the Bellman’s optimality principle, see Dreyfus (1960), which gives the desired Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation. The above theorem gives the desired interpretation of the generalized momentap in terms of the value function. Indeed, along an optimal trajectoryq⋆, we have ∇V|x=q⋆ t =∂vL(q⋆ t, ˙q⋆ t ) =pt∀t∈[0,T ], where the second equality is just the deﬁnition ofp from (2.4). 1The value function (2.2) satisﬁes these hypothesis, as the associated optimal control (2.8) is continuously diﬀeren- tiable with respect to time and the Lagrangian of the problem is quadratic with respect to both of its variables. 6 3 From smooth relaxation to microstructure decision In this section, we prove our main theorem, Theorem 2, which shows how a risk-neutral instantaneous- proﬁt maximizer (or “myopic agent”) can achieve long-term optimality given a judicious choice of microstructure alpha model. In other words, there is a speciﬁc microstructure alpha model related to Hamilton’s generalized momenta, which, if used by a microstructure trader, encourages the trader to take positions that are optimal at a much longer horizon. Suppose now thatL is coercive of degreer >1. One may prove thatH coincides with the Fenchel conjugate ofL: H(q,p ) = sup v∈Rd {⟨p,v⟩−L(q,v )}. (3.1) It follows thatH is convex in thep variable. We now restrict attention to autonomous and separable Lagrangians that take the form L(q,v ) =c(v) +f(q), (3.2) which includes the mean-variance example discussed before. Under the assumption (3.2), duality between the Lagrangian and Hamiltonian implies that the optimal instantaneous trade˙q∗(t) at each time t is the argumentv which solves the maximization problem in (3.1). That is, ˙q⋆= argmax v { ⟨p,v⟩−c(v) } . (3.3) where (3.2) implies we can safely omit the termf(q). One can interpret (3.3) as optimization in a risk-neutral world. Indeed, suppose a risk-neutral agent had a vector of expected returns, which happened to exactly equal the vector of generalized momenta, p, and sought only to maximize net proﬁt, irrespective of risk. In that case, (3.3) is the problem faced by this agent. This agent can be considered “myopic” because any information concerning more than one period ahead is available to the agent only indirectly, insofar aspdepends on the rest of the trading path. This intuition is related to the interpretation of the generalized momenta as the gradient of the value function. Indeed, for a myopic risk-neutral investor who does not face transaction costs, the “value function” of a position of sizex is simply the expected proﬁt over the next period, i.e., V (t,q ) = r·q where r is the vector of expected returns, but then∇V =r. The following deﬁnition characterizes what a myopic agent is. Moreover, we emphasize that, throughout the paper,V (·,·) corresponds to the value function of a long-term optimization problem (whose gradient provide the eﬀective microstructure alphas), whereasW (·,·) denotes the value function of the myopic agent. Deﬁnition 3.1.A myopic agentwith microstructure alphasp is deﬁned to be a risk-neutral trader seeking to maximize instantaneous net proﬁt by choosing trading rate given by ˙q⋆= argmax v { ⟨p,v⟩−c(v) } , (3.4) where p denotes a set of microstructure alphas, as in Deﬁnition 1.1. Thevalue function of the myopic traderat timet∈[0,T ] for an inventoryq∈Rd is deﬁned as W (t,q ) = ∫T t ( ⟨ps,v⋆ s⟩−c(v⋆ s) ) ds, (3.5) wherev⋆is deﬁned as the solution of(3.4). 7 In other words, the value function of a myopic trader deﬁned in (3.5) is simply the sum of his instantaneous trading gains over time. The following proposition shows that a myopic trader sending market orders only has to choosep =∇V in order to minimize the error between his value function and the long-term objective functionV. Theorem 2.Assume thatL takes the separable form(3.2). A myopic agent with instantaneous cost function c(·) must choose microstructure alphasp =∇V in order to minimize the absolute error between his value function and the long-term objective functionV deﬁning the trading schedule. More precisely, for all(t,q )∈[0,T ]×∏d i=1  min(qi 0,qi T ), max(qi 0,qi T )  , ⏐⏐⏐W (t,q )−V (t,q ) ⏐⏐⏐≤κ(T−t)|q−qT|TΣ|q−qT| 2 , and we have the uniform bound sup (t,q)∈[0,T ]× ∏d i=1[min(qi 0,qi T ),max(qi 0,qi T )] ⏐⏐⏐W (t,q )−V (t,q ) ⏐⏐⏐≤κT|q0−qT|TΣ|q0−qT| 2 , where|q0−qT|= ( |q1 0−q1 T|,...|qd 0−qd T| ) . Proof. Themyopictraderaimsatminimizing c(v)−pv, whereforthemoment premainsundetermined, at each trading time. Over[t,T ] the trader’s problem can be written: W (t,q ) = maxv ∫T t [⟨ps,vs⟩−c(vs)]ds. We choose quadratic costsc(v) = η 2‖v‖2 2, where‖·‖2 is the Euclidian norm and the ﬁrst order condition with respect tov givesW (t,q ) = ∫T t ‖ps‖2 2 2ηds. On the other hand, the value functionV (t,q ) becomes ∫T t { 1 2η‖∂vL(q⋆ s,v⋆ s)‖2 2 + 1 2κ(q⋆ s−qT )TΣ(q⋆ s−qT ) } ds, where q⋆is deﬁned by (2.8) andv⋆is its derivative with respect to time. Therefore, |V (t,q )−W (t,q )|= ⏐⏐⏐⏐ ∫T t {1 2η‖∂vL(q⋆ s,v⋆ s)‖2 2 + 1 2κ(q⋆ s−qT )TΣ(q⋆ s−qT )−‖ps‖2 2 2η } ds ⏐⏐⏐⏐, and the minimum with respect top is attained atps = ∂vL(q⋆ s,v⋆ s) = ∇V (s,q⋆ s), because p must depend only of the instantaneous trading rate andL is separable and additive. The bounds are obtained easily by deﬁnition of the space of inventories. This simple result has several important consequences. Suppose one wants to avoid the use of optimal control and still wants to follow the Almgren-Chriss trading curve. In that case, one can simply solve the static optimization problem (3.3) at discrete times (the times of trading), usingp =∇V. Equation (3.3) does not give a full set of instructions for the trader with a long-term trading schedule who has to interact with a continuous limit order book market, but it can serve as a guide. Indeed, the order routing problem, treated notably in Cont and Kukanov (2017), takes into account the possibility to send limit, market, or cancel orders to several liquidity venues, depending on their spread and 8 imbalance. Stochastic control appears to be ineﬃcient for this problem, as one needs to solve a high-dimensional Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation. Methods involving deep reinforcement learning have been developed for optimal trading, see for example Baldacci and Manziuk (2020), but they lead to high computation time, especially if one wants to deal with a portfolio of assets traded on several venues. The advantage of the methodology presented in this paper is that one can avoid optimal control and solve a simple static optimization problem to determine the optimal action at each discrete trading time. Remark 3.2. The bounds on the absolute error between the value function of the myopic agent and the long-term objective function enable to compute the accuracy of the myopic trader. For example, take the liquidation overT = 1 day ofq1 0 = q2 0 = 2000 shares of 2 assets, with correlationρ= 0.6 and daily volatilitiesσ1 = 0.015 and σ2 = 0.02. The absolute error between the two value functions is uniformy bounded in time and inventories by2×10−2. In Theorem 2, the myopic trader does not consider the properties of an order book, such as the possi- bility to submit limit and market orders or to wait. In this case, the optimal eﬀective microstructure alpha p (in the sense of minimization of the error with respect to the Almgren-Chriss value function V) should not be equal to the generalized momenta because we add microstructure eﬀects for the myopic trader that are not present in the trading schedule represented by∇V. With a suﬃciently simple ﬁll model, the myopic trader’s problem dealing with microstructure eﬀects can be solved in closed form. This closed-form expression (see Example 3.3) illustrates the contrast between the two possible decisions the trader must face, as mentioned above. Example 3.3. For the sake of readability, we assumed = 1. Suppose that the myopic trader can choose between submitting a limit order (with ﬁll probability0< f <1) or a market order (with the cost of crossing the spread equal tos> 0). The myopic trader’s optimization problem is: sup v { (pv−η 2v2−sv)1{pv−η 2v2−sv>f (pv−η 2v2)}+f(pv−η 2v2)1{pv−η 2v2−sv<f (pv−η 2v2)} } . Computations lead to the following decisions: passive order ifp< 2s 1−f, aggressive otherwise, and the optimal microstructure alpha is given by: p⋆ t = 1√f|∇V (t,q⋆ t )|sgn ( ∇V (t,q⋆ t ) ) if p⋆ t < 2s 1−f, p ⋆ t =|∇V (t,q⋆ t )|sgn ( ∇V (t,q⋆ t ) ) +s otherwise. The use of the generalized momenta as eﬀective microstructure alpha has a wide range of practical implications. First, it oﬀers a way to bridge the gap between order placement decisions and scheduling decisions, usually decoupled in practice. Second, the microstructure formulation helps to tackle classic optimal control on limit order books. For example, a realistic optimal trading framework dealing with a portfolio of assets on several liquidity venues is in practice intractable due to the dimensionality of the problem. In the method presented in this paper, the optimal controls of the trader (that is, the volume sent on each venue for each asset by the mean of limit and market orders) are derived through a simple static optimization problem, which can be solved for a large number of assets on a large number of venues. The convergence through the trading schedule is guaranteed by choice of the eﬀective microstructure alphap. 9 Remark 3.4. Note that, in the framework of Example(3.3), if the spreads tends to zero and the ﬁlling probabilityf tends to one, we recover the framework of a myopic sending market orders only, and the optimal eﬀective microstructure alpha is given by∇V. This method can easily handle the increasing complexity coming from the microstructure eﬀects (short term alpha, imbalance, and spread of each venue, etc.). In the next section, we present a general microstructure trading model taking into account the main stylized facts combining order placement and order routing of a portfolio of assets. We show that using the method proposed in this paper can be applied to solve in practice two important problems in systematic trading: the multi- asset, multi-venue optimal trading problem and the multi-asset, multi-venue optimal market-making problem. 4 A general microstructure trading model with long-term trading schedule 4.1 Optimal trading We ﬁrst provide a deﬁnition of the problem. Deﬁnition 4.1.Consider an agent trading a portfolio of correlated assets, where each asset is listed on one or more liquidity venues. Themulti-asset, multi-venue optimal trading problemconsists in determining at a given time and for each asset, the optimal quantity to buy or sell on each venue, for given market conditions and a pre-computed trading schedule, as well as the optimal limit at which such quantity should be posted. The framework described here is inspired by Baldacci and Manziuk (2020). Consider a trading schedule ford≥1 assets q⋆∈Rd (the Almgren-Chriss trading schedule described in Equation (2.8), for example) with associated value functionV (t,q⋆ t ). For each asseti∈{1,...,d}, the trader splits his limit and market orders betweenNi≥1 liquidity venues. We assume that he wants to unwind the portfolio so thatqT = 0d. For alli∈{1,...,d},n∈{1,...,N i}, the order book of the asseti on the venuen is characterized by the following quantities: • the bid-ask spread process(ψi,n t )t∈[0,T ] taking values in the state spaceψ i,n ={δi,n,...,Jδi,n}, • the imbalance process(Ii,n t )t∈[0,T ] taking values in the state spaceI i,n ={Ii,n 1 ,...,I i,n K}, where J,K ∈N denote the number of possible spreads and imbalances respectively andδi,n stands for the tick size ofi-th asset on then-th venue. Note that the dynamics are unspeciﬁed, meaning that any continuous-time stochastic process with discrete values can be considered for the purpose of simulation. Deﬁnition 4.2.A market regimeis, for asseti∈{1,...,d}, a set of spread and imbalance values on the diﬀerent venuesn∈{1,...,N i}. We deﬁne the setsΨ = {Ψ 1,..., Ψ #Ψ},I ={I1,...,I#I}of disjoint intervals, representing diﬀerent market regimes of interest in terms of spreads and imbalances. 10 Example 4.3.Assumed = 1 and for alln∈{1,...,N}, δn =δ. The set Ψ = { δ,{2δ,3δ},{4δ,5δ} } denotes three spread regimes: low (one tick), medium (two or three ticks), and high (four or ﬁve ticks). Example 4.4. Assume d = 1 and for alln∈{1,...,N}and k∈{1,...,K}that In k = Ik. In this case the setI = { [−1,−0.66], (−0.66,−0.33], (−0.33, 0.33], (0.33, 0.66], (0.66, 1] } denotes ﬁve regimes of imbalance: low (−33% to 33%), medium on the ask (resp. bid) from33% to 66% (resp. from−66% to−33%) and high on the ask (resp. bid) from66% to 100% (resp. from−100% to−66%). The number of, possibly partially, ﬁlled ask orders on the asseti in the venuen is modeled by a Cox process denoted byNi,n with intensitiesλi,n ( ψi t,I i t,pi,n t ,𝓁i t ) where pi,n t ∈Qi,n ψ represent the limit at which the trader sends a limit order of size𝓁i,n t , and Qi,n ψ ={0, 1}if ψi,n =δi,n, and{−1, 0, 1}otherwise. Practically, on asseti, forn∈{1,...,N i}, when the spread is equal to the tick size, the trader can post at the ﬁrst best limit (pi,n = 0) or the second best limit (ifpi,n = 1). When the spread is equal to two ticks or more, the trader can either create a new best limit (pi,n =−1) or post at the best or the second best limit as previously. The arrival intensity of a buy market order at timet on the venue n∈{1,...,N i}for asseti at the limitp∈Qi,n ψ, given a couple(ψi t,I i t) = m of spread and imbalance on each venue, is equal toλi,n,m,p > 0. When the trader posts limit orders of volume𝓁i,n t on then-th venue forn∈{1,...,N i}, the probability that it is executed is equal tofλ(𝓁i t), wherefλ(·)∈[0, 1] is a continuously diﬀerentiable function, decreasing with respect to each of its coordinate. Therefore, the arrival intensity of an ask market order ﬁlling the buy limit order of the trader for asseti on the n-th venue at the limitpi,n t , given spread and imbalance(ψi t,I i t) is a multi-regime function deﬁned by λi,n(ψi t,I i t,pi,n t ,𝓁i t) =fλ(𝓁i t) ∑ m∈Mi,p∈Qi,n ψ λi,n,m,p1{(ψi t,Ii t)∈m,pi,n t =p}, (4.1) whereMi = Ψ Ni ×INi . Moreover, we allow for partial execution, the fact of which we represent by random variablesϵi,n t ∈[0, 1]. The proportion of executed volume for limit orders in each venue depends on the spread and the imbalance in allNi venues for asseti, as well as the volume and the limit of the order chosen by the trader. We assume a categorical distribution withR >0 diﬀerent execution proportionsωr,r∈{1,...,R}for each venue withP(ϵi,n t =ωr) =ρi,n,r(ψi t,I i t,pi,n t ,𝓁i t), where ρi,n,r(ψi t,I i t,pi,n t ,𝓁i t) =fρ(𝓁i t) ∑ m∈Mi,p∈Qi,n ψ ρi,n,m,p,r1{(ψi t,Ii t)∈m,pi,n t =p}, (4.2) wherefρ(·) is a continuously diﬀerentiable function, decreasing with respect to each of its coordinate. We allow for the execution of market orders (denoted by a point process(Ji,n t )t∈[0,T ]) on each venue of size (vi,n t )t∈[0,T ]∈[0,v] where v >0 and Ji,n t =Ji,n t− + 1. We assume that market orders are always fully executed but this assumption can be relaxed easily. As each asset must be bought or sold, we deﬁne∆ = (∆ 1,..., ∆ d) where for i∈{1,...,d}, ∆ i = 1 if qi 0 > 0,−1 otherwise. The inventory process on each asset is deﬁned by qi t =qi 0−∆ i Ni ∑ n=1 (∫t 0 𝓁i,n s ϵi,n s dNi,n s + ∫t 0 vi,n s dJi,n s ) . 11 The myopic trader has an eﬀective microstructure(peﬀ,i t )t∈[0,T ] in order to follow the pre-computed execution curveq⋆i t on each asset, but also a short-term alpha(pshort,i t )t∈[0,T ] which is a function of the current spread and imbalancemi of all the venues where asseti is listed. Remark 4.5.The microstructure alpha considered for each asset is the sum of a direct microstructure alpha depending on the market regimes and an eﬀective microstructure alpha that gives a signal to follow the long-term objective function. The sum of these two terms gives the magnitude of the buy or sell signal. For example, suppose peﬀ,i is small and positive, indicating that ﬁlling a buy order would be a slight improvement to the value function. Suppose withpeﬀ,i alone, the system would have recommended a passive buy order. Now suppose a strongly-positive microstructure alpha, denoted pshort,i, is also present; then the combinationpeﬀ,i +pshort,i in place ofpeﬀ,i should recommend a more aggressive action, such as a spread-crossing buy order. Finally, the cost function of a limit order of size𝓁at limit p on venuen for asset i is deﬁned as ci,n,L(𝓁,p) and ci,n,M(v) for the cost function of a market order of sizev on venuen for asseti. The myopic trader acts at discrete times and at timet∈[0,T ] for (ψi t,I i t)∈mi,i ∈{1,...,d}, his optimization problem is max { sup 𝓁,p {d∑ i=1 Ni ∑ n=1 λi,n(mi,pi,n,𝓁i)E ( peﬀ,i +pshort,i,n(mi) ) 𝓁i,nϵi,n−ci,n,L(ϵi,n𝓁i,n,pi,n) } , sup v {d∑ i=1 Ni ∑ n=1 ( peﬀ,i +pshort,i,n(mi) ) vi,n−ci,n,M(vi,n) }} , (4.3) where the expectation is taken with respect to the variablesϵi,n for alli∈{1,...,d},n∈{1,...,N i}. This is a simple static optimization which can be solved for a large number of assets and venues using a multidimensional root-ﬁnding method. The output is, for each statemi, the optimal volumes and limits 𝓁⋆i,n(mi),p⋆i,n(mi) for each asset on each liquidity venue. We deﬁne the value function of the myopic trader at timet as W (t,ψ,I,q) = ∫T t max {d∑ i=1 Ni ∑ n=1 λi,n(ψi s,I i s,p⋆i,n s ,𝓁⋆i s )E ( plong,i s +pshort,i,n s (ψi s,I i s) ) 𝓁⋆i,n s ϵi,n s −ci,n,L(ϵi,n s 𝓁⋆i,n s ,p⋆i,n s )  , d∑ i=1 Ni ∑ n=1 ( plong,i s +pshort,i,n s (ψi s,I i s) ) v⋆i,n s −ci,n,M(v⋆i,n) } ds where ψt = ψ,It = I,q t = q. As in Theorem 2, the myopic trader has now to choose the long-term alpha peﬀto match the trading scheduleq⋆. This leads to the following optimization setting for all mi∈Mi: max { sup 𝓁,p {d∑ i=1 Ni ∑ n=1 λi,n(mi,pi,n,𝓁i)E ( peﬀ,i +pshort,i,n(mi) ) 𝓁i,nϵi,n−ci,n,L(ϵi,n𝓁i,n,pi,n) } , sup v {d∑ i=1 Ni ∑ n=1 ( peﬀ,i +pshort,i,n(mi) ) vi,n−ci,n,M(vi,n) }} , peﬀ= argminpeﬀ ⏐⏐⏐V (·,q⋆ ·)−W (·,ψ·,I·,q·) ⏐⏐⏐. (Opt-Trd) 12 In this general framework, order scheduling with a long-term target is easily tractable even for a large portfolio of assets, as the trader has to solve a static optimization problem at each trading time. For a parsimonious model of ﬁlling probabilities, the eﬀective microstructure alpha can be computed in closed form. Note that each time a ﬁll is received that changes the portfolio holdings, and/or each time a signiﬁcant amount of time passes, the eﬀective microstructure alphapeﬀmust be recomputed. Remark 4.6. The methodology presented in this paper leads to entirely tractable optimization prob- lems, even for a large number of assets. This is the case when we have a closed-form solution for the long-term value functionV, which can be computed quickly. It also suggests an approximation of the eﬀective microstructure alpha, that is to takepeﬀ,i t =∇iV (t,q⋆ ·). This heuristics will be used in the next section to solve a diﬀerent control problem. 4.2 Market-making The great advantage of the framework presented in this paper is that it avoids the use of optimal control to tackle optimal trading problems. The trader solves a simple static optimization problem, and the use of the generalized momenta as a long-term alpha plays the role of the trading schedule. Similar ideas can be applied to the market-making problem, with some minor changes. Deﬁnition 4.7.Consider an agent trading on a portfolio of correlated assets, where each of them is listed on one or several liquidity venues. His goal is to earn the diﬀerence between the bid and ask prices (the bid-ask spread) while keeping his inventory close to zero to avoid an unwanted large exposure and be forced to buy at a higher price or sell at a lower price in order to unwind this position. Themulti-asset, multi-venue optimal market-making problemconsists in deriving at a given time, for each asset, the optimal quantity to buy or sell in each venue, for given market conditions, as well as the optimal limit at which such quantity should be posted, with an inventory vector mean-reverting around zero or some predetermined target. The market-making problem has been introduced in the ﬁnancial literature by Ho and Stoll (1981); Glosten and Milgrom (1985). Ho and Stoll presented a framework to tackle inventory management, while Grossman and Miller proposed a3 periods model that encompassed both market-makers and ﬁnal customers, enabled them to understand what happens at equilibrium, and contributed to the important literature on the price formation process. The seminal reference of the recent literature on market-making is the work of Avellaneda and Stoikov in Avellaneda and Stoikov (2008), who proposed a stochastic control framework to tackle the quoting and inventory management problems. Since then, a vast literature on optimal market-making has emerged, basically adding many features to the Avellaneda and Stoikov framework, see for example Cartea et al. (2014); Guéant et al. (2013) and the two textbooks Cartea et al. (2015); Guéant (2016). These works deal with single asset market-making, and the considered framework is more suitable for OTC markets rather than order- driven markets. The problem of multi-asset market-making, dealing with the curse of dimensionality, has been addressed via deep reinforcement learning methods, see for example Guéant and Manziuk (2019). Models for optimal market-making in limit order books have been developed for the single asset case, see Guilbaud and Pham (2013), for example. All these models suﬀer from the same problem when dealing with a portfolio of assets: solving a high-dimensional Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation makes the problem almost intractable in practice. In this section, we propose an adaptation of the previously described heuristics to tackle the multi-asset market-making problem in limit order books. 13 4.2.1 The long-term objective function Our methodology to solve optimal control problems in high dimension relies on the fact that the eﬀective microstructure alphas come from a long-term objective function computed analytically. This is the case of the Almgren-Chriss trading curve, which hides the microstructure eﬀects that are in- corporated in the myopic optimization problem. However, as stated previously, the main constraint of the optimal market-making problem is that, even for market-making on OTC markets, the value function’s computation is very time-consuming. We propose to use the gradient of an approximation of the value function of the optimal market-making problem on OTC markets as the eﬀective mi- crostructure alphas for the optimal market-making problem in order books. To this end, we borrow the OTC framework of Bergault et al. (2020) and recall their modeling assumptions brieﬂy. Fori∈{1,...,d}, the reference price of asseti is modeled by a processSi t with dynamics dSi t =σidWi t, where (Wi t,...,W d t ) is ad-dimensional Brownian motion with variance-covariance matrixΣ. At each t∈[0,T ], the market-maker chooses the pricesPi,b t ,P i,a t at which she is ready to buy/sell each asset i. These prices are given by Pi,b t =Si t−δi,b t , P i,a t =Si t +δi,a t , whereδt = (δ1,b t ,δ1,a t ,...,δd,b t ,δd,a t ) are the control processes of the market-maker corresponding to the bid and ask spreads set on each asseti. Fori∈{1,...,d}, the point processesNi,b t ,N i,a t denote the total number of bid and ask transactions between0 and t on asseti. Their intensities are given by Λi,b(δi,b t ), Λi,a(δi,a t ) where the functionsΛi,b, Λi,a satisfy some technical conditions, see Bergault et al. (2020) for details. These conditions are suﬃciently general to allow the use of several form of intensity such as exponential, logistic, SU Johnson etc. The transaction size for asset i is constant and denoted by zi, and the inventory process of the market-maker for asseti is dqi t =zi ( dNi,b t −dNi,a t ) , q t = (q1 t,...,qd t )T. The cash process of the market-maker has the following dynamics: dXt = d∑ i=1 ( Pi,a t dNi,a t −Pi,b t dNi,b t ) . The optimization problem of the market-maker is deﬁned by sup δ E  XT + d∑ i=1 qi TSi T−γ 2 ∫T 0 qT s Σqsdt  , and simple computations2 give the associated value function at timet for a given inventory vector qt =q: V (t,q ) = sup δ Et d∑ i=1 ∫T t ( δi,a s Λi,a(δi,a s ) +δi,b s Λi,b(δi,b s )−γ 2qT s Σqs ) dt  , (4.4) 2It can be shown by simple change of variables that the value function of this control problem is only a functional of the time and the inventories. 14 where Et denote the conditional expectation with respect to the canonical ﬁltration at timet and γ >0 is the risk-aversion of the market-maker. He wishes to maximize the sum of his cash process and the mark-to-market value of his inventory. The running penalty forces him to mean-revert his inventories to zero. We now state the main proposition of Bergault et al. (2020) that provides a closed form approximation ofV (t,q ), and refer to this article for the proof. Proposition 4.8. Deﬁne the functions Hi,b(p) = sup δ {Λi,b(δ)(δ−p)}, H i,a(p) = sup δ {Λi,a(δ)(δ−p)}, and the constantsαi,b j = (Hi,b)j(0),αi,a j = (Hi,a)j(0), where the superscriptj∈{0, 1, 2}denote the derivative of orderj. Deﬁne also fork∈N ∆ i,b j,k =αi,b j (zi)k, ∆ i,a j,k =αi,a j (zi)k, Vb j,k = ( ∆ 1,b j,k,..., ∆ d,b j,k ) , V a j,k = ( ∆ 1,a j,k,..., ∆ d,a j,k ) , Db j,k = diag ( ∆ 1,b j,k,..., ∆ d,b j,k ) , D a j,k = diag ( ∆ 1,a j,k,..., ∆ d,a j,k ) . Then ifαi,b 2 +αi,a 2 > 0, the value function of the optimal control problem(4.4) can be approximated by the function ˜V (t,q ) =−qTA(t)q−qTB(t)−C(t), (4.5) whereA : [0,T ]→S++ d ,B : [0,T ]→Rd and C : [0,T ]→R are deterministic functions given by A(t) = 1 2D −1 2 + ˆA ( e ˆA(T−t)−e−ˆA(T−t) )( e ˆA(T−t) +e−ˆA(T−t) )−1 D −1 2 + , B(t) =−2e−2 ∫T t A(u)D+du ∫T t e2 ∫T s A(u)D+duA(s) ( V−+D−D ( A(s) )) ds C(t) =−Tr(Db 0,1+a 0,1)(T−t)−Tr ( (Db 1,2 +Da 1,2) ∫T t A(s)ds ) −V T − ∫T t B(s)ds −1 2 ∫T t D ( A(s) )T (Db 2,3 +Da 2,3)D ( A(s) ) ds−1 2 ∫T t B(s)TD+B(s)ds − ∫T t B(s)TD−B(s)ds, with D+ =Db 2,1 +Da 2,1,D−=Db 2,2−Da 2,2,V−=Vb 1,1−Va 1,1, ˆA =√γ ( D 1 2 +ΣD 1 2 + )1 2 , andD is the linear operator mapping a matrix onto the vector of its diagonal andS++ d is the set of d×d deﬁnite positive matrix. The approximated value function (4.5) is quadratic, therefore, sub-diﬀerentiable with respect to the vector of inventoriesq and the deterministic functionsA(t),B (t),C (t) can be computed in closed form. It takes into account the main property of a “high-level” multi-asset market-making problem, that is, the correlation structure between the assets. By analogy with Section 4.1, its sub-gradient can be chosen as an eﬀective microstructure alpha to mean revert toward a ﬂat inventory. 15 Remark 4.9.In order to compute eﬃciently the value function in(4.5), note that the matrixA can be diagonalized and therefore approximated with a principal component analysis. The expressions of A,B,C do not provide intuition about the long-term behavior of the market-maker. However, in an asymptotic framework, that is whenT→+∞, we obtain A→T→+∞ 1 2 √γΓ, B→T→+∞−D −1 2 + ˆA ˆA+D −1 2 + ( V−+ 1 2 √γD−D(Γ) ) , where Γ = D −1 2 + ( D 1 2 +ΣD 1 2 + )1 2 D −1 2 + and ˆA+ is the Moore-Penrose generalized inverse ofˆA. If we perform a principal component analysis on the variance-covariance matrix Σ, we observe that the buy or sell signal (depending on the sign of the inventories) coming from the sub-gradient ofV (t,q ) is an increasing function of the eigenvalues ofΣ and the risk-aversion parameterγ. Thus, choosing the sub-gradient ofV (t,q ) as an eﬀective microstructure alpha should provide a mean-reverting signal for a myopic agent, taking into account the correlation between the assets. 4.2.2 Multi-asset multi-venue optimal market-making in limit order book We now derive the solution to the multi-asset multi-venue optimal market-making problem using our heuristics. We take the same modeling notation as in 4.1. Assuming bid and ask symmetry for sake of simplicity, we introduce the processesNi,n,b,N i,n,a to model the number of (possibly partially-ﬁlled) bid and ask orders on the asseti in the venuen of intensityλi,n(ψi,I i,pi,n,b,𝓁i,b) for the bid side and λi,n(ψi,I i,pi,n,a,𝓁i,a) for the ask side, where the functionλis deﬁned by (4.1). The quantity𝓁i,n,b (resp. 𝓁i,n,a) is the volume sent on then-th venue of thei-th asset on the bid (resp. ask) side. The quantity pi,n,b (resp. pi,n,a) is the limit chosen by the market-maker on then-th venue of thei-th asset on the bid (resp. ask) side to send a limit order. The distribution of the random variablesϵi,n,b t andϵi,n,a t are deﬁned as in Equation (4.2). The market-maker can also send market orders on the bid and ask sides (denoted by point processesJi,n,b t ,J i,n,b t ) on each venue of sizevi,n,b t ,vi,n,a t . Its inventory process on each asset is deﬁned by qi t = (∫t 0 𝓁i,n,b s ϵi,n,b s dNi,n,b s + ∫t 0 vi,n,b s dJi,n,b s ) − (∫t 0 𝓁i,n,b s ϵi,n,b s dNi,n,b s + ∫t 0 vi,n,b s dJi,n,b s ) ∈Z. The problem faced by a market-maker is slightly diﬀerent compared to a classic trader. While the trader must follow a predetermined target, the market-maker’s inventory must revert toward zero. Therefore, we seek a long-term alpha that gives a signal to our myopic market-maker of the form “sell for high inventory, buy for low inventory” with diﬀerent type of aggressiveness (limit or market order) depending on the level of inventory. Contrary to optimal execution, there is no optimal inventory in market-making problems at a given timet∈[0,T ], which explains the dependence of the long-term alpha on the current inventory. As stated previously, the eﬀective microstructure alphas should be the gradient of a value function corresponding to a “high-level” multi-asset market-making problem (which hides the microstructure eﬀects). This value function should be in closed form to recompute the gradient quickly when the market-maker trades and too much time passed. Thus, we propose to use the sub-gradient of the value function (4.5) corresponding to an approximation of the multi-asset market-making value function in OTC markets as a proxy for eﬀective microstructure alphas used by a market-maker acting on a 16 portfolio of assets listed on several order book platforms. By analogy with Section 4.1, at each time step t, for an inventory vectorq∈Rd, the market-maker solves the following optimization problem: max { sup 𝓁,p {d∑ i=1 Ni ∑ n=1 ∑ j∈{b,a} λi,n(mi,pi,n,j,𝓁i,j)E ( peﬀ,i+pshort,i,n(mi) ) 𝓁i,n,jϵi,n,j−ci,n,L(ϵi,n,j𝓁i,n,j,pi,n,j) } , sup vb {d∑ i=1 Ni ∑ n=1 ( peﬀ,i +pshort,i,n(mi) ) vi,n,b−ci,n,M(vi,n,b) } , (Opt-MM) sup va {d∑ i=1 Ni ∑ n=1 ( peﬀ,i +pshort,i,n(mi) ) vi,n,a−ci,n,M(vi,n,a) }} , peﬀ,i =∇i ˜V (t,q ). The control problem is essentially a choice between sending limit orders or market orders in each venue for each asset. The eﬀective microstructure alpha helps the market-maker to mean revert his inventory toward zero. For example, assume that the market-maker received a large buy passive ﬁlling in asseti. The eﬀective microstructure alpha, that is thei-th component of the gradient of the long- term utility function ˜V, will point down which is a strong sell signal. Therefore, the market-maker will send a sell market order to reduce his long position. Note that the eﬀective microstructure alpha takes into account the correlation structure between the assets, meaning that the market-maker can hedge a long position in an asset with a short position in another positively correlated asset. 5 Numerical results Mathematical elegance and simplicity are to be prized, of course, but an execution model cannot pass the test of practicality until it helps us execute portfolio transitions. One of the most important features of our framework, as compared with a plain-vanilla, Almgren- Chriss executor, it allows the executor to consider market microstructure and use passive orders, hence avoiding certain types of market impact and spread costs. The main point we wish to make in this example is that our method potentially avoids the pitfalls of a purely-passive execution model because it can consider the utility gradient (and its multi-period analog, the gradient of the value function) in the formation of aggression levels. With this speciﬁc aim in mind, we consider the liquidation of a market-neutral portfolio with our method and contrast this with comparable results for a purely-passive method. The speciﬁc example we choose is the liquidation of a market-neutral portfolio on October15, 2008. The portfolio to be liquidated is long IBM and short AAPL. We choose the long position in IBM arbitrarily to be 1000 shares. We estimate the CAPM beta of each security, denotedˆβi wherei = 1, 2, using three years of daily data, and size the short position so that the beta exposure of the portfolio∑ ihi ˆβi is near zero. 5.1 Transaction cost model and microstructure simulation We takeκ= 10−3 and we assumec(v) = vTΛv for some diagonal matrixΛ = diag(λ1,...,λd). This reduces the transaction cost modeling problem to one of estimating appropriate values for eachλi. 17 Let advpi denote our prediction of the daily dollar volume in thei-th security. The notation “advp” comes from the fact that it is computed as the average daily volume “adv” in shares, times the price “p”. For simplicity we assume trading one percent of advpi will cause 20 basis points of market impact, with extension by linearity, meaning that λi = 20×10−4× 1 0.01advpi . (5.1) For very large trades (say, more than 0.05 advpi), simple models such as (5.1) break down. For this reason, we restrict our attention in this example to trades that are relatively small with respect to the anticipated volume. One of the most challenging aspects of this study is simulating passive execution, which we deﬁned previously as a process of continually joining the queue on the near side of the limit order book until the order is ﬁlled, but never crossing the spread. We are limited to the academic data sets available via the Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS). For this exercise, we used the New York Stock Exchange Trade and Quote (TAQ) database, which contains intraday transactions data on trades and quotes for all securities listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and American Stock Exchange (AMEX), as well as Nasdaq National Market System (NMS) and SmallCap issues. The TAQ database represents the aggregate inside quote for each exchange. Therefore, it includes both specialists and the public limit order book. Only having access to the consolidated feed, we construct a conservative simulation of when passive ﬁlls occur. Speciﬁcally, if we have a “buy” limit order (the entire process is similar for limit “sell” orders with “bid” replaced by “ask”) which is simulated as existing in the queue on the bid side of the order book, when can we assume such an order was ﬁlled? Conservatively, if the order book changes and the new ask price is less or equal to the existing limit order price, we assume that markets would have cleared in the process of this change, and our limit order would have been ﬁlled, at least partially. We limit the amount of ﬁll to the posted quantity at the new ask price. If this quantity is simulated to have been taken out, then no further ﬁlls are allowed to occur in the simulation until the price level changes. We assume that when the price level of the NBBO has changed, the liquidity is also replenished to the reported value at the new price level. This is a fairly conservative set of conventions; in reality, a larger number of passive ﬁlls could occur than merely the ones we simulate. This is because if there are multiple limit orders in the queue, one limit order can, of course, be ﬁlled without either bid or ask price levels changing. Predicting the probability of a passive ﬁll, denotedfi above, is equivalent to predicting the next transition of the limit order book and hence requires a model of limit order book dynamics. Indeed, such ﬁll probabilities are one of the possible outputs of the very detailed model of Cont et al. (2010) or the microstructure trading model presented in the previous section. As our data set is only the consolidated feed, we simply takefi = 0.1 as the passive ﬁll probability. 5.2 Results As indicated above, we construct a market-neutral portfolio ofd = 2 securities in which the long side is initially 1000 shares of IBM. Securityi = 1 is IBM andi = 2 is AAPL. We estimate the security betas to the S&P 500 (via regression on several years of daily data) as ˆβ1 = 0.705, ˆβ2 = 1.276. (5.2) 18 We begin the simulation at 10:00 am on October 15, 2008, rather than immediately at the open since there are often outlier quotes, wide spreads and other eﬀects around the open. The most recent midpoint price of IBM at 10:00 am wasp1 = 93.06 and for AAPL,p2 = 105.985. For convenience, we keep track of a cash balance for each position. Then1 = 1000 shares of IBM are ﬁnanced by borrowingn1p1 = USD 93,060 in cash and purchasing a position initially worth USD 93,060, so the net value (cash plus stock) of that position is initially zero. Similarly, the short position in AAPL is obtained by borrowingn2 =−485 shares and immediately selling them for USD 51,403, and this position also initially has a net (cash + stock) value of zero. Note that with these holdings, (5.2) implies that the portfolio’s beta is n1p1 ˆβ1 +n2p2 ˆβ2≈0. Any cash generated from further stock sales or cash used for further purchases of the same security is considered part of the separate cash balance allocated to that position. As prices change and as orders are ﬁlled, the values of each position will ﬂuctuate. Letni,t denote the number of shares held in thei-th security at timet, andpi,t the latest midpoint price as of timet. Also, letci,t denote the amount of cash (which can be positive or negative) attributed to the i-th security at timet, according to the accounting conventions outlined above. These variables change throughout the lifetime of the execution. The value of a position is the number of shares held times the most recent midpoint price, plus the total amount of cash associated to the position, i.e.ni,tpi,t +ci,t. The value of a portfolio is the sum of the values of all its positions, i.e. valuet := d∑ i=1 (ni,tpi,t +ci,t). (5.3) The value process (5.3), and especially its drift, is one measure of the execution’s quality. If the value tends to drift downward, as in the AlwaysPassive model detailed below, then the execution desk is losing money due to slippage. This is perhaps the typical situation – one expects execution to have associated costs. A particularly pleasant situation arises when the drift of the portfolio value process (5.3) is zero, as in Figure 2, and it is possible that with very good microstructure alphas added to the generalized momenta, the drift could even become positive. All monetary values are reported in USD. The predicted daily volumes are estimated to advp1≈1.16×109, advp2≈6.13×109. The covariance matrix is Σ = 10−4× ( 15.5728 17 .7558 17.7558 28 .6519 ) , which implies a correlation of 0.84 among the two assets and daily volatilities of approximately 3.9% and 5.4%. The output of our algorithm is the instantaneous aggression level: aggressive, passive, or wait. There is not a unique benchmark to gauge such an algorithm’s performance, but it is sensible to compare a complicated method of choosing the aggression level to a simple method for choosing the aggression 19 level, to see if the additional complexity is justiﬁed. Hence one could compare it to a constant aggression level – always passive. Figure 1 reveals that, as the market was falling, the passive “buy” orders in AAPL were all ﬁlled very quickly, while unsurprisingly the “sell” orders in IBM were ﬁlled very slowly, and indeed were not even ﬁnished by the end of the trading day. This drove the Gross Market Value (gmv) down while pushing the net and beta higher, where we deﬁne βt := ∑ i ni,tpi,t ˆβi, nett := ∑ i ni,tpi,t, gmvt := ∑ i |ni,tpi,t|, (5.4) with ˆβi given by (5.2). Thus the portfolio hadβt > 0 in a falling market. Note that the losses incurred in this manner do not become gains if the sign of the market move is reversed; they remain losses irrespective of the market’s direction. In a rising market, the “always passive” model would have the same problem: the “sell” orders would be ﬁlled quickly, the “buy” orders would linger, and the portfolio would build up negative beta in a rising market. Figure 1: Portfolio holdings in the “always passive” model, and portfolio characteristics: gross market value (gmv), net, andβt given by (5.4). We now show the analogous graphs for the simplest version of our execution model developed in the previous section. Note that the model retains a fairly small beta exposure throughout the lifetime of the execution. This is because CAPM beta is also a factor in the APT risk model, and the generalized momenta point along the gradient of the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman value function and hence drive trading towards the optimal value of multiperiod utility (including the risk term). This is the key advantage of our model over simpler execution algorithms. 20 Figure 2: Portfolio holdings in the sophisticated model, and portfolio characteristics: gross market value (gmvt), nett, andβt given by (5.4). Finally, we consider the portfolio value over the lifetime of the execution. Note that in our model, the value process (5.3) is approximately driftless, which as explained above is a desirable property, and outperforms the “always passive” value process realization. In particular, in our model valuet is able to avoid negative drift in a falling market precisely because the portfolio remains approximately beta- neutral. In a portfolio with many assets (largen), our method would allow it to remain approximately neutral to all factors in the APT model. Figure 3: Portfolio value (5.3) over the lifetime of the execution, for both execution methods. The diﬀerence in Figure 3 is both statistically and economically signiﬁcant. The t-statistic for the diﬀerence is about 78, hence signiﬁcant at the 99.999% level. Moreover, the dollar value of the diﬀerence between the two methods is about 1.5% of the initial gross market value to be liquidated. 6 Conclusion In this paper, we present a framework to perform optimal trading, taking into account market mi- crostructure and a long-term trading schedule without the use of optimal control. This approach relies on the use of the generalized momentap =∇V (t,q ) as the eﬀective microstructure alpha. We show 21 that a myopic agent sending only market orders with such alpha will minimize the error with respect to the long-term trading schedule. Moreover, when we add the possibility of passive execution, the long-term alpha can be chosen as a transformation of the generalized momentap. We also present a general microstructure trading framework for the multi-asset multi-venue optimal trading problem. For a parsimonious model of ﬁll probabilities, the eﬀective microstructure alpha can be computed in closed form. We apply the same heuristics to derive an optimal market-making model that is tractable for a large number of assets and venues. Based on the dual formulation of the classic Almgren-Chriss optimization problem, this simple heuris- tics has wide-ranging practical implications. In addition to bridging the gap between order placement and scheduling, it simpliﬁes optimal trading problems that are usually intractable using optimal control due to the high-dimensional Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation resulting from the control problem. This is of particular importance for a quantitative execution desk wishing to trade a high number of cross-listed assets. It opens up many avenues for future exploration. One set of projects is to consider trading problems beyond the typical buy-side utility-maximization, which can still be viewed within the unifying framework of a myopic risk-neutral wealth-maximizer, whose microstruc- ture alphas are aligned with the value function gradient. References R. Almgren and N. Chriss. Optimal execution of portfolio transactions.Journal of Risk, 3:5–40, 2001. K. J. Arrow. Liquidity preference, lecture vi in “lecture notes for economics 285, the economics of uncertainty”, pp 33-53. 1963. M. Avellaneda and S. Stoikov. High-frequency trading in a limit order book.Quantitative Finance, 8 (3):217–224, 2008. B. Baldacci and I. Manziuk. Adaptive trading strategies across liquidity pools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.07807, 2020. P. Bergault, D. Evangelista, O. Guéant, and D. Vieira. Closed-form approximations in multi-asset market making, 2020. Á. Cartea, S. Jaimungal, and J. Ricci. Buy low, sell high: A high frequency trading perspective. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics, 5(1):415–444, 2014. Á. Cartea, S. Jaimungal, and J. Penalva.Algorithmic and high-frequency trading. Cambridge Univer- sity Press, 2015. R. Cont and A. Kukanov. Optimal order placement in limit order markets.Quantitative Finance, 17 (1):21–39, 2017. R. Cont, S. Stoikov, and R. Talreja. A stochastic model for order book dynamics.Operations Research, 58(3):549–563, 2010. S. E. Dreyfus. Dynamic programming and the calculus of variations.Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 1(2):228–239, 1960. 22 L. R. Glosten and P. R. Milgrom. Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist market with hetero- geneously informed traders.Journal of ﬁnancial economics, 14(1):71–100, 1985. O. Guéant. The Financial Mathematics of Market Liquidity: From optimal execution to market making, volume 33. CRC Press, 2016. O. Guéant and I. Manziuk. Deep reinforcement learning for market making in corporate bonds: beating the curse of dimensionality.Applied Mathematical Finance, 26(5):387–452, 2019. O. Guéant, C.-A. Lehalle, and J. Fernandez-Tapia. Dealing with the inventory risk: a solution to the market making problem.Mathematics and ﬁnancial economics, 7(4):477–507, 2013. F. Guilbaud and H. Pham. Optimal high-frequency trading with limit and market orders.Quantitative Finance, 13(1):79–94, 2013. T. Ho and H. R. Stoll. Optimal dealer pricing under transactions and return uncertainty.Journal of Financial economics, 9(1):47–73, 1981. J. W. Pratt. Risk aversion in the small and in the large.Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 122–136, 1964. 23