CoinTossX: An open-source low-latency high-throughput matching engine Ivan Jericevicha, Dharmesh Sing b, Tim Gebbie a,b aDepartment of Statistical Sciences, University of Cape Town, Rondebosch 7700, South Africa bDepartment of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg 2000, South Africa Abstract We deploy and demonstrate the CoinTossX low-latency, high-throughput, open-source matching engine with orders sent using the Julia and Python languages. We show how this can be deployed for small-scale local desk-top testing and discuss a larger scale, but local hosting, with multiple traded instruments managed concurrently and managed by multiple clients. We then demonstrate a cloud based deployment using Microsoft Azure, with large-scale industrial and simulation research use cases in mind. The system is exposed and interacted with via sockets using UDP SBE message protocols and can be monitored using a simple web browser interface using HTTP. We give examples showing how orders can be be sent to the system and market data feeds monitored using the Julia and Python languages. The system is developed in Java with orders submitted as binary encodings (SBE) via UDP protocols using the Aeron Media Driver as the low-latency, high throughput message transport. The system separates the order-generation and simulation environments e.g. agent-based model simulation, from the matching of orders, data-feeds and various modularised components of the order-book system. This ensures a more natural and realistic asynchronicity between events generating orders, and the events associated with order-book dynamics and market data-feeds. We promote the use of Julia as the preferred order submission and simulation environment. Keywords: Market matching-engine, Open-source application, Microsoft Azure deployment, Java web application, Julia, Python, Agent-based modeling, JSE Contents 1 Introduction 1 2 Market simulation for testing 2 3 Realistically simulating high-concurrency 3 4 CoinT ossX 4 4.1 Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 4.2 Clients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 4.3 Functionality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 4.4 Testing framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 4.4.1 Unit testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 4.4.2 Order-ﬂow testing . . . . . . . . . 10 4.4.3 Latency tests . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 4.4.4 Throughput tests . . . . . . . . . . 12 5 Simulation results 12 6 Conclusion 13 7 Acknowledgement 14 Appendix A Deployment and usage 15 Appendix B Submitting orders 18 Email addresses: jrciva001@myuct.ac.za (Ivan Jericevich), dharmeshsing@gmail.com (Dharmesh Sing), tim.gebbie@uct.ac.za (Tim Gebbie) Appendix B.1 Java . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 Appendix B.2 Julia . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 Appendix B.3 Python . . . . . . . . . . . 20 1. Introduction A complete study of the market microstructure of the Jo- hannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) is not possible with- out access to their matching engine 1. Studying market microstructure is challenging due to the various changes in the market, regulation and technology. However, most of the current literature focuses on analyzing existing ex- changes and the building of agent based models. The im- portance of order matching engines in the trading infras- tructure makes these systems of interest not only to com- puter scientists but also to computational ﬁnance and risk management, while the non-linear impact of event-driven processes relating to order matching may provided an im- penetrable calibration boundary for agent-based models attempting to empirically relate temporal dynamics with speciﬁc agent behaviours [1, 2, 3]. A trade matching engine is the core software and hard- ware component of an electronic exchange. It matches up bids and oﬀers to complete trades. Electronic order matching was introduced in the early 1980s in the United 1A matching engine is component of an exchange that matches buy and sell orders according to the rules of the exchange. Preprint submitted to SoftwareX February 23, 2021 arXiv:2102.10925v1 [cs.DC] 22 Feb 2021 2 MARKET SIMULATION FOR TESTING States to supplement open outcry trading 2. Before this, stocks where traded on exchange ﬂoors and transaction costs where high. Failures in these systems increased as the frequency and volume on the electronic networks in- creased. Modern matching engines are fully automated and use one or several algorithms to allocate trades among com- peting bids and oﬀers at the same price. They typically support diﬀerent order types and have unique APIs or use standard ones 3. As it pertains to trading, latency 4 directly inﬂuences the amount of time it takes for a trader to interact with the market. Traditionally, to achieve low latency, high-frequency trad- ing has required powerful server hardware appropriately networked in a data center, scaled to accommodate worst- case network traﬃc scenarios on the busiest trading days. These trading systems must be resilient in the face of network or power failures, requiring expensive redundant hardware as well as oﬀsite data retention [4]. For ex- ample, ﬁrms would use co-location, ﬁbre-optic network cables, optimized hardware architectures and other tech- nology to get as close to zero latency as possible [5]. On the other hand, cloud-based software solutions beneﬁt by being resilient and oﬀering cost-eﬀective, easy scaling — an advantage that is not oﬀered by traditional trading systems. However, the biggest challenge for latency in a cloud-based environment, and one of the greatest bar- riers to building high-frequency trading systems in this environment, is the fact that hardware is not co-located within a data center [4]. That said, a combination of the low latency of traditional matching engines and the resiliency, scalability and availability of cloud-based en- vironments is something that is yet to come about 5. A low latency high throughput 6 matching engine does not exist for academics to further their understanding in this ﬁeld [6]. CoinTossX provides an environment for the application of agent-based modelling experiments which would otherwise be prohibitive to undertake in real ﬁnan- cial markets due to cost, complexity and other factors. It was for this reason that CoinTossX was developed and why it’s applications are studied further here. Here we 2A method of communication between professionals on a stock exchange or futures exchange typically on a trading ﬂoor 3Vendors include Connamara Systems, Cinnober (acquired by Nasdaq), Aquis T echnologies (A2X) , SIA S.p.A., Nasdaq, Match-Trade, MillenniumIT (JSE) , GATElab Ltd (acquired by London Stock Exchange), Eurex, LIST, Stellar Trading Systems, Quodd, Baymarkets, Market Grid, ARQA Technologies, Kappsoft, Thesys Technologies 4Latency refers to the ability of a system to handle data messages with minimal delay. 5There is however a strong argument to place the Order Manage- ment System (OMS), that decides what to trade - the selection of parent orders and execution strategies, in the Cloud; while retrain- ing the Execution Management System (EMS), that implements child orders, in close proximity to the matching engine. Here we are moving the matching engine into the Cloud. 6High throughput refers to the ability of a system to process a very high volume of data messages. hope to provide an easy-to-use, openly available, realis- tic, real-time, simulated trading system that is straight- forward to set-up on multiple platforms. Hence, this pa- per beneﬁts institutions, academics and others seeking to take advantage of an open-source, resilient, scalable matching engine simulator that may avoid a variety of conﬂicts of interests related research or insights derived from commercial alternatives. This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 and Sec- tion 3 outline the existing literature on the topic. Sec- tion 4 is dedicated to an outline of CoinTossX. More speciﬁcally, Section 4.1 gives a detailed description of the structure and software construction. Section 4.3 presents the capabilities and features of CoinTossX. Section 4.4 gives the details of the extensive tests conducted to ensure the system meets the stringent latency and throughput requirements. Supplementary to the testing framework, Section 5 shows the results of the simulation of a simple Hawkes process for generating large volumes of market and limit orders. Section 6 ends with some concluding remarks and, lastly, Appendix A provides instruction for users to deploy and use the application on their local machine or on a remote server. 2. Market simulation for testing Simulating the entire ﬁnancial market ecosystem for trade strategy testing and risk management is appealing be- cause of the mechanistic complexity of the market struc- ture and costs and the nonlinear feed-backs and interac- tions that multiple interacting agents bring to the market ecosystem. This type of simulation can be both a ﬁnan- cially costly, as well as computational expensive exercise; yet it appears tractable, and subsets of the ecosystem are used for system veriﬁcation e.g. in vendor provided test market venues. The rapid evolution of software and hardware and the in- creasing need to reduce transaction costs, system failures and transaction errors has led to important changes in market structure and market architecture. These changes have supported the rise of electronic, algorithmic, and high frequency trading. The speciﬁcs are unique to each and every market and regulatory environment. For ex- ample, in the South African context the JSE uses the MillenniumIT trading systems following the approach of the London Stock Exchange with the BDA broker-dealer clearing system [7] with rules and regulations set by the Financial Markets Act (2012), the JSE rules and direc- tives, and the Financial Intelligence Centre (FIC) Act (2001). However, CoinTossX is fully conﬁgurable. Al- though implemented and tested here using the published and publicly available JSE market rules and test-cases, it can be conﬁgured for a rich variety of market structures. Many researchers developing trading strategies do not have access to vendor provided testing environments, while those that do often do not want to expose their strategies to competitors in shared testing environments. 2 3 REALISTICALLY SIMULATING HIGH-CONCURRENCY However, suﬃciently realistic multi-agents simulation en- vironments remain illusive, particularly for low liquidity, and collective behaviour based risk-event scenarios [8] be- cause a key component remains the realism of the un- derlying trading agents and their interactions within test markets. Most agent-based simulation environments and models are over simpliﬁed to the extent of not being relevant for realistic science and risk management. Some examples include using a global calendar time to sequentially order trading events, or providing intentional (and sometimes unintentional) market clearing events that synchronise price discovery and information ﬂow with agent interac- tions in terms of a unique global time – the loss of high- concurrency and cohersion in favour of tight-coupling for computational convenience. There are many examples, in the context of South African markets. Nair [9] prototyped a simple matching engine using a single stock and adopting the standard order types and mechanisms associated with a continuous dou- ble auction market as speciﬁed in the JSE. Although works like this seem to provide a simpliﬁed but realistic framework demonstrating the over-all principles of cou- pling a matching engine with agent-based modeling of a stock market; such frameworks are unlikely to recover realistic dynamics or lead to useful insights when interro- gated at the level of asynchronous but high concurrency order-book events and dynamics. High-concurrency and a careful management of the concept of time [1] seem a prudent requirement related to both the stylised facts of the market, as argued for in many South African market examples [8], but more importantly, for realistic strategy testing and risk management. Here like-for-like message delays, order-book rules, and both asynchronous order matching as well as reactive, asynchronous, and high-concurrency agent (for the rules and behaviours) and actor (for the computational rep- resentations and causation models) generation can aﬀect model outcomes and estimation. It is the asynchrony and order-splitting at the agent level that can dominate the emergence of auto-correlations and cross-correlations in various traded assets because there is no single calen- dar time related mechanisms that generates equilibrium prices, can synchronise information and order-ﬂow, or can co-ordinate machine time events, with sequential calen- dar time [1]. 3. Realistically simulating high-concurrency The LMAX Exchange (London Multi Asset Exchange) [10] is an FX exchange with an ultra low latency match- ing engine. Thompson et al. [10] developed the Disruptor ring buﬀer for inter-thread concurrency as an alternative to storing events in queues or linked lists. This was in response to the problem that linked-lists could grow and increase the garbage in the system — causing signiﬁcant costs to latency and jitter 7. At the heart of the disrup- tor mechanism sits a pre-allocated bounded data struc- ture in the form of a ring-buﬀer. The Disruptor preallo- cates memory in a cache-friendly manner which is shared with the consumer. The system was also developed on the JVM and can process up to 25 million messages per second on a single thread with latencies lower than 50 nanoseconds [10]. Recently, Addison et al. [4] implement a simple foreign exchange (FX) trading system and deploy it to cloud en- vironments from multiple cloud providers (Amazon Web Service, Microsoft Azure and Oracle Cloud Infrastruc- ture), recording network latency and overall system la- tency in order to assess the capability of public cloud infrastructure in performing low-latency trade execution under various conﬁgurations and scenarios. They con- clude that suﬃciently low latency and controlled jitter can be achieved in a public cloud environment to support security trading in the public cloud [4]. More speciﬁcally, they demonstrate the ability to achieve sub-500 microsec- ond roundtrip latency — therefore concluding that it is currently feasible to build a production low-latency, high- frequency trading system in the cloud. For research in ﬁnance, economics and computer science, the importance of having a realistic, ﬂexible, high perfor- mance matching engine deployable to diﬀerent environ- ments can be found in a wide range of ﬁelds. In par- ticular, given the whole new range of realism that such a software provides, agent-based computational ﬁnance and ﬁnancial models in general are some of those that may show the greatest potential in terms of the insights to complex systems that can be gained from their applica- tion. This is not to mention the additional class/layer of causation that is introduced in the modelling framework by having the complex set rules of the environment/sys- tem/architecture be separate/independent from the mod- elling and decision making processes (at the agent level). In this way more emphasis can be placed on top-down ac- tions and states — a potential step towards hierarchical causality [11]. On this note, CoinTossX is a simulation environment and so the task of producing realistic simulated market dy- namics, comparable to those observed in empirical inves- tigations, is left to the user(s). For this purpose the two popular methods usually adopted are mutually exciting Hawkes processes (see Section 4.4) and agent-based mod- els (ABMs) [12]. ABMs provide a bottom-up approach to modelling the actions and interactions of autonomous agents with the aim of assessing their eﬀect on a complex system. Propo- nents of agent-based models argue that ﬁnancial markets 7Jitter is the deviation from true periodicity of a presumably periodic signal, often in relation to a reference clock signal. This variation in the time between data packets arriving is caused by network congestion. 3 4 COINTOSSX exhibit many emergent phenomena, and that such phe- nomena are usually attributed to the interactions and re- lationships between the agents that make up the system. Successfully calibrating ABMs to ﬁnancial time series [13] can allow for inference about the factors determining the price behaviour observed in the real world, provided that parameter estimates are suﬃciently robust. In recent years, ABMs became popular as a tool to study macroeconomics — speciﬁcally, the impact of trad- ing taxes, market regulatory policies, quantitative eas- ing, and the general role of central banks. ABMs can also play an important role in analysis of the impact of the cross-market structure [12]. Of particular interest is the class of models described by Lussange et al. [12] who outline a computational research study of collective eco- nomic behavior via agent-based models, where each agent would be endowed with speciﬁc cognitive and behavioral biases known to the ﬁeld of neuroeconomics, and at the same time autonomously implement rational quantitative ﬁnancial strategies updated by machine learning (and re- inforcement learning (RL)). ABMs are not without their pitfalls [14, 12, 13]: computa- tional cost, validation and calibration challenges, a bias towards inductive decision making, endemic parameter degeneracies, and their tendency to focus on mechanistic behaviours and rules, rather than interaction dynamics and learning . Despite these challenges, their potential to link the micro-level rules of investors behaviour with the macro-behaviour of asset prices in real market is com- pelling, in part due to the apparent expansive amount of data that is collected from ﬁnancial markets. How- ever, a key concern remains the scientiﬁc costs, or impact, of losing the realism of high-concurrency adaptive inter- actions between strategic agents in a suﬃcient reactive framework, for the computational convenience of time- synchronised bottom-up rule based approaches. Here we have decided to ﬁrst focus on the matching engine frame- work, and separate it entirely from the agent generation framework; this may ensure that high-concurrency and low latency features of real markets are not lost. 4. CoinT ossX CoinTossX is a an open-source, high-frequency, low la- tency, high throughput matching engine for simulating the JSE [6, 5, 15] (or any market that has well established rules and test cases). The software was developed with Java and open-source libraries and is designed to max- imize throughput, minimize latency, and accommodate rapid development of additional functionality. It can be conﬁgured for multiple clients, stocks and trading sessions (continuous trading, opening auction, closing auction, in- traday auction and volatility auction). The software has been conﬁgured to replicate the rules and processes of the JSE. It may allow traders, organizations and aca- demic institutions to test market structure, fragility and dynamics without the cost of live test trading. The soft- ware can provide a platform to study price formations in stock exchanges and the interplay between regulators, market structure and dynamics [6]. This work also ad- dresses some aspects of the unavailability of data and di- rect data-feed access from industry, by providing a frame- work that can be compared to recorded transaction data arising from the actual market system interfaces. The system requirements we implemented were obtained from JSE’s publicly available technical documentation and test cases [16, 17, 18] 8. The eight main components of the simulator are [6]: 1. Stocks are objects for which clients can send orders and limit order books can be constructed and kept track of. 2. Clients are computer algorithms that send order events to the simulator. Clients will send order events to the trading gateway (refer to Section 4.2 for more detail). 3. The trading gateway receives the client request, validates the request and then sends it to the match- ing component to be processed. It sends updates to the client to indicate the status of the event. 4. The matching engine processes the events from the Trading Gateway. It manages one or more limit order books. If there is an update to the LOB, it sends updates to the market data gateway. 5. The market data gateway receives updates from the matching engine component and sends market data updates to all connected clients. 6. The website receives updates from the market data gateway. It displays the LOBs for each security and allows the user to conﬁgure the stocks and clients. 7. The web-event listener was speciﬁcally incorpo- rated for the purpose of reducing pauses to the web- site due to garbage collection. This single, dedicated writer principle would improve performance of the website as well (refer to the discussion on the web- site in Section 4.1). This component also saves each event to the database 8. The database stores the LOBs of each stock and is designed to have low memory overhead whilst being eﬃcient in searching, updating and deleting orders (refer to the discussion on oﬀ-heap data structures in Section 4.1). 8Technical documentation can be found at https://www.jse.co.za/services/technologies/equity-market- trading-and-information-technology-change 4 4 COINTOSSX 4.1 Architecture Change trading session Login Log out Order request Trading gateway Client User Website Manage clients Manage stocks View LOBs Run testing framework Order request Change trading session Market data update Matching engine Market data update Market data gateway Figure 1: A High level diagram of the relationship between the components of CoinTossX in terms of end-user functionality [6]. A website is required to monitor and conﬁgure the stocks and clients. The relationships between these components are also summarised in Figure 1. The client sends a login request message to the trading gateway which then vali- dates the client. If the client is already logged in or the username or password is invalid it responds with a reject code message. The client can also send a log out request to the trading gateway. In this case the trading gateway removes the client from the list of connected clients and sends a response to the client to indicate if the log out was successful. The trading gateway logs out clients when it shuts down. When there is a change in the trading ses- sion, the website sends a message to the trading gateway which then sends the message to the matching engine. Clients can send an order request or order message to the trading gateway which then validates the message. If the message is valid, it then sends the message to get matched. Valid order types are market, limit, hidden, stop and stop limit. Each order has a time in force (TIF) value, which cannot be amended, that determines how long an order is active until it is executed, deleted or ex- pired (which ever comes ﬁrst). The engine matches the orders using the matching algorithms based on the trad- ing session. Market data updates are sent to the market data gateway to indicate the changes in the LOB of each stock. Additionally, the website and all clients receive market data updates and internal messages (to monitor the application) from the gateway. A user can create, up- date and delete clients and stocks. A user can view the limit order book for each stock as a bar chart of all active orders. Tables will show the details of these active orders. A user can start, stop and conﬁgure the parameters of the testing framework. 4.1. Architecture This software is open source and was built to run on dif- ferent operating systems as well as on a single server or on multiple servers. Implementation in Java means that CoinTossX can be deployed on diﬀerent hardware con- ﬁgurations (due to the JVM). The goal was to build a matching engine that could achieve low-latencies using industry standard technology. This ensures that the soft- ware is portable and can be deployed conﬁdently. The high level architecture of CoinTossX is summarised in Figure 2. A single market event goes through the following pro- cess. A simple binary encoding (SBE) message 9 will be sent to the trading gateway. The trading gateway will forward the message to the matching engine which will then process it. It will send a message back to the trading gateway to indicate the status of the message. The trad- ing gateway will forward the message back to the client. The matching engine will send an update to the market data gateway if there is a change in the limit order book. The market data gateway will forward the updates to all connected clients and will forward some of the updates to the web event listener. The web event listener saves each event to the ﬁle system. The website then reads and displays the data from the ﬁle system. The communication between the website and the ﬁle sys- tem is done by transmitting data over a network using only User Datagram Protocol (UDP) 10 as opposed to Transmission Control Protocol (TCP). TCP is a heavy- weight protocol because it requires three packets to set up a connection and requires a connection to be set up between two applications before data can be transmit- ted11. UDP, on the other hand, was chosen for being lightweight protocol as it does not check the connection or the order of the messages and does not require a con- nection to be setup before data is transmitted. Data is transmitted irrespective of whether the receiver is ready to receive the message or not. UDP may, however, be unreliable because the sender does not know if the mes- sage was delivered. The messages that are received (read as a byte stream) will always be in the order that it is sent. Modularisation is achieved by designing each of the above components independently of one other while al- lowing communication between them to occur only via exposed ports using these high speed SBE message pro- tocols. This functionality was introduced by assigning each component an IP address and port on which to lis- ten. These ports are speciﬁed in the “properties” ﬁles in the root project directory. Furthermore, each client/user may submit orders from a remote server. So if Coin- TossX is deployed to the cloud, one should ensure that the virtual machine allows for these types of inbound port communications. After an extensive comparison of message transport soft- ware, the Aeron media driver library was chosen for sup- porting the above protocols being an eﬃcient and reliable 9JSE uses text messages between the clients and their matching engine which is ineﬃcient since characters take up more memory and are slower to transmit across the network. From the compar- isons made in [6], the SBE message protocol was found to be the fastest way to encode and decode messages; and had the greatest throughput. 10JSE uses TCP for their trading gateway and UDP for their market data gateway. 11Nonetheless, TCP can be reliable because if a message is not received, it will try multiple times to deliver the message. TCP will drop the connection if there are multiple timeouts. 5 4 COINTOSSX 4.1 Architecture UDP unicast, UDP multicast, and IPC message transport for communicating between all the components. Each component has its own media driver to shovel events to and from the component. Aeron is designed to be the highest throughput with the lowest latency possible of any messaging system [19] (see Figure 3). Given this modular design, each component and client may be started and run on seperate, independent servers. As mentioned, components communicate with each other through the media driver via UDP SBE message packets. Therefore. it is essentially possible to have an industrial matching engine by providing each component with its own high performance server. Client{1, . . . , N} /group Media driver /_456 Media driver /_456 Media driver /_456 Trading /signin gateway /signout Matching engine Market data gateway /_481 Media driver /_456Web event listener /_609 File system Website /_581 Figure 2: A High level architecture diagram visualising the technical relationship between the software components [6]. Figure 3: A High Dynamic Range (HDR) Histogram graph showing the latency percentiles of Aeron’s PingPong test. This provides a lower-bound for the achievable latency of CoinTossX as well as for open-source message transport libraries in general [19]. The matching engine is the component which relies heav- iest on the latency and throughput of the system and is therefore designed with these features in mind whilst sticking to the JSE matching engine’s architecture. The software was designed such that diﬀerent matching logic algorithms are in separate Java classes. This allows the logic to be changed to test any variations of the matching logic. The matching engine adopts the price-time priority algorithm during the continuous trading session. That is, for multiple orders occurring at the same price, a market order will be matched with the order having the earli- est submission time. The trading session execution times and monitoring was not implemented in the components as this would reduce the throughput and increase the la- tency. Limit and market orders submitted during a call auction are not matched immediately. These orders are matched at the end of the call auction at a single price using a price discovery process. The Volume Maximizing Auc- tion Algorithm ﬁnds the price that will match the most number of buy and sell orders. More speciﬁcally, dur- ing both the continuous trading and auction call sessions, the matching engine processes orders as follows. The ﬁl- ter and uncross algorithms run each time the Best Bid or Oﬀer (BBO) changes or every 30 seconds. The ﬁlter algo- rithm uses the heuristic Hill Climber search/optimization algorithm12 to ﬁnd the optimal volume of hidden limit orders that can be executed. The search will ﬁlter out hidden limit orders with MES constraints that are not el- igible. After the ﬁltering, speciﬁc rules are used to select the orders and price to executed in the crossed region. As in the JSE, the matching engine uses native message protocols13 to communicate with clients as opposed to FIX14 (Financial Information eXchange), FAST 15 (FIX Adapted for STreaming), ITCH 16 or OUTCH 17. The matching engine component stores the active orders in memory since storing the active orders on disk would in- crease the I/O and reduce performance. The data struc- ture for storing the LOB is designed to have a low mem- ory overhead (lists, hash tables, trees, B-tree, B+tree) and be eﬃcient in searching, updating and deleting or- ders [6]. More importantly, the low latency is achieved through the eﬃcient use of CPU cache. The simulator only uses main memory without the use of virtual mem- ory18. The time taken for data to move from the CPU to main memory is reduced by using caches that contain copies of frequently used data from main memory. The website was developed using Spring Boot and Apache Wicket and only has the permission to read from the ﬁle system. The original design had the event listener and website in the same Java process. When the website was used or paused because of garbage collection, it aﬀected 12The Hill Climber algorithm is an optimization technique that iteratively searches for the solution to a problem by changing one element in each iteration 13Message protocols are the methods by which the exchange com- municates with market participants. Native protocols are custom built protocols. 14FIX is an open standard non-propriety protocol that is used by buy and sell ﬁrms, trading platforms and regulators to transmit trade data. The protocol allows organizations to easily communi- cate domestically and internationally with each other. 15Greater numbers of market participants and therefore volume increased the network latency and lead to market participants not receiving updates in an acceptable time. The FAST protocol re- duces latency by encoding and compressing the data before trans- mission. 16ITCH is used to publish market data only. 17OUCH is used to place, amend and cancel orders. 18Virtual memory is space on the hard disk which is used by an operating system when it requires more memory. The time to fetch data from virtual memory is very slow and is therefore not used. 6 4 COINTOSSX 4.2 Clients the receiving and saving of events. Therefore this logic was split into a separate component — the web event listener. The listener could keep the received events in memory or save it to the ﬁle system. Saving the data in memory would be fast, but would require an unknown maximum memory setting. Therefore the data needs to be saved to the ﬁle system. Using the MapDB library 19, an oﬀ heap hashmap is used to save the events to memory mapped ﬁles. An oﬀ heap hashmap stores data outside the Java heap space and is not aﬀected by garbage col- lection. Oﬀ heap data is suited for storing data larger than the current memory and allows sharing of data be- tween JVMs. Memory mapped ﬁles allow Java programs to read and write ﬁles using only memory while the op- erating system reads and writes to the ﬁle system. This signiﬁcantly improves performance. The entire ﬁle or a part of the ﬁle can be loaded into memory. The values in memory will still be written to the ﬁle system even if the JVM crashes. The web event listener has read and write permissions. It saves events to the ﬁle system but receives events faster than it can save it to ﬁle. This issue is solved with the Disruptor by having two threads: one to receive and store events, and the other to save events to the ﬁle system [10]. 4.2. Clients Important to the design of this trading system are the clients who send orders to the trading gateway and re- ceive updates from the website and market data gateway. Each client is assigned input and output URLs for both the Native Gateway and Market Data Gateway. These URLs specify the IP addresses (in this case localhost - the user’s local machine) to/from which messages will be sent/received as well as the ports on which these com- ponents are listening. Therefore each client takes up a number of threads on the machine it runs on — which can be the same or diﬀerent from the machine running the other components of the matching engine. So, hav- ing clients send orders to the server remotely would free up hardware and improve performance on the matching engine server. It is also important to note that each client here is a unique trader having its own unique ID, password, ports and login credentials. However, as was done in the testing framework, a single client may still be used to simulate multiple traders. This would be preferable in the case where the client(s) and other components run on the same machine, thereby limiting the computational resources re- quired for simulations. In that case, the client is simply a tool/object for submitting orders to the gateway. In this way one can have a self-contained simulation framework be independent from the actual implementation or send- ing of orders by, for example, deﬁning an ABM in julia 19MapDB is an open-source, embedded Java database engine and collection framework. It provides Maps, Sets, Lists, Queues, Bitmaps with range queries, expiration, compression, oﬀ-heap stor- age and streaming. with each agent holding a reference to the client object that sends orders. The number of client-stock pairs that can be supported in total is only limited to the performance capabilities of the server on which the matching engine is running (see sec- tion 4.4 for hardware recommendations and performance results with diﬀering number of client-stock pairs). The limits of the number of clients that can be supported by each stock, however, still needs to be explored and mea- sured with respect to diﬀerent hardware conﬁgurations. 4.3. Functionality When the user starts CoinTossX, through the website, three main screens can be switched between and dis- played. The stock screen shows the stocks conﬁgured, the trading session that is active for each stock and a button to view the limit order book of the stock. In the limit order books for each stock a bar chart will be gener- ated to display the active orders. The market data shown on the LOB pages for each stock are snapshots represent- ing the current state of the limit order book. Tables will show the details of the bids, oﬀers, trades and all sub- mitted orders. All data on these pages can be exported. The Hawkes conﬁguration page (see Section 4.4) allows the user to change the values of the Hawkes input data before running the simulation. The simulation page al- lows the user to stop and start the warmup process and the Hawkes simulation. It shows the status of each client and the active trading session. The clients screen shows the clients that are conﬁgured and allows the user to cre- ate, update and delete clients. Clients not conﬁgured will not be able to log in to the trading gateway. In order for a client to submit orders, a login request, with the rel- evant username and password, must ﬁrst be sent to the trading gateway. Similarly, log-out request must be sent when the client logs out. Thereafter the client can sub- mit orders by publishing order messages to the trading gateway via UDP ports. Traders cannot submit orders that are smaller than the LOB’s tick size (controls the smallest order size). The allowable order types that are not conditioned on time are [16]: 1. Market orders (MO) – contains the quantity of shares to trade, but not the price, and executes against each orders in the LOB on the contra side until it is fully ﬁlled. Orders submitted during the auction call will remain in the LOB until uncrossing is done. All market orders that are not ﬁlled will expire. 2. Limit order (LO) – displays the quantity and price which may execute against a trade or expire based on it’s time-in-force (TIF). 3. Hidden orders (HO) – allows traders to submit orders which are completely hidden from the market (price and volume). These have a lower priority than all visible active orders. These orders can execute against other visible and hidden orders. Hidden limit 7 4 COINTOSSX 4.3 Functionality orders that are submitted during an auction call are rejected. The quantity of a hidden order must meet the minimum reserve size (MRS) 20. Each hidden or- der also has a minimum execution size (MES) 21. Af- ter a trade executes against a hidden order, if the remaining quantity is less than the MES (¿ MRS) then the order will expire. If the remaining quantity is greater than the MRS and MES then the order will only expire when it executes or based on it’s TIF (whichever comes ﬁrst). Hidden orders may only be submitted during the continuous trading session. 4. Stop order and stop limit order (SO & SL) – a stop order is a market order with a stop price. These orders do not enter the order book (remain unelected) until their stop price is reached. When the stop price is reached, the stop order becomes a market order. Similarly, a stop limit order is a limit order with a stop price. These orders do not enter the order book until their stop price is reached. When the stop price is reached, the stop order becomes a limit order. Stop and stop limit buy orders will be elected if the last traded price is equal to or greater than the stop price. Similarly, stop and stop limit sell orders will be elected if the last traded price is equal to or less than the stop price. An incoming stop or stop limit order may be immediately elected on receipt if the stop price has already been reached. These orders will also only be elected at the end of the execution of an order. Some of the above orders can also have a time-in-force (TIF) which cannot be amended after the order is placed. The following time in force options are available [16]: 1. At the opening (OPG) – only accepted during the opening auction and are used to direct orders only towards this session. OPG orders that are not ﬁlled during the uncrossing will expire at the end of the opening auction. If there is no opening auction scheduled, OPG orders will be rejected. 2. Good for auction (GF A) – orders of this type that are submitted will be parked 22 until the next auction and are injected at the start of the auction. GFA orders that are not ﬁlled during the uncross- ing will be parked for the next auction and are only removed when they are ﬁlled or cancelled. If there is no auction session scheduled, GFA orders will be rejected. 3. Good for intraday auction (GFX) – These or- ders are parked until the next intraday auction and are injected at the start of the auction. As opposed to GFA orders, GFX orders that are not ﬁlled dur- ing uncrossing will expire at the end of the intraday 20The minimum order quantity for orders to qualify as hidden limit orders. 21The minimum quantity of the hidden limit order which is per- mitted to execute 22While orders are parked they cannot be executed. auction. If there is no intraday auction scheduled, GFX orders will be rejected. 4. At the close (A TC)– submitted orders of this type are parked until the next closing auction. They are injected at the start of the auction and if they are not ﬁlled, will expire at the end of the closing auction. If there is no closing auction scheduled, ATC orders will be rejected. 5. Day (DA Y) – orders that expire at the end of the trading day. If an order does not specify a TIF, it will default to DAY. 6. Immediate or cancel (IOC) – can be partially or fully ﬁlled. An IOC that is only partially ﬁlled will cancel immediately after execution. IOC orders are rejected during auction calls. 7. Fill or kill (FOK) – this order type diﬀers from IOC orders in that they are either fully ﬁlled or ex- pired. Partially ﬁlled orders are not allowed. 8. Good till cancel (GTC) – can remain in the order book for a maximum of 90 calendar days or until the order is ﬁlled or canceled. 9. Good till date (GTD) – as opposed to GTC or- ders, these orders remain in the order book until the order is ﬁlled, cancelled or a speciﬁed expiration date is reached (maximum active time is 90 days). GTD orders do not allow for the speciﬁcation of an expi- ration time (only date). 10. Good till time (GTT) – remain in the order book until the speciﬁed expiry time is reached in the trad- ing day. GTT orders that have an expiry time during an auction will not expire until uncrossing is ﬁnished. 11. Closing price cross (CPX) – these orders are parked until the start of the closing price cross ses- sion. Unexecuted CPX orders are expired at the end of the closing price cross session. Stop and stop limit orders are not allowed to have a TIF of type CPX. Valid combinations of order types and TIF are shown in Table 1 below. 8 4 COINTOSSX 4.4 Testing framework TIF Market Limit Hidden Stop Stop limit limit IOC FOK DAY GF A GFX OPG ATC GTC GTD GTT CPX Accepted Rejected Table 1: Valid order types and time-in-force (TIF) combinations for the submission of new orders to the trading gateway. Lastly, CoinTossX also allows for multiple trading session types which correspond to that of the JSE. The trading sessions below and the rules adopted by each are conﬁg- urable in the data/tradingSessionsCron.properties ﬁle. The times shown are those of the JSE, provided for context [16]. All trading session start and end times can be speciﬁed by the user through the cron expressions in the data directory. During the auction call sessions orders are not matched immediately, rather, they are matched at the end of the call auction at a single price using a volume maximizing price-discovery process. This process ﬁnds the price that will match the most number or buy and sell orders. 1. Start of trading (07:00 – 08:30 ) – no orders can be submitted or executed executed during this session. Traders will be able to cancel, but not submit, orders during this session. 2. Opening auction call sessions (08:30 – 09:00 ) 3. Continuous trading session (09:00 – 16:50 ) – the system will continuously match incoming orders against those in the order book according to the price-time priority execution rule. 4. V olatility auction call session (triggered) – this session will only trigger when a stock’s circuit breaker tolerance level has been breached. volatil- ity auction call sessions last for a scheduled period of 5 minutes. The orders accumulated during this session will be executed at the uncrossing based on the volume maximizing algorithm. 5. Intraday auction call session (12:00 – 12:15 ) 6. Closing auction call session (16:50 – 17:00 ) 7. Closing price publication session (17:00 – 17:05 ) – no orders can be submitted or executed executed during this session. Traders will be able to cancel, but not submit, orders during this session. 8. Closing price cross session (17:05 – 17:10 ) – trading will only take place at the closing price that was published during the closing price publication session. 9. Post close session (17:05 – 18:15 ) – traders will be able to cancel, but not submit, orders during this session. 10. Halt (manually envoked ) – A halt session may be activated by the user during which time no order equests may be executed. Traders will however be able to cancel orders. 11. Halt and close (manually envoked ) – The be- haviour is the same as the halt session except closing price calculations will be performed. 12. Pause (manually envoked ) – No executions will take place during the pause session. Traders will be able to submit, amend or cancel orders during this ses- sion, however, market orders will expire at the end of the session. 13. Re-opening auction call (manually envoked ) – The user may manually invoke the re-opening auc- tion call session when resuming from a manual trad- ing halt or a trading pause. 14. T rade reporting (08:00 – 18:15 ) – trades and statistics, where applicable, will be published through the market data gateways. 4.4. Testing framework CoinTossX has been successfully deployed locally as well as to remote servers such as Microsoft Azure, CHPC and TW Kambule Mathematical Sciences Laboratories pro- vided servers (using 4 re-purposed legacy TACC Ranger blades, see Table 4). Deployment to high-performance compute solutions such as UCT HPC was found to be infeasible for a number of reasons: First, facilities such as UCT HPC often perform computations by relying on an MPI approach using one of a variety of diﬀerent job management systems where the submission of “jobs” to “worker nodes” is highly constrained by the preferences of systems administrators managing many diﬀerent use cases; the worker nodes are not equivalent to virtual ma- chines, rather they receive tasks from the “head node” to be executed in parallel. Simplistically this means that, for example, web interfaces will not be easily accessible from worker nodes due to the system and network architecture - but this more generally impacts any client worker in- teractions when agents interact via clients through some centralised architecture - here the matching engine; but this can be any interaction landscape. In general, such systems are poorly suited for real-time and reactive use cases. This is because, by design, many high-performance computing facilities, such as UCT HPC or CHPC, are not high-throughput facilities. They are typically not well suited for large scale high-concurrency, low latency mar- ket and agent-based simulation problems that necessarily 9 4 COINTOSSX 4.4 Testing framework Order type/time-in-force Order type/time-in-force Session OPG ATC IOC FOK GTC GTD GTT GF A GFX DAY CPX MO LO SO & SL HL Start of trading Opening auction call Continuous trading Volatility auction call Intraday auction call Closing auction call Closing price publication Closing price cross session Post close Halt Halt and close Pause Re-opening auction call FCO auction call session Accepted Rejected Accepted and parked until injected Accepted and expired immediately if they do not execute upon aggression Carried forward from the previous day Table 2: Valid trading session and order type/TIF combinations for the submission of new orders to the trading gateway. need to be highly reactive 23 in nature. We believe that this is an important design perspective that is often not well considered when designing advanced market (or so- cial science) simulators. 4.4.1. Unit testing The functionality of the software was tested using the test cases made available online from the JSE. The re- quirements were taken from [16]. Testing of the trad- ing sessions were restricted to the continuous and intra- day auction trading sessions using only the DAY TIF. Unit tests were implemented to cover the testing of the functional requirements of the software while individual throughput and latency performance tests were imple- mented in conjunction with the Java Microbenchmark Harness24 (JMH) to test methods whose performance were critical. These tests, covering the majority of the application, provide a safety net to allow changes to be made to the code without breaking existing functionality. The outputs of these tests were not compared to the JSE or another exchange as the data is not available by the 23Reactive is used here in the broad sense of system architectures that require the fast propagation of data changes and relationships within a system with many clients, but require high coherence with low coupling. 24JMH is a Java harness for building, running, and analysing nano/micro/milli/macro benchmarks written in Java and other lan- guages targetting the JVM industry. The JSE’s test environment is also closed and does not provide realistic order-book dynamics. This pa- per focuses mainly on the results of latency and through- put tests, however, the types and results of the extensive list of tests performed can be found by referring to Sing and Gebbie [6]. 4.4.2. Order-ﬂow testing Matching engine integrity was evaluated using unit tests and, instead of an agent-based approach, simulations and tests aim to understand throughput and latency were car- ried out with a 8-variate marked Hawkes process [20, 21]. This provides a ﬂexible framework to simulate a market data feed with varying throughput, with full control over the trade and quote conditional intensities. The soft- ware and Hawkes client processes were deployed on one server which aﬀected the performance of all components. The mutually exciting processes correspond to 8 diﬀer- ent order types that are considered in the testing frame- work. The testing framework only considers basic aggres- sive and passive market and limit orders as in Large [22]: 10 4 COINTOSSX 4.4 Testing framework Type Event Ask or Immediate Moves Descritpion # type Bid execution prices 1 Trade Ask  (MO)  Market buy that moves the ask 2 Trade Bid  (MO)  Market sell that moves the bid 3 Add Bid  (LO)  Bid between quotes 4 Add Ask  (LO)  Ask between quotes 5 Trade Ask  (MO)  Market buy does not move ask 6 Trade Bid  (MO)  Market sell does not move bid 7 Add Bid  (LO)  Bid at or below best bid 8 Add Ask  (LO)  Ask at or above best ask Table 3: Order event types used for the 8-variate Hawkes process in the testing framework simulation following the approach of Large [22]. The simulation is conducted using the intensity-based thinning algorithm as introduced by Lewis and Shedler [23] and modiﬁed by Ogata [24] and is used to deﬁne the time at which orders arrive. Each thinning algorithm submitting large numbers of orders may be thought of as clients. So, in the case of the testing framework, a sin- gle client is associated with each stock and is meant to represent a large group of traders investing in that stock. The prices and volumes are generated based on the order type in a fairly random manner. First, a maximum LOB depth M = 10 is speciﬁed. A lower limit for the price at which buy limit orders are gen- erated is set to Lb = 25000. Similarly, an upper limit for the price at which sell limit orders are generated is set to Hs = 25057. The LOB is initialised with an initial limit and buy Ib = 25034 and sell Is = 25057 order. Thereafter prices and volumes are generated according to a random normal distribution in these bounds. According to this bids and asks can cross each other - which is not real- istic. Nonetheless it’s purpose is merely to demonstrate the applications ability. The VWAP is used to calculate the price for an aggressive buy/sell trade (not the same as the execution price) that executes against the LOB. That is, if an aggressive trade aﬀects the ﬁrst k highest/lowest levels of the order book then the price is calculated as: ∑k i=1 Pricei × Volumei ∑k i=1 Volumei For the next section, test scenarios were created to test the performance of the software by evaluating the impact of multiple clients-stock pairs. That is, each stock is as- signed a unique client who sends high volumes of orders. By increasing the number of stocks and clients after each subsequent run, the volume of messages being processed increases as well - during which time the throughput per second and latency are automatically recorded. These performance tests have been conducted on multiple com- puters, all with diﬀerent operating systems and hardware speciﬁcations. Here the performance results are docu- mented by running the application on the two machines listed in Table 4. The average start-up time of the web application is approximately 50 seconds. Machine Operating System Memory Processors WITS MSS Server 64-bit Linux Ubuntu 16.04-LTS 32GB 4× Quadcore AMD Opteron 8356 @ 2.3GHz (16 cores) Standard A4m V2 Azure VM 64-bit Linux Ubuntu 18.04-LTS 32GB 4× Intel Xeon CPU E5-2673 v3 @ 2.4GHz (32 cores) Table 4: Hardware speciﬁcations of machines used for throughput and latency testing used to compare the cloud solution (Azure) to the dedicated physical hardware solution (WITS MSS Server blade) . Although not presented here, limit order book storage testing was also conducted on the WITS Mathematical Science Support provided server hardware and demon- strated the ability to store thousands of orders at each price point. The design of the LOB also allows orders to be added and removed easily 4.4.3. Latency tests The latency was tested and visualized using the HdrHis- togram library 25. With every run, each client submits approximately 110 000 orders. The time it takes to pro- cess all these orders is then measured and compared be- tween machines. To reproduce Figure 4 simply re-run the Hawkes simulations for the system to write latency and throughput results to ﬁle. Figure 4 shows the latency results, in nanoseconds, for runs with diﬀering numbers of active client-stock pairs on each machine. The latency increases as the number of clients-stock pairs increase - since each client is associated with multiple threads running processes in parallel. Due to there being only 4 CPUs on the Azure VM, running more than 6 clients simultaneously was found to be in- feasible. For this reason the user should ensure that the hardware on the server is capable of supporting the de- sired number of clients. For the high spec Wits Server ma- chine the minimum and maximum latency (measured up to 10 clients) at the 90th percentile is 106ns and 248ns, re- spectively. Similarly, for the medium spec machine (with a maximum of 6 clients) the minimum and maximum latency at the 90th percentile is 123ns and 393ns, respec- tively. Therefore, on a high end machine one can expect sub 250ns latency (with 10 clients), while with a medium spec machine one can expect sub 400ns latency (with 6 clinets) 26. 25HdrHistogram is designed for recording histograms of value measurements in latency and performance sensitive applications. Measurements show value recording times as low as 3-6 nanosec- onds on modern (circa 2012) Intel CPUs 26JSE’s average round-trip colocation network latency is sub 100 11 5 SIMULATION RESULTS Figure 5 considers the scenario where high volumes of or- ders are submitted to the trading gateway. One million orders are submitted from a single client and compared across the two machines. For the Wits server, the la- tency is 735ns at the 90th percentile but maintains a sig- niﬁcantly lower latency on average. On the other hand, the Azure server has higher latency’s on average with a latency of 964ns at the 90th percentile. Figure 5: A comparison of latencies during a high volume scenario. One million orders were submitted by a single client on the Wits server and Azure machines. 4.4.4. Throughput tests Table 5 shows the throughput per second as the number of clients-stock pairs increase on each machine. To repro- duce the data in Table 5 simply re-run the Hawkes sim- ulations for the system to write latency and throughput results to ﬁle. It should be noted that each client waits for market data updates before calculating the next or- der to send. The client also waits a few nanoseconds as part of the Hawkes simulation. These delays reduced the throughput of orders sent. The results show that as the number of clients-stock pairs increase, the throughput de- creases. The most signiﬁcant decrease in throughput is when more than 4 clients and stocks are used. Beyond 6 clients the hardware conﬁguration of the Azure VM was found to be insuﬃcient. In total, the high spec machine was shown to be capable of processing more than one million orders in less than a 19 minute simulation period with signiﬁcantly low latencies. On the other hand, the medium spec machine was capable of processing 450000 and 560000 orders in approximately 44 minute and 2 hour simulation periods for 4 and 6 client-stock pairs, respec- tively. 5. Simulation results The results in this section relate to the simulation for a single stock using a simple Hawkes process as a proof of microseconds and it’s matching engine has a latency of 50 microsec- onds [25]. concept. Simulation results are contained in three seper- ate .csv ﬁles for each security: one for market orders only, another for limit orders and the last for a snapshot of the limit order book at then end of the simulation. This data is only printed to ﬁle at the end of the sim- ulation once all logged-in clients have logged out. The format of these ﬁles are shown in snippets 6 and 7 below. The submission times are given by the UTC standard. TradId’s correspond to the OrderId’s of the limit orders order against which they were executed. SecurityId,"OrderId","SubmittedTime","Price","Volume","Side" 1,"1","2020-11-22 07:43:08.231","25034","1200","Buy" 1,"2","2020-11-22 07:43:08.696","25057","1000","Sell" 1,"3","2020-11-22 07:43:11.683","25056","3600","Buy" 1,"4","2020-11-22 07:43:11.763","25050","2600","Buy" 1,"5","2020-11-22 07:43:11.915","25048","1200","Sell" Figure 6: File format for the output of simulated limit orders sent to the trading gateway. This data is written to ﬁle after the simulation is complete and the client ends their session. TradeId,"Price","Quantity","CreationTime" 1,"25056","1200","2020-11-22 07:43:12.352" 2,"25056","1700","2020-11-22 07:43:12.905" 3,"25056","700","2020-11-22 07:43:12.906" 5,"25057","100","2020-11-22 07:43:12.984" 6,"25057","300","2020-11-22 07:43:13.115" Figure 7: File format for the output of simulated market orders sent to the trading gateway. Figure 8: A Graph of the intensities of the 8-variate Hawkes process for 50 seconds of the Hawkes simulation. 12 6 CONCLUSION (a) Wits Server high speciﬁcation machine (b) Azure medium speciﬁcation virtual machine Figure 4: A High Dynamic Range (HDR) Histogram graph showing the latency percentiles of the matching engine for increasing numbers of stocks and clients. In the testing framework each client submits approximately 110000 market/limit orders. Wits Server Microsoft Azure client-stock pairs Duration Number of orders Throughput per second Duration Number of orders Throughput per second 1 00:00:48.820 111646 2287 00:06:44.917 110825 274 2 00:04:23.981 224562 850 00:19:38.576 222390 189 4 00:12:02.204 448774 621 00:43:55.734 447878 170 6 00:15:12.386 669331 733 02:01:27.494 564070 77 8 00:20:27.010 895080 729 - - - 10 00:18:52.289 1120514 989 - - - Table 5: Tabulated measurements of throughput per second with increasing numbers of client-stock pairs. Based on the Hawkes process parameters each client submits approximately 110000 orders. After each simulation the start and end times are published and used to calculate the throughput per second. The hardware conﬁguration on the Azure VM was found to be insuﬃcient when deﬁning more that 6 clients. All data generated in this table can be acquired at the end of each simulation in the data directory of the start-up folder. Figure 9: A Graph of the limit and market orders submitted to the trading gateway. As a proof of concept, the Hawkes simulation as- signs volumes and prices in a fairly random and unrealistic manner as the bid and ask are allowed to cross (negative spread). The size of the points are proportional to the volume of the order. 6. Conclusion CoinTossX is a low latency high throughput stock ex- change. It is conﬁgurable and allows users to view the limit order book in real time as well as for multiple clients to connect and send orders to the exchange. The ex- change supports multiple stocks and a variety of diﬀerent trading session. Here Hawkes processes are used to pro- vide a simple but robust simulation of order arrivals for infrastructure testing. The CoinTossX website can be enhanced to analyze the data that is processed. The ex- change provides a realistic platform for agent based mod- els exploration. The software was designed so that diﬀer- ent matching logic algorithms are in separate Java classes. This allows the logic to be changed to test any variations of the matching logic or market rules. Hence, additional work can be done to change the matching rules on the en- gine to test the impact of rules and regulation changes on the limit order book and its dynamics. Since the compo- nents are de-coupled, their implementation language can be continually and easily changed to support the latest frameworks [5]. Future work will be aimed at better un- derstanding the interaction dynamics from increasingly realistic approaches to point-process based simulations e.g. with trading clients based on Hawkes processes us- ing models such as those of Bacry and Muzy [26] and Zheng et al. [27] to investigate the interactions of limit- order and market-order trading agents through a realistic 13 REFERENCES order matching process. Ultimately this type of work is aimed at better understanding high-concurrency agent- based perspectives for market modeling and their impact on model calibration [2] and causation. 7. Acknowledgement We thank Turgay Celik and Brian Maistry WITS Math- ematical Science Support and the TW Kambule Math- ematical Sciences Laboratories for allowing us to use 4 former TACC Ranger blades for some of the simulation work. We thank Patrick Chang, Dieter Hendricks and Diane Wilcox for various discussions and advice with re- gards to the project. References [1] P. Chang, E. Pienaar, T. Gebbie, The epps eﬀect under al- ternative sampling schemes, 2020. URL: https://arxiv.org/ abs/2011.11281. arXiv:2011.11281. [2] D. Platt, T. Gebbie, Can agent-based models probe market microstructure?, Physica A: Statistical Mechan- ics and its Applications 503 (2018) 1092–1106. URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0378437118309956. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2018.08.055. [3] K. Goosen, T. Gebbie, Calibrating high-frequency trading data to agent-based models using approximate bayesian com- putation, Master’s thesis, University of cape town, 2020. URL: https://github.com/KellyGoosen1/hft-abm-smc-abc . doi:10.25375/uct.12894005.v1. [4] A. Addison, C. Andrews, N. Azad, D. Bardsley, J. Bauman, J. Diaz, T. Didik, K. Fazliddin, M. Gromoa, A. Krish, R. Prins, L. Ryan, N. Villette, Low-latency trading in the cloud environ- ment, in: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Computa- tional Science and Engineering (CSE) and IEEE International Conference on Embedded and Ubiquitous Computing (EUC), IEEE, 2019, pp. 272–282. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee. org/document/8919600. doi:10.1109/CSE/EUC.2019.00060. [5] D. Sing, Cointossx software, 2017. URL: https://github.com/ dharmeshsing/CoinTossX. doi:10.25375/uct.14069552. [6] D. Sing, T. Gebbie, JSE Matching Engine Simulator, Master’s thesis, University of the Witwatersrand, 2017. URL: http:// wiredspace.wits.ac.za/handle/10539/25136. [7] J. S. Exchange, Broker Deal Accounting System, 2020. URL: https://www.jse.co.za/services/technologies/ bda-technical-specifications. [8] I. Jericevich, P. Chang, T. Gebbie, Comparing the market mi- crostructure between two south african exchanges, 2020. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.04367. arXiv:2011.04367. [9] P. Nair, Agent based modelling of a single-stock market on the JSE, Master’s thesis, University of the Witwatersrand, 2015. URL: http://wiredspace.wits.ac.za/handle/10539/16840. [10] M. Thompson, D. Farley, M. Barker, P. Gee, A. Stewart, Dis- ruptor: High performance alternative to bounded queues for exchanging data between concurrent threads, Technical Re- port, LMAX, 2011. URL: https://lmax-exchange.github. io/disruptor/. [11] D. Wilcox, T. Gebbie, Hierarchical causality in ﬁnancial eco- nomics, SSRN (2014). URL: https://ssrn.com/abstract= 2544327. doi:10.2139/ssrn.2544327. [12] J. Lussange, A. Belianin, S. Bourgeois-Gironde, B. Gutkin, A bright future for ﬁnancial agent-based models, SSRN (2018). URL: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3109904. doi: 10. 2139/ssrn.3109904. [13] D. Platt, A comparison of economic agent-based model cal- ibration methods, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Con- trol 113 (2020) 103859. URL: https://www.sciencedirect. com/science/article/pii/S0165188920300294. doi: 10.1016/ j.jedc.2020.103859. [14] B. LeBaron, Agent-based computational ﬁnance, Handbook of Computational Economics 2 (2006) 1187–1233. [15] I. Jericevich, D. Sing, T. Gebbie, Cointossx, GitHub (2021). URL: https://zivahub.uct.ac.za/articles/software/ CoinTossX/14069552. doi:10.25375/uct.14069552.v1. [16] J. S. Exchange, Equity Market Trading and Information Solu- tion JSE Speciﬁcation Document Volume 00E — Trading and Information Overview, 4 ed., 2020. URL: https://www.jse. co.za/content/JSEContractSpecificationItems/Volume% 2000E%20-%20Trading%20and%20Information%20Overview% 20for%20Equity%20Market.pdf. [17] J. S. Exchange, Equity Market Trading and Informa- tion Solution JSE Speciﬁcation Document Volume 01 — Native Trading Gateway, 3.05 ed., 2018. URL: https: //www.jse.co.za/content/JSETechnologyDocumentItems/ Volume%2001%20-%20Native%20Trading%20Gateway.pdf. [18] J. S. Exchange, Equity Market Trading and Information Solution JSE Speciﬁcation Document Volume 05 — Market Data Gateway, 3.09 ed., 2019. URL: https://www.jse.co.za/ content/JSETechnologyDocumentItems/Volume%2005%20-% 20Market%20Data%20Gateway%20(MITCH%20-%20UDP).pdf. [19] R. Logic, Aeron media driver, 2021. URL: https://github. com/real-logic/Aeron/wiki. [20] A. G. Hawkes, Spectra of some self-exciting and mutu- ally exciting point processes, Biometrika 58 (1971) 83–90. URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2334319. doi:10.2307/ 2334319. [21] Y. Ogata, Statistical models for earthquake occurrences and residual analysis for point processes, Journal of the American Statistical association 83 (1988) 9–27. URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/01621459. 1988.10478560. doi:10.1080/01621459.1988.10478560. [22] J. Large, Measuring the resiliency of an electronic limit order book, Journal of Financial Markets 10 (2007) 1– 25. URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/S1386418106000528. doi:10.1016/j.finmar.2006.09.001. [23] P. W. Lewis, G. S. Shedler, Simulation of nonhomo- geneous poisson processes by thinning, Naval research logistics quarterly 26 (1979) 403–413. URL: https: //onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nav.3800260304. doi:10.1002/nav.3800260304. [24] Y. Ogata, On lewis’ simulation method for point pro- cesses, IEEE transactions on information theory 27 (1981) 23– 31. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/1056305. doi:10.1109/TIT.1981.1056305. [25] J. S. Exchange, The lowest-latency connection to JSE markets, 2015. URL: https://www.jse.co.za/content/ JSETechnologyDocumentItems/3.%20JSE%20Colocation% 20Brochure%202015.pdf. [26] E. Bacry, J.-F. Muzy, Hawkes model for price and trades high- frequency dynamics, Quantitative Finance 14 (2014) 1147– 1166. doi:10.1080/14697688.2014.897000. [27] B. Zheng, F. Roueﬀ, F. Abergel, Modelling bid and ask prices using constrained hawkes processes: Ergodicity and scaling limit, SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics 5 (2014) 99– 136. doi:10.1137/130912980. 14 APPENDIX A DEPLOYMENT AND USAGE Appendix A. Deployment and usage CoinTossX ClientSimulator build src main java client example hawkes resources test/java/hawkes build.gradle Common LimitOrderBook MarketDataGateway MatchingEngine MatchingEngineClient Messages NativeGateway Socket Web WebEventListener data ClientData.csv hawkesData.properties Stock.csv Trader.csv tradingSessionsCron.properties build.gradle gradle/wrapper gradlew gradlew.bat install.gradle lib scripts local.properties deploy local.gradle remote.properties deploy remote.gradle windows.properties settings.gradle Below are the instructions for deploying CoinTossX to a user’s local machine or virtual ma- chine in a cloud environment. These instructions apply to Windows, Linux and OSX operating systems. CoinTossX is a Java web application and is built using the Gradle build tool. The user need not install Gradle or change the version of Gradle installed on their system as the project uses the Gradle wrapper to download and run the required Gradle version a. Currently CoinTossX is compatible with Java version 8 and Gradle version 6.7.1. The application can be started from the command line, however, it is recommended that the user make use of a Java IDE such as Eclipse or IntelliJ IDEA to automate the start-up process and simplify deployment. Prerequisites 1. JDK version 8 (see Installation section for more detail) 2. A computer with 4 or more CPU cores and a suﬃcient amount of RAM (ideally 4 cores 32 GB but can be less depending on the number of clients and stocks used). 3. A Java IDE such as Eclipse or IntelliJ IDEA. 4. The user may be required to run commands using Command Prompt (Windows) or Bash (Linux and OSX). Additional resources • Tutorial for building a java project with gradle: 🔗. • Tutorial for building a simple Java web application: 🔗 • Introduction to Spring Boot 🔗 • Introduction to Apache Wicket 🔗 • Tutorial for setting up a student Azure account: 🔗 • Instructions for the installation of Oracle JDK 8 and conﬁguration of the system environ- ment variables on Linux: 🔗 • Calling Java in Julia 🔗, Python 🔗 and R 🔗 Installation If the correct version of Java is already installed and conﬁgured correctly, the user can skip step 1 below. 1. CoinTossX is currently only compatible with version 8 of Java. Therefore, the user should install version 8 of either the Oracle ( 🔗) or Open JDK (Java Development Kit) b. For simplicity, it is assumed that Windows and OSX users will install the Oracle JDK while Linux users will install the Open JDK. • Windows — After installing Oracle JDK 8 using the link above, if not done so au- tomatically by the java install wizard, ensure that J A V A _ H O M Eis set and that the java executable is set in the path environment variable. To set/add java to the system’s J A V A _ H O M Eand path environment variables, go to Se tt ing s > Ad va nce d System Se tt in gs ↪→> E n v i r o n m e n t V a r i a b l e s > System V a r i a b l e s . Then add the location of the java instal- lation to a new variable called J A V A _ H O M Ewhich points to the relevant java distribution (e.g. C :\ Program Files \ Java \ jdk1 .8.0 _271 ). Thereafter append a new pointer in the path environment variable by adding \% J A V A _ H O M E \%\ bin. • Linux — Installation of Open JDK 8 is done by executing the commands below: sudo apt - get update sudo apt - get install openjdk -8 - jdk After this, if the correct version of Java is still not being used, the user can switch to the correct version using sudo update - a l t e r n a t i v e s -- set java ↪→/ usr / lib / jvm / jdk1 .8.0 _ [ version ]/ bin / java • OSX — To set J A V A _ H O M Erun export ↪→J A V A _ H O M E =/ Library / Java / J a v a V i r t u a l M a c h i n e s / jdk1 .8.0 _ [ version ]. jdk / Con te nts / Home • Clone the CoinTossX repository (using either git in the terminal or Github Desktop). The user can clone the repository to any location of their choosing. cd [ d i r e c t o r y to clone into ] git clone https :// github . com / d h a r m e s h s i n g / C o i n T o s s X .git aThe Wrapper is a script that invokes a declared version of Gradle, downloading it beforehand if necessary. This standardizes a project on a given Gradle version and simpliﬁes execution (especially when using an IDE) bNote that the user should install the JDK (which includes the JRE), not only the JRE. 15 APPENDIX A DEPLOYMENT AND USAGE The next set of instructions provides guidelines for the deployment of CoinTossX. By this point the user will have cloned the repository to a location of their choosing for either local or remote deployment. Depending on the operating system, diﬀerent deployment conﬁgurations would need to be employed - hence the multiple conﬁguration and deployment ﬁles. The ﬁles with the ”.properties” extensions deﬁne the required ports for each component as well as user speciﬁc path deﬁnitions. To match the location to which the repository was cloned, the user would have to conﬁgure the local . p r o p e r t i e sﬁle (for Linux) or the windows . p r o p e r t i e sﬁle (for Windows) to correspond with the user’s directories. For remote deployment the user would have to conﬁgure the remote . p r o p e r t i e swith the corresponding paths on the remote server. The path variables which need to be conﬁgured are: • M E D I A _ D R I V E R _ D I Rpointing to the Aeron Media Driver. This folder will only be created after the application is started. For Linux users it is recommended that the default path ( / dev / shm ) is not deviated from in order to achieve optimal performance. Otherwise the path can be amended as follows: M E D I A _ D R I V E R _ D I R =[...]/ aeron Note that if the user deviates from the default media driver path, they would have to make the same change in the build . gradle ﬁle. • S O F T W A R E _ P A T Hpointing to the start-up folder that will be created upon deployment. This path can be set to any valid path on the user’s machine and may be given any name. For example: S O F T W A R E _ P A T H =[. .. ]/[ folder name ] • D A T A _ P A T Hpoints to the data folder within the software path. For example: D A T A _ P A T H =[ S O F T W A R E _ P A T H ]/ data Before the application can be started, we are required to change a few system settings to ensure that network per- formance and system memory are utilised correctly. Firstly, the receive and send UDP buﬀer sizes/limits need to be conﬁgured as follows. sudo sysctl net . core . rm em_ ma x = 20 97 152 sudo sysctl net . core . wm em_ ma x = 20 97 152 Secondly, this Java application requires large pages to be enabled. By default Linux does not enable any HugePages (portions of memory set aside to be solely used by the application). To determine the current HugePage usage, run grep Huge / proc / meminfo . Furthermore, the default HugePage size is 2MB (2048kB). So if the user wishes to enable approximately 20GB of HugePages (dedicated memory), this would require 10000 HugePages - so the command to run would be sudo sysctl vm . n r _ h u g e p a g e s =10000 Last is the running of the application. Users deploying the application to Microsoft Azure, CHPC, Wits Server or any other server may choose to do so locally or remotely. Remote deployment will require that the user specify the above paths to correspond with that of the remote server. The instructions below demonstrate both local and remote deployment. For users deploying remotely, one must ﬁrst ensure that SSH is enabled on the server and that port 22 is open for the transfer of ﬁles. Additionally, the username, IP address and password ﬁelds in the d e p l o y _ r e m o t e . gradle ﬁle should match that of the server. 1. Set the current directory to the location of CoinTossX: cd [ path to ]/ C o i n T o s s X 2. To build the project, use the provided gradle wrapper to run: ./ gradlew - Penv = local build -x test # For local d e p l o y m e n t ./ gradlew - Penv = remote build -x test # For remote d e p l o y m e n t ./ gradlew . bat - Penv = windows build -x test # For windows d e p l o y m e n t 3. To deploy the project to a start-up folder, execute one of the following. ./ gradlew - Penv = local clean i n s t a l l D i s t bootWar c o p y R e s o u r c e s T o I n s t a l l D i r c o p y T o D e p l o y d e p l o y L o c a l # For ↪→local d e p l o y m e n t ./ gradlew - Penv = remote clean i n s t a l l D i s t bootWar c o p y R e s o u r c e s T o I n s t a l l D i r c o p y T o D e p l o y d e p l o y R e m o t e # ↪→For remote d e p l o y m e n t ./ gradlew . bat - Penv = windows clean i n s t a l l D i s t bootWar c o p y R e s o u r c e s T o I n s t a l l D i r c o p y T o D e p l o y d e p l o y L o c a l ↪→# For windows d e p l o y m e n t 4. Finally, to run the program, execute the shell script: 16 APPENDIX A DEPLOYMENT AND USAGE sh [ S O F T W A R E _ P A T H ]/ scripts / st art Al l .sh # For local start - up sh [ S O F T W A R E _ P A T H ]/ scripts / r e m o t e _ s t a r t A l l .sh # For remote start - up [ S O F T W A R E _ P A T H ]/ scripts / sta rt All . bat # For Windows start - up 5. Access the web app by typing l o c a l h o s t :8080(if deployed locally) or [ server IP ]:8080 (if deployed remotely) into the URL search bar of a browser. Usage To conﬁgure the trading sessions to be ﬁred during the simulation refer to t r a d i n g S e s s i o n s C r o n . p r o p e r t i e sﬁle found in the data direc- tory. The usage/syntax of the cron expressions within that ﬁle are as follows. A cron expression is a string consisting of six or seven ﬁelds, separated by white space, that describe individual details of the schedule: [ seconds ] [ minutes ] [ hours ] [ day of month ] [ month ] [ day of week ] ↪→[ year ] A few examples, provided in t r a d i n g S e s s i o n s C r o n . p r o p e r t i e s, are shown on the right. T R A D I N G _ S E S S I O N S = C o n t i n u o u s T r a d i n g 2 # S t a r t O f T r a d i n g . name = C o n t i n u o u s T r a d i n g # S t a r t O f T r a d i n g . cron =0 0 7 * * 1 -7 # C o n t i n u o u s T r a d i n g . name = C o n t i n u o u s T r a d i n g # C o n t i n u o u s T r a d i n g . cron =0 0 9 * * 1 -7 # I n t r a D a y A u c t i o n C a l l . name = I n t r a D a y A u c t i o n C a l l # I n t r a D a y A u c t i o n C a l l . cron =0 0 17 * * 1 -7 C o n t i n u o u s T r a d i n g 2 . name = C o n t i n u o u s T r a d i n g C o n t i n u o u s T r a d i n g 2 . cron =0 15 17 * * 1 -7 # R a n d o m A u c t i o n . name = V o l a t i l i t y A u c t i o n C a l l # R a n d o m A u c t i o n . cron =0 0/5 * * * 1 -7 Each component of the system as well as other actions can be started independently via the shell scripts. The list of all the runnable shell scripts can be found in the deploy / scripts directory. Each shell script simply executes the Java byte code of a “main” method whose class is speciﬁed in the build . gradle ﬁle of the corresponding module. For example, the st ar tA ll . sh script starts each component consecutively (equivalent to clicking the “Start” button on the Hawkes simulation web page). Similarly, stopAll . sh stops all the components (equivalent to clicking the “Shut Down” button on the Hawkes simulation webpage). Furthermore, any other actions on the website can also be done from the command line. To start the Hawkes simulation for a single client and stock simply run ./ s t a r t H a w k e s S i m u l a t i o n . sh 1 1. This starts the simulation for client 1 and stock 1 by submitting the client ID and stock ID as the ﬁrst and second argument, respectively. The list of clients that can be activated can be found in the data / C l i e n t D a t a . csvﬁle. Consider, for example, the ﬁrst client shown below. CompID , Password , NGInputURL , NGInputStreamId , NGOutputURL , NG Ou tpu tS tre am Id , MDGInputURL , M DGI np ut Str ea mId , MDGOutputURL , ↪→M D G O u t p u t S t r e a m I d , S e c u r i t y I d 1 , test111111 , udp :// l o c a l h o s t :5000 ,10 , udp :// l o c a l h o s t :5001 ,10 , udp :// l o c a l h o s t :5002 ,10 , udp :// l o c a l h o s t :5003 ,10 ,1 Each client is assigned input and output URLs for both the Native Gateway and Market Data Gateway. These URLs specify the IP addresses (in this case localhost - the user’s local machine) to/from which messages will be sent/received as well as the ports on which these components are listening. From the website the user can: view/add/edit/delete clients, view the simulation status of clients and stocks, start the Hawkes simulation, edit the Hawkes simulation parameters, view/extract Hawkes simulation data as well as view a snapshot of the limit order books of each stock. With regards to the output of results, after all clients have submitted an end of trading session message, the orders along with their submission times are written to ﬁle and stored in the deploy / data directory. At the end of each Hawkes simulation the HdrHistogram latency results are written to a text ﬁle in the same directory. 17 APPENDIX B SUBMITTING ORDERS (a) Splash screen (b) All stocks and clients page snapshot (c) Simulation page snapshot (d) Hawkes conﬁguration page snap- shot (e) Client page snapshot Figure A.10: CoinTossX website Appendix B. Submitting orders The subsections below demonstrate the submission of orders to the trading gateway (on a user’s local machine) in three programming languages: Java, Julia and Python. Note that currently CoinTossX only allows for Java implementations. Nonetheless, most programming languages include packages/libraries which provide interfaces for calling Java. Although it may be considered sub-optimal, this solution allows us to bypass some problems with a Java-only implementation without the need for a software shim. Even though the message interface is port based, and hence it should not matter what language or interface is used, to submit orders the choices made here are convenient as they still allow the separation of the matching engine for the components that may generate orders. The below programming languages are only a few of those that provide these types of libraries. The code snippets below can be found in the CoinTossX project under the directory C l i e n t S i m u l a t o r / src / main / java / example. More speciﬁcally, all necessary static Java methods are deﬁned in the U t i l i t i e sclass. Clients have the following functionality that will be demonstrated in the code snippets: 1. Submit the order combinations shown in table 2. 2. Cancel limit orders. 3. Market data updates (a) VWAP of buy/sell side of LOB. (b) Current best bid/ask price/quantity. (c) Active trading session. (d) Whether or not the LOB has updated. Appendix B.1. Java As opposed to the other implementations below, the Java implementation is shown in full without reference to the U t i l i t i e sclass to provide more detail for how the other implementations function. 1 /* 2 Example : 3 - Java version : 1.8.0 _271 4 - Authors : Ivan Jericevich , Dh ar mes h Sing , Tim Gebbie 5 - S t r u c t u r e : 6 1. D e p e n d e n c i e s 7 2. S u p p l e m e n t a r y methods 8 3. I m p l e m e n t a t i o n 9 - Login and start session 10 - Submit orders 11 - Market data updates 18 APPENDIX B SUBMITTING ORDERS Appendix B.2 Julia 12 - End session and logout 13 */ 14 // - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 15 16 // - - - - - Import the n e c e s s a r y d e p e n d e n c i e s - - - - -// 17 package example ; 18 19 import client .*; 20 import sbe . msg .*; 21 import java . util . P r o p e r t i e s ; 22 import java . io . I O E x c e p t i o n ; 23 import java . io . I n p u t S t r e a m ; 24 import java . util . P r o p e r t i e s ; 25 import java . time . L o c a l D a t e T i m e ; 26 import com . c a r r o t s e a r c h . hppc . I n t O b j e c t M a p ; 27 // - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 28 29 public class Example { 30 private static final String P R O P E R T I E S _ F I L E = " s i m u l a t i o n . p r o p e r t i e s " ; // The name of the file s p e c i f y i n g ↪→the s i m u l a t i o n c o n f i g u r a t i o n 31 private static P r o p e r t i e s p r o p e r t i e s = new P r o p e r t i e s () ; 32 33 // - - - - - S u p p l e m e n t a r y method for e x t r a c t i n g the s i m u l a t i o n se tti ng s - - - - -// 34 private static void l o a d P r o p e r t i e s ( P r o p e r t i e s properties , String p r o p e r t i e s F i l e ) throws I O E x c e p t i o n { 35 try ( I n p u t S t r e a m i n p u t S t r e a m = Example . class . g e t C l a s s L o a d e r () . g e t R e s o u r c e A s S t r e a m ( p r o p e r t i e s F i l e ) ) { 36 if ( i n p u t S t r e a m != null ) { 37 p r o p e r t i e s . load ( i n p u t S t r e a m ) ; 38 } else { 39 throw new I O E x c e p t i o n ( " Unable to load p r o p e r t i e s file " + p r o p e r t i e s F i l e ) ; 40 } 41 } 42 } 43 // - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 44 45 // - - - - - I m p l e m e n t a t i o n - - - - -// 46 public static void main ( String [] args ) throws E x c e p t i o n { 47 48 // - - - - - Login and start session - - - - -// 49 int cl ie ntI d = 1; int s e c u r i t y I d = 1; // Define the client ID c o r r e s p o n d i n g the client to be logged in as ↪→well as the se cu rit y ID c o r r e s p o n d i n g to the se cur it y in which they will trade 50 // Load the s i m u l a t i o n se tt ing s as well as all client data ( ports , p a s s w o r d s and IDs ) 51 l o a d P r o p e r t i e s ( properties , P R O P E R T I E S _ F I L E ) ; 52 String d ata Pa th = p r o p e r t i e s . get ( " D A T A _ P A T H " ) . t oS tri ng () ; 53 IntObjectMap < ClientData > c l i e n t D a t a = C l i e n t D a t a . l o a d C l i e n t D a t a D a t a ( d ata Pa th ) ; 54 // Create and i n i t i a l i z e client 55 Client client = new Client ( c l i e n t D a t a . get ( cl ien tI d ) , s e c u r i t y I d ) ; 56 client . init ( p r o p e r t i e s ) ; 57 // Start trading session by Logging in client to the g ate wa ys and c o n n e c t i n g to ports 58 client . s e n d S t a r t M e s s a g e () ; 59 System . out . println ( " Start at " + L o c a l D a t e T i m e . now () ) ; 60 61 // - - - - - Submit orders - - - - -// 62 // A r g u m e n t s for " s u b m i t O r d e r ": volume , price , side , order type , time in force , display quantity , min ↪→e x e c u t i o n size , stop price 63 client . s u b m i t O r d e r (1000 , 99 , " Buy " , " Limit " , " Day " , 1000 , 0 , 0) ; // Buy limit order 64 client . s u b m i t O r d e r (1000 , 101 , " Sell " , " Limit " , " Day " , 1000 , 0 , 0) ; // Sell limit order 65 client . s u b m i t O r d e r (1000 , 0 , " Buy " , " Market " , " Day " , 1000 , 0 , 0) ; // Buy market order 66 client . s u b m i t O r d e r (1000 , 0 , " Buy " , " S t o p L i m i t " , " Day " , 1000 , 0 , 0) ; // Stop buy limit order 67 client . s u b m i t O r d e r (1000 , 0 , " Buy " , " Stop " , " Day " , 1000 , 0 , 0) ; // Stop buy market order 68 client . c a n c e l O r d e r ( " 1 " , " Buy " ) ; // Cancel limit order 69 70 // - - - - - Market data updates - - - - -// 71 client . ca lc VWA P ( " Buy " ) ; // VWAP of buy side of LOB 72 client . getBid () ; // Best bid price 73 client . g e t B i d Q u a n t i t y () ; // Best bid volume 74 client . ge tO ffe r () ; // Best ask price 75 client . g e t O f f e r Q u a n t i t y () ; // Best ask volume 76 client . w a i t F o r M a r k e t D a t a U p d a t e () ; // Pauses the client until a new event occurs 77 client . i s A u c t i o n () ; // Current trading session 78 79 // - - - - - End trading session by logging out client and closing c o n n e c t i o n s - - - - -// 80 client . s e n d E n d M e s s a g e () ; 81 client . close () ; 82 System . out . println ( " Co mpl et e at " + L o c a l D a t e T i m e . now () ) ; 83 84 System . exit (0) ; 85 } 86 // - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 87 } Appendix B.2. Julia The Julia-Java interface is provided in the JavaCall.jl package. This package works by specifying the paths to the compiled Java byte code (.jar ﬁles) as well as the path to the required dependencies. Thereafter the JVM is started 19 APPENDIX B SUBMITTING ORDERS Appendix B.3 Python and the utilities for logging a client in, starting the trading session, submitting an order and logging out are imported. With the execution of each command, the Java stacktrace is printed in the REPL as well. 1 #= 2 Example : 3 - Julia version : 1.5.3 4 - Java version : 1.8.0 _271 5 - Authors : Ivan Jericevich , Dh ar mes h Sing , Tim Gebbie 6 - S t r u c t u r e : 7 1. P r e l i m i n a r i e s 8 2. Login and start session 9 3. Submit orders 10 4. Market data updates 11 5. End session and logout 12 =# 13 # - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 14 15 16 # - - - - - P r e l i m i n a r i e s - - - - -# 17 # Import the Java - Julia i n t e r f a c e package 18 using Jav aC all 19 cd ( @ __D IR __ ) ; c l e a r c o n s o l e () # pwd () 20 # Add the path to java classes as well as the path to the ". jar " files c o n t a i n i n g the req ui re d java d e p e n d e n c i e s 21 Ja va Ca ll . a d d C l a s s P a t h ( " / home / i v a n j e r i c e v i c h / C o i n T o s s X / C l i e n t S i m u l a t o r / build / classes / main " ) # ↪→Ja va Cal l . g e t C l a s s P a t h () 22 Ja va Ca ll . a d d C l a s s P a t h ( " / home / i v a n j e r i c e v i c h / C o i n T o s s X / C l i e n t S i m u l a t o r / build / install / C l i e n t S i m u l a t o r / lib /*. jar " ) 23 # I n i t i a l i z e JVM 24 Ja va Ca ll . init () 25 # Import the class c o n t a i n i n g the reqired methods 26 u t i l i t i e s = @j im por t example . U t i l i t i e s # J ava Ca ll . l i s t m e t h o d s ( u t i l i t i e s ) 27 # - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 28 29 30 # - - - - - Login and start session - - - - -# 31 # Define the client ID c o r r e s p o n d i n g the client to be logged in as well as the s ec ur ity ID c o r r e s p o n d i n g to the ↪→se cu rit y in which they will trade 32 cl ie nt Id = 1; s e c u r i t y I d = 1 33 # Load the s i m u l a t i o n s et tin gs as well as all client data ( ports , p a s s w o r d s and IDs ) and create / i n i t i a l i z e client 34 client = jcall ( utilities , " l o a d C l i e n t D a t a " , J a v a O b j e c t { Symbol ( " client . Client " ) } , ( jint , jint ) , clientId , ↪→s e c u r i t y I d ) 35 # Start trading session by Logging in client to the ga tew ay s and c o n n e c t i n g to ports 36 jcall ( client , " s e n d S t a r t M e s s a g e " , Nothing , () ) 37 # - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 38 39 40 # - - - - - Submit orders - - - - -# 41 # A r g u m e n t s for " s u b m i t O r d e r ": volume , price , side , order type , time in force , display quantity , min e x e c u t i o n ↪→size , stop price 42 jcall ( client , " s u b m i t O r d e r " , Nothing , ( jlong , jlong , JString , JString , JString , jlong , jlong , jlong ) , 1000 , 99 , ↪→" Buy " , " Limit " , " Day " , 1000 , 0 , 0) # Buy limit order 43 jcall ( client , " s u b m i t O r d e r " , Nothing , ( jlong , jlong , JString , JString , JString , jlong , jlong , jlong ) , 1000 , 101 , ↪→" Sell " , " Limit " , " Day " , 1000 , 0 , 0) # Sell limit order 44 jcall ( client , " s u b m i t O r d e r " , Nothing , ( jlong , jlong , JString , JString , JString , jlong , jlong , jlong ) , 1000 , 0 , ↪→" Buy " , " Market " , " Day " , 1000 , 0 , 0) # Buy market order 45 jcall ( client , " s u b m i t O r d e r " , Nothing , ( jlong , jlong , JString , JString , JString , jlong , jlong , jlong ) , 1000 , 0 , ↪→" Buy " , " S t o p L i m i t " , " Day " , 1000 , 0 , 0) # Stop buy limit order 46 jcall ( client , " s u b m i t O r d e r " , Nothing , ( jlong , jlong , JString , JString , JString , jlong , jlong , jlong ) , 1000 , 0 , ↪→" Buy " , " Stop " , " Day " , 1000 , 0 , 0) # Stop buy market order 47 # A r g u m e n t s for " c a n c e l O r d e r ": order id , side 48 jcall ( client , " c a n c e l O r d e r " , Nothing , ( jlong , jlong ) , " 1 " , " Buy " ) # Cancel limit order 49 # - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 50 51 52 # - - - - - Market data updates - - - - -# 53 jcall ( client , " cal cV WAP " , jlong , ( JString ,) , " Buy " ) # VWAP of buy side of LOB 54 jcall ( client , " getBid " , jlong , () ) # Best bid price 55 jcall ( client , " g e t B i d Q u a n t i t y " , jlong , () ) # Best bid volume 56 jcall ( client , " get Of fer " , jlong , () ) # Best ask price 57 jcall ( client , " g e t O f f e r Q u a n t i t y " , jlong , () ) # Best ask volume 58 jcall ( client , " w a i t F o r M a r k e t D a t a U p d a t e " , Nothing , () ) # Pauses the client until a new event occurs 59 jcall ( client , " i s A u c t i o n " , jboolean , () ) # Current trading session 60 # - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 61 62 63 # - - - - - End session and logout - - - - -# 64 # End trading session by logging out client and closing c o n n e c t i o n s 65 jcall ( client , " s e n d E n d M e s s a g e " , Nothing , () ) ; jcall ( client , " close " , Nothing , () ) 66 # - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Appendix B.3. Python The Python Java interface is provided in the JPype module. This code snippet follows a similar process as above but with diﬀerent syntax. 1 ’’’ 2 Example : 20 APPENDIX B SUBMITTING ORDERS Appendix B.3 Python 3 - Python version : 3.8.5 4 - Java version : 1.8.0 _271 5 - Authors : Ivan Jericevich , Dh ar mes h Sing , Tim Gebbie 6 - S t r u c t u r e : 7 1. P r e l i m i n a r i e s 8 2. Login and start session 9 3. Submit orders 10 4. Market data updates 11 5. End session and logout 12 ’’’ 13 # - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 14 15 16 # - - - - - P r e l i m i n a r i e s - - - - -# 17 # Import the Java - Python i n t e r f a c e module 18 import jpype as jp 19 # I n i t i a l i z e / start the JVM 20 jp . s tar tJ VM ( jp . g e t D e f a u l t J V M P a t h () , " - ea " , c l a s s p a t h = ↪→" / home / i v a n j e r i c e v i c h / C o i n T o s s X / C l i e n t S i m u l a t o r / build / classes / main " ) # Start JVM 21 # Add the path to the ". jar " files c o n t a i n i n g the r eq uir ed java d e p e n d e n c i e s 22 jpype . a d d C l a s s P a t h ( " / home / i v a n j e r i c e v i c h / C o i n T o s s X / C l i e n t S i m u l a t o r / build / install / C l i e n t S i m u l a t o r / lib /*. jar " ) 23 # Import the class c o n t a i n i n g the reqired methods 24 u t i l i t i e s = jp . JClass ( " example . U t i l i t i e s " ) 25 # - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 26 27 28 # - - - - - Login and start session - - - - -# 29 # Define the client ID c o r r e s p o n d i n g the client to be logged in as well as the s ec ur ity ID c o r r e s p o n d i n g to the ↪→se cu rit y in which they will trade 30 cl ie nt Id = 1 31 s e c u r i t y I d = 1 32 # Load the s i m u l a t i o n s et tin gs as well as all client data ( ports , p a s s w o r d s and IDs ) and create / i n i t i a l i z e client 33 client = u t i l i t i e s . l o a d C l i e n t D a t a ( clientId , s e c u r i t y I d ) 34 # Start trading session by Logging in client to the ga tew ay s and c o n n e c t i n g to ports 35 client . s e n d S t a r t M e s s a g e () 36 # - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 37 38 39 # - - - - - Submit orders - - - - -# 40 # A r g u m e n t s for " s u b m i t O r d e r ": volume , price , side , order type , time in force , display quantity , min e x e c u t i o n ↪→size , stop price 41 client . s u b m i t O r d e r (1000 , 99 , " Buy " , " Limit " , " Day " , 1000 , 0 , 0) # Buy limit order 42 client . s u b m i t O r d e r (1000 , 101 , " Sell " , " Limit " , " Day " , 1000 , 0 , 0) # Sell limit order 43 client . s u b m i t O r d e r (1000 , 0 , " Buy " , " Market " , " Day " , 1000 , 0 , 0) # Buy market order 44 client . s u b m i t O r d e r (1000 , 0 , " Buy " , " S t o p L i m i t " , " Day " , 1000 , 0 , 0) # Stop buy limit order 45 client . s u b m i t O r d e r (1000 , 0 , " Buy " , " Stop " , " Day " , 1000 , 0 , 0) # Stop buy market order 46 # A r g u m e n t s for " c a n c e l O r d e r ": order id , side 47 client . c a n c e l O r d e r ( " 1 " , " Buy " ) # Cancel limit order 48 # - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 49 50 51 # - - - - - Market data updates - - - - -# 52 client . ca lc VWA P ( " Buy " ) # VWAP of buy side of LOB 53 client . getBid () # Best bid price 54 client . g e t B i d Q u a n t i t y () # Best bid volume 55 client . ge tO ffe r () # Best ask price 56 client . g e t O f f e r Q u a n t i t y () # Best ask volume 57 client . w a i t F o r M a r k e t D a t a U p d a t e () # Pauses the client until a new event occurs 58 client . i s A u c t i o n () # Current trading session 59 # - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 60 61 62 # - - - - - End session and logout - - - - -# 63 # End trading session by logging out client and closing c o n n e c t i o n s 64 client . s e n d E n d M e s s a g e () 65 client . close () 66 # Stop JVM 67 jp . s h u t d o w n J V M () 68 # - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 21