Universal Trading for Order Execution with Oracle Policy Distillation Yuchen Fang, 1* Kan Ren, 2 Weiqing Liu, 2 Dong Zhou, 2 Weinan Zhang, 1 Jiang Bian, 2 Yong Yu,1 Tie-Yan Liu2 1Shanghai Jiao Tong University,2Microsoft Research {arthur fyc, wnzhang}@sjtu.edu.cn, yyu@apex.sjtu.edu.cn {kan.ren, weiqing.liu, zhou.dong, jiang.bian, tie-yan.liu}@microsoft.com Abstract As a fundamental problem in algorithmic trading, order exe- cution aims at fulﬁlling a speciﬁc trading order, either liqui- dation or acquirement, for a given instrument. Towards effec- tive execution strategy, recent years have witnessed the shift from the analytical view with model-based market assump- tions to model-free perspective, i.e., reinforcement learning, due to its nature of sequential decision optimization. How- ever, the noisy and yet imperfect market information that can be leveraged by the policy has made it quite challenging to build up sample efﬁcient reinforcement learning methods to achieve effective order execution. In this paper, we propose a novel universal trading policy optimization framework to bridge the gap between the noisy yet imperfect market states and the optimal action sequences for order execution. Partic- ularly, this framework leverages a policy distillation method that can better guide the learning of the common policy to- wards practically optimal execution by an oracle teacher with perfect information to approximate the optimal trading strat- egy. The extensive experiments have shown signiﬁcant im- provements of our method over various strong baselines, with reasonable trading actions. Introduction Financial investment, aiming to pursue long-term maxi- mized proﬁts, is usually behaved in the form of a sequential process of continuously adjusting the asset portfolio. One in- dispensable link of this process is order execution, consist- ing of the actions to adjust the portfolio. Take stock invest- ment as an example, the investors in this market construct their portfolios of a variety of instruments. As illustrated in Figure 1, to adjust the position of the held instruments, the investor needs to sell (or buy) a number of shares through ex- ecuting an order of liquidation (or acquirement) for different instruments. Essentially, the goal of order execution is two- fold: it does not only requires to fulﬁll the whole order but also targets a more economical execution with maximizing proﬁt gain (or minimizing capital loss). As discussed in (Cartea, Jaimungal, and Penalva 2015), the main challenge of order execution lies in a trade-off be- tween avoiding harmful “ market impact ” caused by large *The work was conducted when Yuchen Fang was doing intern- ship at Microsoft Research Asia. Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved. # Shares 100 200 # Shares 0 800 Sell 100 Buy 600 Stock A Stock Z … … … Portfolio on Jun. 10 Portfolio on Jun. 11 Order execution Figure 1: An example of portfolio adjustment which requires order execution. transactions in a short period and restraining “ price risk ”, i.e., missing good trading opportunities, due to slow ex- ecution. Previously, traditional analytical solutions often adopt some stringent assumptions of market liquidity, i.e., price movements and volume variance, then derive some closed-form trading strategies based on stochastic control theory with dynamic programming principle (Bertsimas and Lo 1998; Almgren and Chriss 2001; Cartea and Jaimun- gal 2015, 2016; Cartea, Jaimungal, and Penalva 2015). Nonetheless, these model-based 1 methods are not likely to be practically effective because of the inconsistency between market assumption and reality. According to the order execution’s trait of sequential decision making, reinforcement learning (RL) solutions (Nevmyvaka, Feng, and Kearns 2006; Ning, Ling, and Jaimungal 2018; Lin and Beling 2020) have been proposed from a model-free perspective and been increasingly lever- aged to optimize execution strategy through interacting with the market environment purely based on the market data. As data-driven methods, RL solutions are not necessarily con- ﬁned by those unpractical ﬁnancial assumptions and are thus more capable of capturing the market’s microstructure for better execution. Nevertheless, RL solutions may suffer from a vital issue, i.e., the largely noisy and imperfect information. For one thing, the noisy data (Wu, Gattami, and Flierl 2020) could lead to a quite low sample efﬁciency of RL methods and thus results in poor effectiveness of the learned order execu- tion policy. More importantly, the only information that can be utilized when taking actions is the historical market in- formation, without any obvious clues or accurate forecasts 1Here ‘model’ corresponds to some market price assumptions, to distinguish the environment model in reinforcement learning. arXiv:2103.10860v1 [q-fin.TR] 28 Jan 2021 of the future trends of the market price2 or trading activities. Such issues indeed place a massive barrier for obtaining a policy to achieve the optimal trading strategy with proﬁtable and reasonable trading actions. Imperfect information perfect information Teacher Representation Optimal action Student Policy distillation Figure 2: Brief illustration of the oracle policy distillation. To break this barrier, in this paper, we propose a universal policy optimization framework for order execution. Specif- ically, this framework introduces a novel policy distillation approach in order for bridging the gap between the noisy yet imperfect market information and the optimal order ex- ecution policy. More concretely, as shown in Figure 2, this approach is essentially a teacher-student learning paradigm, in which the teacher, with access to perfect information, is trained to be an oracle to ﬁgure out the optimal trading strat- egy, and the student is learned by imitating the teacher’s op- timal behavior patterns. For practical usage, only the com- mon student policy with imperfect information, would be utilized without teacher or any future information leakage. Also note that, since our RL-based model can be learned using all the data from various instruments, it can largely alleviate the problem of model over-ﬁtting. The main contributions of our paper include: • We show the power of learning-based yet model-free method for optimal execution, which not only surpasses the traditional methods, but also illustrates reasonable and proﬁtable trading actions. • The teacher-student learning paradigm for policy distilla- tion may beneﬁcially motivate the community, to alleviate the problem between imperfect information and the opti- mal decision making. • To the best of our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst paper exploring to learn from the data of various instruments, and derive a universal trading strategy for optimal execution. Related Works Order Execution Optimal order execution is originally proposed in (Bertsi- mas and Lo 1998) and the main stream of the solutions are model-based. (Bertsimas and Lo 1998) assumed a market model where the market price follows an arithmetic ran- dom walk in the presence of linear price impact function of the trading behavior. Later in a seminal work (Almgren and Chriss 2001), the Almgren-Chriss model has been proposed which extended the above solution and incorporated both 2We deﬁne ‘market price’ as the averaged transaction price of the whole market at one time which has been widely used in litera- ture (Nevmyvaka, Feng, and Kearns 2006; Ning, Ling, and Jaimun- gal 2018). temporary and permanent price impact functions with mar- ket price following a Brownian motion process. Both of the above methods tackled order execution as a ﬁnancial model and solve it through stochastic control theory with dynamic programming principle. Several extensions to these pioneering works have been proposed in the past decades (Cartea and Jaimungal 2016; Gu´eant and Lehalle 2015; Gu ´eant 2016; Casgrain and Jaimungal 2019) with modeling of a variety of market fea- tures. From the mentioned literature, several closed-form so- lutions have been derived based on stringent market assump- tions. However, they might not be practical in real-world sit- uations thus it appeals to non-parametric solutions (Ning, Ling, and Jaimungal 2018). Reinforcement Learning RL attempts to optimize an accumulative numerical reward signal by directly interacting with the environment (Sut- ton and Barto 2018) under few model assumptions such as Markov Decision Process (MDP). RL methods have already shown superhuman abilities in many applications, such as game playing (Mnih et al. 2015; Li et al. 2020; Silver et al. 2016), resource dispatching (Li et al. 2019; Tang et al. 2019), ﬁnancial trading (Moody and Wu 1997; Moody et al. 1998; Moody and Saffell 2001) and portfolio management (Jiang and Liang 2017; Ye et al. 2020). Besides the analytical methods mentioned above, RL gives another view for sequential decision optimization in order execution problem. Some RL solutions (Hendricks and Wilcox 2014; Hu 2016; Dab ´erius, Granat, and Karls- son 2019) solely extend the model-based assumptions men- tioned above to either evaluate how RL algorithm might im- prove over the analytical solutions (Dab ´erius, Granat, and Karlsson 2019; Hendricks and Wilcox 2014), or test whether the MDP is still viable under the imposed market assump- tions (Hu 2016). However, these RL-based methods still rely on ﬁnancial model assumption of the market dynamics thus lack of practical value. Another stream of RL methods abandon these ﬁnancial market assumptions and utilize model-free RL to optimize execution strategy (Nevmyvaka, Feng, and Kearns 2006; Ning, Ling, and Jaimungal 2018; Lin and Beling 2020). Nevertheless, these works faces challenges of utilizing im- perfect and noisy market information. And they even train separate strategies for each of several manually chosen in- struments, which is not efﬁcient and may result in over- ﬁtting. We propose to handle the issue of market informa- tion utilization for optimal policy optimization, while train- ing a universal strategy for all instruments with general pat- tern mining. Policy Distillation This work is also related to policy distillation (Rusu et al. 2015), which incorporates knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) in RL policy training and has at- tracted many researches studying this problem (Parisotto, Ba, and Salakhutdinov 2015; Teh et al. 2017; Yin and Pan 2017; Green, Vineyard, and Koc ¸ 2019; Lai et al. 2020). However, these works mainly focus on multi-task learn- ing or model compression, which aims at deriving a com- prehensive or tiny policy to behave normally in different game environments. Our work dedicates to bridge the gap between the imperfect environment states and the optimal action sequences through policy distillation, which has not been properly studied before. Methodology In this section, we ﬁrst formulate the problem and present the assumptions of our method including MDP settings and market impact. Then we introduce our policy distillation framework and the corresponding policy optimization algo- rithm in details. Without loss of generality, we take liquida- tion, i.e., to sell a speciﬁc number of shares, as an on-the-ﬂy example in the paper, and the solution to acquirement can be derived in the same way. Formulation of Order Execution Generally, order execution is formulated under the scenario of trading within a predeﬁned time horizon, e.g., one hour or a day. We follow a widely applied simpliﬁcation to the reality (Cartea, Jaimungal, and Penalva 2015; Ning, Ling, and Jaimungal 2018) by which trading is based on discrete time space. Under this conﬁguration, we assume there areT timesteps {0, 1,...,T −1}, each of which is associated with a respec- tive price for trading {p0,p 1,...,p T−1}. At each timestep t∈{ 0, 1,...,T − 1}, the trader will propose to trade a vol- ume ofqt+1≥ 0 shares, the trading order of which will then be actually executed with the execution price pt+1, i.e., the market price at the timestep (t + 1). With the goal of maxi- mizing the revenue with completed liquidation, the objective of optimal order execution, assuming totally Q shares to be liquidated during the whole time horizon, can be formulated as arg max q1,q2,...,qT T−1∑ t=0 (qt+1·pt+1), s.t. T−1∑ t=0 qt+1 =Q. (1) The average execution price (AEP) is calculated as ¯P =∑T−1 t=0 (qt+1·pt+1)∑T−1 t=0 qt+1 =∑T−1 t=0 qt+1 Q ·pt+1. The equations above expressed that, for liquidation, the trader needs to maximize the average execution price ¯P so that to gain as more revenue as possible. Note also that, for acquirement, the objective is reversed and the trader is to minimize the execution price to reduce the acquirement cost. Order Execution as a Markov Decision Process Given the trait of sequential decision-making, order execu- tion can be deﬁned as a Markov Decision Process. To solve this problem, RL solutions are used to learn a policy π∈ Π to control the whole trading process through proposing an actiona∈A given the observed state s∈S , while maxi- mizing the total expected rewards based on the reward func- tionR(s,a ). State. The observed state st at the timestep t describes the status information of the whole system including both the trader and the market variables. Two types of widely-used information (Nevmyvaka, Feng, and Kearns 2006; Lin and Beling 2020) for the trading agent are private variable of the trader and public variable of the market. Private vari- able includes the elapsed time t and the remained inventory (Q−∑t i=1qi) to be executed. As for the public variable, it is a bit tricky since the trader only observes imperfect market information. Speciﬁcally, one can only take the past market history, which have been observed at or before the time t, into consideration to make the trading decision for the next timestep. The market information includes open, high, low, close, average price and transaction volume of each timestep. Action. Given the observed statest, the agent proposes the decisionat =π(st) according to its trading policyπ, where at is discrete and corresponds to the proportion of the target orderQ. Thus, the trading volume to be executed at the next time can be easily derived asqt+1 =at·Q, and each action at is the standardized trading volume for the trader. According to Eq. (1), we follow the prior works (Ning, Ling, and Jaimungal 2018; Lin and Beling 2020) and as- sume that the summation of all the agent actions during the whole time horizon satisﬁes the constraint of order fulﬁll- ment that ∑T−1 t=0 at = 100% . So that the agent will have to proposeaT−1 = max{1−∑T−2 i=0 ai,π (sT−1)} to fulﬁll the order target, at the last decision making time of (T− 1). However, leaving too much volume to trade at the last trad- ing timestep is of high price risk, which requires the trading agent to consider future market dynamics at each time for better execution performance. Reward. The reward of order execution in fact consists of two practically conﬂicting aspects, trading proﬁtability and market impact penalty. As shown in Eq. (1), we can parti- tion and deﬁne an immediate reward after decision making at each time. To reﬂect the trading proﬁtability caused by the action, we formulate a positive part of the reward as volume weighted price advantage: ˆR+ t (st,at) = qt+1 Q · price normalization z }| {(pt+1− ˜p ˜p ) =at (pt+1 ˜p − 1 ) , (2) where ˜p = 1 T ∑T−1 i=0 pi+1 is the averaged original market price of the whole time horizon. Here we apply normalization onto the absolute revenue gain in Eq. (1) to eliminate the variance of different instru- ment prices and target order volume, to optimize a universal trading strategy for various instruments. Note that although we utilize the future price of the in- strument to calculate ˆR+, the reward is not included in the state thus would not inﬂuence the actions of our agent or cause any information leakage. It would only take effect in back-propagation during training. As ˜p varies within differ- ent episodes, this MDP might be non-stationary. There are some works on solving this problem (Gaon and Brafman 2020), however this is not the main focus of this paper and rewardaction Market info. (price and volume) 𝑡 time Imperfect information Perfect information Student Teacher Market Environment action reward Public variable Policy distillation Figure 3: The framework of oracle policy distillation. All the modules with dotted lines, i.e. teacher and policy dis- tillation procedure, are only used during the training phase, and would be removed during the test phase or in practice. would not inﬂuence the conclusion. To account for the potential that the trading activity may have some impacts onto the current market status, following (Ning, Ling, and Jaimungal 2018; Lin and Beling 2020), we also incorporate a quadratic penalty ˆR− t =−α(at)2 (3) on the number of shares, i.e., proportion at of the target or- der to trade at each decision time. α controls the impact de- gree of the trading activities. Such that the ﬁnal reward is Rt(st,at) = ˆR+ t (st,at) + ˆR− t (st,at) = (pt+1 ˜p − 1 ) at−α (at)2 . (4) The overall value, i.e., expected cumulative discounted rewards of execution for each order following policy π, is Eπ[∑T−1 t=0 γtRt] and the ﬁnal goal of reinforcement learn- ing is to solve the optimization problem as arg max π Eπ [T−1∑ t=0 γtRt(st,at) ] . (5) As for the numerical details of the market variable and the corresponding MDP settings, please refer to the supplemen- tary including the released code. Assumptions Note that there are two main assumptions adopted in this paper. Similar to (Lin and Beling 2020), (i) the temporary market impact has been adopted as a reward penalty and we assume that the market is resilient and will bounce back to the equilibrium at the next timestep. (ii) We either ignore the commissions and exchange fees as the these expense is relatively small fractions for the institutional in- vestors that we are mainly aimed at. Policy Distillation and Optimization In this section, we explain the underlying intuition behind our policy distillation and illustrate the detailed optimization framework. Policy Distillation As aforementioned, our goal is to bridge the gap between the imperfect information and the optimal trading action sequences. An end-to-end trained RL policy may not effectively capture the representative patterns from the imperfect yet noisy market information. Thus it may result in much lower sample efﬁciency, especially for RL algorithms. To tackle with this, we propose a two stage learning paradigm with teacher-student policy distillation. We ﬁrst explain the imperfect and perfect information. In additional to the private variable including left time and the left unexecuted order volume, at time t of one episode, the agent will also receive the state of the public variable, i.e., the market information of the speciﬁc instrument price and the overall transaction volume within the whole market. However, the actual trader as a common agent only has the history market information which is collected before the de- cision making timet. We deﬁne the history market informa- tion as imperfect information and the state with that as the common statest. On the contrary, assuming that one oracle has the clue of the future market trends, she may derive the optimal decision sequence with this perfect information, as notated as ˜st. As illustrated in Figure 3, we incorporate a teacher- student learning paradigm. • Teacher plays a role as an oracle whose goal is to achieve the optimal trading policy ˜πφ(·|˜st) through interacting with the environment given the perfect information ˜st, whereφ is the parameter of the teacher policy. • Student itself learns by interacting with the environment to optimize a common policyπθ(·|st) with the parameter θ given the imperfect informationst. To build a connection between the imperfect information to the optimal trading strategy, we implement a policy distil- lation lossLd for the student. A proper form is the negative log-likelihood loss measuring how well the student’s deci- sion matching teacher’s action as Ld =−Et [log Pr(at = ˜at|πθ,st;πφ, ˜st)] , (6) where at and ˜at are the actions taken from the policy πθ(·|st) of student andπφ(·|˜st) of teacher, respectively. Et denotes the empirical expectation over timesteps. Note that, the teacher is utilized to achieve the optimal action sequences which will then be used to guide the learn- ing of the common policy (student). Although, with per- fect information, it is possible to ﬁnd the optimal action se- quence using a searching-based method, this may require human knowledge and is quite inefﬁcient with extremely high computational complexity as analyzed in our supple- mentary. Moreover, another key advantage of the learning- based teacher lies in the universality, enabling to transfer this method to the other tasks, especially when it is very difﬁcult to either build experts or leverage human knowledge. Policy Optimization Now we move to the learning algo- rithm of both teacher and student. Each policy of teacher and student is optimized separately using the same algorithm, thus we describe the optimization algorithm with the stu- dent notations, and that of teacher can be similarly derived by exchanging the state and policy notations. 𝜋(⋅ |𝒔௧) 𝑉(𝒔 ௧) Public variable Private variable Recurrent layer Inference layer Actor layer Critic layer Recurrent layer Figure 4: The overall structure of the policy network. With the MDP formulation described above, we utilize Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) algorithm (Schulman et al. 2017) in actor-critic style to optimize a policy for directly maximizing the expected reward achieved in an episode. PPO is an on-policy RL algorithm which seeks to- wards the optimal policy within the trust region by minimiz- ing the objective function of policy as Lp(θ) =−Et [ πθ(at|st) πθold (at|st) ˆA(st,a t)−βKL [πθold (·|st),π θ(·|st)] ] . (7) Here θ is the current parameter of the policy network, θold is the previous parameter before the update operation. ˆA(st,at) is the estimated advantage calculated as ˆA(st,at) =Rt(st,at) +γVθ(st+1)−Vθ(st). (8) It is a little different to that in (Schulman et al. 2017) which utilizes generalized advantage estimator (GAE) for advan- tage estimation as our time horizon is relatively short and GAE does not bring better performance in our experiments. Vθ(·) is the value function approximated by the critic net- work, which is optimized through a value function loss Lv(θ) = Et [‖Vθ(st)−Vt‖2] . (9) Vt is the empirical value of cumulative future rewards calcu- lated as below Vt = T−1∑ t′=t E [ γT−t′−1Rt′(st′,at′) ] . (10) The penalty term of KL-divergence in Eq. (7) controls the change within an update iteration, whose goal is to stabilize the parameter update. And the adaptive penalty parameterβ is tuned according to the result of KL-divergence term fol- lowing (Schulman et al. 2017). As a result, the overall objective function of the student includes the policy loss Lp, the value function loss Lv and the policy distillation lossLd as L(θ) = policy optimization z }| { Lp +λLv + policy distillation z}|{ µLd , (11) where λ and µ are the weights of value function loss and the distillation loss. The policy network is optimized to min- imize the overall loss with the gradient descent method. Please also be noted that the overall loss function of the teacherL(φ) does not have the policy distillation loss. Policy Network Structure As is shown in Figure 4, there are several components in the policy network where the pa- rameterθ is shared by both actor and critic. Two recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been used to conduct high- level representations from the public and private variables, separately. The reason to use RNN is to capture the temporal patterns for the sequential evolving states within an episode. Then the two obtained representations are combined and fed into an inference layer to calculate a comprehensive repre- sentation for the actor layer and and the critic layer. The actor layer will propose the ﬁnal action distribution under the current state. For training, following the original work of PPO (Schulman et al. 2017), the ﬁnal action are sam- pled w.r.t. the produced action distribution π(·|st). As for evaluation and testing, on the contrary, the policy migrates to fully exploitation thus the actions are directly taken by at = arg maxaπ(·|st) without exploration. The detailed implementations are described in supplemental materials. Discussion Compared to previous related studies (Ning, Ling, and Jaimungal 2018; Lin and Beling 2020), the main novelty of our method lies in that we incorporate a novel policy distillation paradigm to help common policy to ap- proximate the optimal trading strategy more effectively. In addition, other than using a different policy network archi- tecture, we also proposed a normalized reward function for universal trading for all instruments which is more efﬁcient than training over single instrument separately. Moreover, we ﬁnd that the general patterns learned from the other in- strument data can improve trading performance and we put the experiment and discussions in the supplementary. Experiments In this section, we present the details of the experiments. The implementation descriptions and codes are in the sup- plementary in this link3. We ﬁrst raise three research questions (RQs) to lead our discussion in this section. RQ1: Does our method succeed in ﬁnding a proper order execution strategy which applies universally on all instruments? RQ2: Does the oracle pol- icy distillation method help our agent to improve the overall trading performance? RQ3: What typical execution patterns does each compared method illustrate? Experiment settings Compared methods We compare our method and its vari- ants with the following baseline order execution methods. TW AP (Time-weighted Average Price) is a model-based strategy which equally splits the order into T pieces and evenly execute the same amount of shares at each timestep. It has been proven to be the optimal strategy under the assumption that the market price follows Brow- nian motion (Bertsimas and Lo 1998). AC (Almgren-Chriss) is a model-based method (Almgren and Chriss 2001), which analytically ﬁnds the efﬁcient frontier of optimal execution. We only consider the tem- porary price impact for fair comparison. 3https://seqml.github.io/opd/ VW AP (V olume-weighted Average Price) is another model-based strategy which distributes orders in pro- portion to the (empirically estimated) market transaction volume in order to keep the execution price closely tracking the market average price ground truth (Kakade et al. 2004; Białkowski, Darolles, and Le Fol 2008). DDQN (Double Deep Q-network) is a value-based RL method (Ning, Ling, and Jaimungal 2018) and adopts state engineering optimizing for individual instruments. PPO is a policy-based RL method (Lin and Beling 2020) which utilizes PPO algorithm with a sparse reward to train an agent with a recurrent neural network for state feature extraction. The reward function and the network architec- ture are different to our method. OPD is our proposed method described above, which has two other variants for ablation study: OPDS is the pure student trained without oracle guidance and OPDT is the teacher trained with perfect market information. Note that, for fair comparison, all the learning-based methods, i.e., DDQN, PPO and OPD, have been trained over all the instrument data, rather than that training over the data of individual instrument as shown in the related works (Ning, Ling, and Jaimungal 2018; Lin and Beling 2020). Datasets All the compared methods are trained and eval- uated with the historical transaction data of the stocks in the China A-shares market. The dataset contains (i) minute-level price-volume market information and (ii) the order amount of every trading day for each instrument from Jan. 1, 2017 to June 30, 2019. Without loss of generality, we focus on intraday order execution, while our method can be easily adapted to a more high-frequency trading scenario. eThe de- tailed description of the market information including data preprocessing and order generation can be referred to the supplementary. The dataset is divided into training, validation and test datasets according to the trading time. The detailed statis- tics are listed in Table 1. We keep only the instruments of CSI 800 in validation and test datasets due to the limit of our computing power. Note that as CSI 800 Index is designed to reﬂect the overall performance of A-shares (Co. 2020), this is a fair setting for evaluating all the compared methods. For all the model-based methods, the parameters are set based on the training dataset and the performances are di- rectly evaluated on the test dataset. For all the learning-based RL methods, the policies are trained on the training dataset and the hyper-parameters are tuned on the validation dataset. All these setting values are listed in the supplementary. The ﬁnal performances of RL policies we present below are cal- culated over the test dataset averaging the results from six policies trained with the same hyper-parameter and six dif- ferent random seeds. Training Validation Test # instruments 3,566 855 855 # order 1,654,385 35,543 33,176 Time period 1/1/2017 - 28/2/2019 1/3/2019 - 31/4/2019 1/5/2019 - 30/6/2019 Table 1: The dataset statistics. Evaluation Workﬂow Every trading strategy has been evaluated following the pro- cedure in Figure 5. Given the trading strategy, we need to go through the evaluation data to assess the performance of or- der execution. After (1) the evaluation starts, if (2) there still exists unexecuted orders, (3) the next order record would be used for intraday order execution evaluation. Otherwise, (4) the evaluation ﬂow is over. For each order record, the exe- cution of the order would end once the time horizon ends or the order has been fulﬁlled. After all the orders in the dataset have been executed, the overall performance will be reported. The detailed evaluation protocol is presented in supplementary. t = t+1 1. Evaluation starts 4. Evaluation ends 3. Get the next order record b. Get market data and generate state c. Trading Strategy d. Order execution No No State Action Yes a. Time horizon ended or order fulfilled t = 0 Yes 2. There exists unexecuted order record Figure 5: Evaluation workﬂow. Evaluation metrics. We use the obtained reward as the ﬁrst metric for all the compared methods. Although some methods are model- based (i.e., TW AP, AC, VW AP) or utilize a different reward function (i.e., PPO), the reward of their trading trajecto- ries would all be calculated as 1 |D| ∑|D| k=1 ∑T−1 t=0 Rk t (sk t,ak t ), whereRk t is the reward of thek-th order at timestept deﬁned in Eq. (4) and|D| is the size of the dataset. The second is the price advantage (PA) = 104 |D| ∑|D| k=1( ¯P k strategy ˜pk − 1), ¯Pk strategy is the corresponding AEP that our strategy has achieved on or- derk. This measures the relative gained revenue of a trading strategy compared to that from a baseline price ˜pk. Gener- ally, ˜pk is the averaged market price of the instrument on the speciﬁc trading day, which is constant for all the compared methods. PA is measured in base points (BPs), where one basis point is equal to 0.01%. We conduct signiﬁcance test (Mason and Graham 2002) on PA and reward to verify the statistical signiﬁcance of the performance improvement. We also report gain-loss ratio (GLR) = E[PA|PA>0] E[PA|PA<0] result. Experiment Results We analyze the experimental results from three aspects. Overall performance The overall results are reported in Table 2 (* indicates p-value < 0.01 in signiﬁcance test) and we have the following ﬁndings. (i) OPD has the best performance among all the compared methods including OPDS without teacher guidance, which illustrates the ef- fectiveness of oracle policy distillation ( RQ2). (ii) All the model-based methods perform worse than the learning- based methods as their adopted market assumptions might not be practical in the real world. Also, they fail to capture 0 50 100 150 200 250 Minute 139 140 141 142 143Price Case 1: SH600518 2019-06-13 pt DDQN PPO OPDS OPD OPDT 0 20 40 60 Trading volume (shares) 0 50 100 150 200 250 Minute 130.0 130.5 131.0 Price Case 2: SZ000776 2019-05-16 pt DDQN PPO OPDS OPD OPDT 0 10 20 30 40 50 Trading volume (shares) 0 50 100 150 200 250 Minute 1360 1380 1400 1420Price Case 3: SZ000001 2019-06-25 pt DDQN PPO OPDS OPD OPDT 0 5 10 15 20 Trading volume (shares) Figure 6: An illustration of execution details of different methods. 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 Steps ×107 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 PA (BPs) PA on Training Set DDQN PPO OPDS OPD 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 Steps ×107 −2 0 2 4 6 8 Reward(×10−2) Reward on Training Set DDQN PPO OPDS OPD 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 Steps ×107 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 PA (BPs) PA on Validation Set DDQN PPO OPDS OPD 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 Steps ×107 −5.0 −2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 Reward(×10−2) Reward on Validation Set DDQN PPO OPDS OPD Figure 7: Learning curves (mean±std over 6 random seeds). Every step means one interaction with the environment. the microstructure of the market and can not adjust their strategy accordingly. As TW AP equally distribute the or- der to every timestep, the AEP of TW AP is always ˜p. Thus the PA and GLR results of TW AP are all zero. (iii) Our proposed method outperforms other learning-based methods (RQ1). Speaking of DDQN, we may conclude that it is hard for the value-based method to learn a universal Q-function for all instruments. When comparing OPD S with PPO, we conclude that the normalized instant reward function may largely contribute to the performance improvement. Category Strategy Reward(×10−2) PA GLR ﬁnancial model- based TW AP (Bertsimas et al. 1998) -0.42 0 0 AC (Almgren et al. 2001) -1.45 2.33 0.89 VW AP (Kakade et al. 2004) -0.30 0.32 0.88 learning- based DDQN (Ning et al. 2018) 2.91 4.13 1.07 PPO (Lin et al. 2020) 1.32 2.52 0.62 OPDS (pure student) 3.24 5.19 1.19 OPD (our proposed) 3.36* 6.17* 1.35 Table 2: Performance comparison; the higher, the better. Learning analysis We show learning curves over training and validation datasets in Figure 7. We have the following ﬁndings that (i) all these methods reach stable convergence after about 8 million steps of training. (ii) Among all the learning-based methods, our OPD method steadily achieve the highest PA and reward results on validation set after convergence, which shows the effectiveness of oracle pol- icy distillation. (iii) Though the performance gap between OPDS and OPD is relatively small in the training dataset, OPD evidently outperforms OPD S on validation dataset, which shows that oracle guidance can help to learn a more general and effective trading strategy. Case study We further investigate the action patterns of different strategies (RQ3). In Figure 6, we present the exe- cution details of all the learning-based methods. The colored lines exhibit the volume of shares traded by these agents at every minute and the grey line shows the trend of the market pricept of the underlying trading asset on that day. We can see that in all cases, theteacher OPDT always cap- tures the optimal trading opportunity. It is reasonable since OPDT can fully observe the perfect information, including future trends. The execution situation of DDQN in all cases are exactly the same, which indicates that DDQN fails to adjust its execution strategy dynamically according to the market, thus not performing well. For PPO and OPD S, ei- ther do they miss the best price for execution or waste their inventory at a bad market opportunity. Our proposed OPD method outperforms all other meth- ods in all three cases except the teacher OPDT. Speciﬁcally, in Case 1, OPD captures the best opportunity and manages to ﬁnd the optimal action sequence. Although OPD fails to capture the optimal trading time in Case 2, it still manages to ﬁnd a relatively good opportunity and achieve a reasonable and proﬁtable action sequence. However, as a result of ob- serving no information at the beginning of the trading day, our method tends to miss some opportunities at the begin- ning of one day, as shown in Case 3. Though that, in such cases, OPD still manages to ﬁnd a sub-optimal trading op- portunity and illustrates some advantages to other methods. Conclusion In this paper, we presented a model-free reinforcement learning framework for optimal order execution. We incor- porate a universal policy optimization method that learns and transfers knowledge in the data from various instru- ments for order execution over all the instruments. Also, we conducted an oracle policy distillation paradigm to improve the sample efﬁciency of RL methods and help derive a more reasonable trading strategy. It has been done through letting a student imitate and distillate the optimal behavior patterns from the optimal trading strategy derived by a teacher with perfect information. The experiment results over real-world instrument data have reﬂected the efﬁciency and effective- ness of the proposed learning algorithm. In the future, we plan to incorporate policy distillation to learn a general trading strategy from the oracles conducted for each single asset. Acknowledgments The corresponding authors are Kan Ren and Weinan Zhang. Weinan Zhang is supported by MSRA Joint Research Grant. References Almgren, R.; and Chriss, N. 2001. Optimal execution of portfolio transactions. Journal of Risk 3: 5–40. Bertsimas, D.; and Lo, A. W. 1998. Optimal control of exe- cution costs. Journal of Financial Markets 1(1): 1–50. Białkowski, J.; Darolles, S.; and Le Fol, G. 2008. Improving VW AP strategies: A dynamic volume approach. Journal of Banking & Finance 32(9): 1709–1722. Cartea, A.; and Jaimungal, S. 2015. Optimal execution with limit and market orders. Quantitative Finance 15(8): 1279– 1291. Cartea, A.; and Jaimungal, S. 2016. Incorporating order- ﬂow into optimal execution. Mathematics and Financial Economics 10(3): 339–364. Cartea, ´A.; Jaimungal, S.; and Penalva, J. 2015. Algorithmic and high-frequency trading. Cambridge University Press. Casgrain, P.; and Jaimungal, S. 2019. Trading algorithms with learning in latent alpha models. Mathematical Finance 29(3): 735–772. Co., C. S. I. 2020. CSI800 index. https://bit.ly/3btW6di. Dab´erius, K.; Granat, E.; and Karlsson, P. 2019. Deep Execution-Value and Policy Based Reinforcement Learning for Trading and Beating Market Benchmarks. Available at SSRN 3374766 . Gaon, M.; and Brafman, R. 2020. Reinforcement Learning with Non-Markovian Rewards. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , volume 34, 3980– 3987. Green, S.; Vineyard, C. M.; and Koc ¸, C. K. 2019. Distillation Strategies for Proximal Policy Optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.08128 . Gu´eant, O. 2016. The Financial Mathematics of Market Liquidity: From optimal execution to market making , vol- ume 33. CRC Press. Gu´eant, O.; and Lehalle, C.-A. 2015. General intensity shapes in optimal liquidation. Mathematical Finance 25(3): 457–495. Hendricks, D.; and Wilcox, D. 2014. A reinforcement learn- ing extension to the Almgren-Chriss framework for optimal trade execution. In 2014 IEEE Conference on Computa- tional Intelligence for Financial Engineering & Economics (CIFEr), 457–464. IEEE. Hinton, G.; Vinyals, O.; and Dean, J. 2015. Distill- ing the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531 . Hu, R. 2016. Optimal Order Execution using Stochastic Control and Reinforcement Learning. Jiang, Z.; and Liang, J. 2017. Cryptocurrency portfolio man- agement with deep reinforcement learning. In 2017 Intelli- gent Systems Conference (IntelliSys), 905–913. IEEE. Kakade, S. M.; Kearns, M.; Mansour, Y .; and Ortiz, L. E. 2004. Competitive algorithms for VW AP and limit order trading. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM conference on Elec- tronic commerce, 189–198. Lai, K.-H.; Zha, D.; Li, Y .; and Hu, X. 2020. Dual Policy Distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04061 . Li, J.; Koyamada, S.; Ye, Q.; Liu, G.; Wang, C.; Yang, R.; Zhao, L.; Qin, T.; Liu, T.-Y .; and Hon, H.-W. 2020. Suphx: Mastering Mahjong with Deep Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.13590 . Li, X.; Zhang, J.; Bian, J.; Tong, Y .; and Liu, T.-Y . 2019. A cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning framework for resource balancing in complex logistics network. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Au- tonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems , 980–988. Inter- national Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems. Lin, S.; and Beling, P. A. 2020. An End-to-End Optimal Trade Execution Framework based on Proximal Policy Op- timization. In IJCAI. Mason, S. J.; and Graham, N. E. 2002. Areas beneath the rel- ative operating characteristics (ROC) and relative operating levels (ROL) curves: Statistical signiﬁcance and interpreta- tion. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society . Mnih, V .; Kavukcuoglu, K.; Silver, D.; Rusu, A. A.; Ve- ness, J.; Bellemare, M. G.; Graves, A.; Riedmiller, M.; Fid- jeland, A. K.; Ostrovski, G.; et al. 2015. Human-level con- trol through deep reinforcement learning.Nature 518(7540): 529–533. Moody, J.; and Saffell, M. 2001. Learning to trade via di- rect reinforcement. IEEE transactions on neural Networks 12(4): 875–889. Moody, J.; and Wu, L. 1997. Optimization of trading sys- tems and portfolios. In Proceedings of the IEEE/IAFE 1997 Computational Intelligence for Financial Engineering (CIFEr), 300–307. IEEE. Moody, J. E.; Saffell, M.; Liao, Y .; and Wu, L. 1998. Rein- forcement Learning for Trading Systems and Portfolios. In KDD, 279–283. Nevmyvaka, Y .; Feng, Y .; and Kearns, M. 2006. Reinforce- ment learning for optimized trade execution. InProceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine learning , 673–680. Ning, B.; Ling, F. H. T.; and Jaimungal, S. 2018. Double Deep Q-Learning for Optimal Execution. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.06600 . Parisotto, E.; Ba, J. L.; and Salakhutdinov, R. 2015. Actor- mimic: Deep multitask and transfer reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06342 . Rusu, A. A.; Colmenarejo, S. G.; Gulcehre, C.; Desjardins, G.; Kirkpatrick, J.; Pascanu, R.; Mnih, V .; Kavukcuoglu, K.; and Hadsell, R. 2015. Policy distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06295 . Schulman, J.; Wolski, F.; Dhariwal, P.; Radford, A.; and Klimov, O. 2017. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 . Silver, D.; Huang, A.; Maddison, C. J.; Guez, A.; Sifre, L.; Van Den Driessche, G.; Schrittwieser, J.; Antonoglou, I.; Panneershelvam, V .; Lanctot, M.; et al. 2016. Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. na- ture 529(7587): 484. Sutton, R. S.; and Barto, A. G. 2018. Reinforcement learn- ing: An introduction. MIT press. Tang, X.; Qin, Z.; Zhang, F.; Wang, Z.; Xu, Z.; Ma, Y .; Zhu, H.; and Ye, J. 2019. A deep value-network based approach for multi-driver order dispatching. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, 1780–1790. Teh, Y .; Bapst, V .; Czarnecki, W. M.; Quan, J.; Kirkpatrick, J.; Hadsell, R.; Heess, N.; and Pascanu, R. 2017. Distral: Robust multitask reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 4496–4506. Wu, H.; Gattami, A.; and Flierl, M. 2020. Conditional Mu- tual information-based Contrastive Loss for Financial Time Series Forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07638 . Ye, Y .; Pei, H.; Wang, B.; Chen, P.-Y .; Zhu, Y .; Xiao, J.; Li, B.; et al. 2020. Reinforcement-learning based portfolio man- agement with augmented asset movement prediction states. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05780 . Yin, H.; and Pan, S. J. 2017. Knowledge transfer for deep reinforcement learning with hierarchical experience replay. In Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.