Order ﬂow and price formation Fabrizio Lillo University of Bologna and Scuola Normale Superiore, Italy May 4, 2021 Abstract I present an overview of some recent advancements on the empirical analysis and theoretical modeling of the process of price formation in ﬁnancial markets as the result of the arrival of orders in a limit order book exchange. After discussing critically the possible modeling approaches and the observed stylized facts of order ﬂow, I consider in detail market impact and transaction cost of trades executed incrementally over an extended period of time, by comparing model predictions and recent extensive empirical results. I also discuss how the simultaneous presence of many algorithmic trading executions aﬀects the quality and cost of trading. 1 Introduction Understanding the price formation process in markets is of paramount importance both from an academic and from a practical perspective. Markets can be seen as a collective evaluation system where the ‘fair’ price of an asset is found by the aggregation of information dispersed across a large number of investors. Non informed investor (roughly speaking, intermediaries and market makers) also participate to the process, in the attempt of proﬁting from temporal or ‘spatial’ (i.e. across market venues or assets) local imbalance between supply and demand, thus acting as counterparts when liquidity is needed. Order submission and trading constitute the way aggregation of information is obtained. The process through which this information is impounded into price is highly complex and might depend on the speciﬁc structure of the investigated market. Prices emerge as the consequence of the arrival of orders, which in turn are aﬀected, among other things, by the recent dynamics of prices. Despite the fact this feedback process is of paramount importance, the complexity of the process is only partial understood and many diﬀerent models are able to provide only a partial description of it. The two main components of the price formation process are order ﬂow and market impact. The former refers to the dynamical process describing the arrival of buy and sell orders to the market. As 1 arXiv:2105.00521v1 [q-fin.TR] 2 May 2021 detailed below, this is in general a complicated process whose modelization is challenging because of the high dimensionality and the presence of strong temporal correlations. Market impact is, broadly speaking, the correlation between an incoming order and the subsequent price change. Since in each trade there is a buyer and a seller, it is not a priori obvious whether a given trade should move on average the price up or down. Considering the role of information on prices, one can advance few alternative explanations on the origin of market impact (for a more detailed discussion on this point, see (Bouchaud et al., 2009)): • Trades convey a signal about private information. The arrival of new private infor- mation causes trades, which cause other agents to update their valuations, which changes prices. • Agents successfully forecast short-term price movements and trade accordingly. Thus there might be market impact even if these agents have absolutely no eﬀect on prices. In the words of Hasbrouck ‘orders do not impact prices. It is more accurate to say that orders forecast prices’. • Random ﬂuctuations in supply and demand. Fluctuations in supply and demand can be completely unrelated to information, but the net eﬀect regarding market impact is the same. In this sense impact is a completely mechanical (or statistical) phenomenon. In the ﬁrst two explanations, market impact is a friction but it is also the mechanism that let prices adjust to the arrival of new information. In the third explanation, instead, market impact is unrelated to information and may merely be a self-fulﬁlling prophecy that would occur even when the fraction of informed traders is zero. Identifying the dominating mechanism in real markets is therefore of fundamental importance to understand price formation. Price formation and market impact are very relevant also from the practitioner perspective of minimizing transaction costs. For medium and large size investors, the main source of trading costs is the one associated with market impact, since by executing progressively an order in response to a given trading decision, the price is moved in a direction adverse to the trader and the later trades/orders become more and more expensive. Minimizing market impact cost by designing optimal execution strategies is an active ﬁeld of research in academia and industry (Almgren and Chriss, 2001). Market impact is thus a critical quantity to understand the informativeness of a trade as well as the cost for the trader, but its nature and properties are still vigorously debated. Also the empirical analysis and characterization of price formation and order ﬂow is challenging, despite the availability of very high-resolution market data. This is due in part to the diﬃculty of controlling several potential confounding eﬀects and biases and in part to the fact that market data are often not suﬃcient to answer some fundamental questions. However recent years have witnessed a booming increase in the number of empirical studies of market impact and transaction cost analysis of algorithmic executions, and we are now able to model them with a great level of accuracy and to dissect the problem under diﬀerent conditioning settings. 2 In this subchapter I will review of some of these recent advancements in the modeling and empirical characterization of order ﬂow, price formation, and market impact. I will focus on a speciﬁc, yet widespread, market mechanism namely the Limit Order Book, which is presented in section 2. In section 3 I will present an overview of the diﬀerent modeling approaches to order ﬂow and price formation, clarifying the diﬀerent choices that the modeler has and why and when some should be preferred to others. Section 4 reviews some results on order ﬂow modeling and in Section 5 I will consider cross-impact, i.e. how the price of an asset responds to trades (and orders) executed on a diﬀerent asset. The study of cross-impact is important when a portfolio of assets is liquidated, since cross-asset eﬀects can deteriorate the quality of the trade if not properly included in the optimal execution scheme. Section 6 presents empirical evidences and theoretical results on the market impact of metaorders, i.e. sequences of orders sent by the same trader as a consequence of a unique trading decision. Section 7 discusses the problem of the simultaneous presence of many metaorders and how market impact behaves under aggregation. The response of price to multiple simultaneous metaorders has been recently termed co-impact and its characterization and modeling is important to study the eﬀect of crowding on price dynamics and cost analysis. Finally, in Section 8 I will brieﬂy present some open problems in the ﬁeld of order ﬂow and price formation and I will delineate few possible research avenues. 2 The Limit Order Book Market microstructure is, by deﬁnition, very speciﬁc about the actual mechanism implemented in the investigated market, because it can aﬀect the price formation process. Financial markets are characterized by a variety of structures, and attempting to make a classiﬁcation is outside the scope of this subchapter. In the following the focus will be on the most popular market mechanism, namely the Limit Order Book (LOB). A LOB, used actively also outside ﬁnance, is a mechanism for double auction and it is essentially a queuing system. Traders can decide to send their order (to buy or to sell) in two diﬀerent ways: either they require to buy or sell a certain amount of shares at the best available price or they specify also the worst price at which they are willing to trade, thus the highest price for a buy or the lowest price for a sell. In the ﬁrst case they send a market order (or, equivalently, a crossing limit order) and, unless there is no one on the opposite case, the order is executed and leads to a transaction. In the second case they send a limit order, where the speciﬁed price is called the limit price, and, if no one is on the opposite side with the same (or more favorable) price, the limit order is stored in a queue of orders at the limit price. An agent can decide to cancel a limit order at any time, for example if the price moves in an adverse direction. At any time, the highest standing limit price to buy (sell) is called bid (ask) or best bid (best ask). The mean price between the bid and the ask is the midprice and the diﬀerence is the spread. Orders arrive and are canceled asynchronously in the market and what is normally called ‘the price’ is something in between the best ask and the best bid. However, from the above description it is clear that at a certain time there is not a unique price in the market. Broadly speaking three modeling approaches have been pursued: (i) econometric models, ﬁtting 3 for example large dimensional linear models on market data (queues, prices, order arrivals); (ii) statistical models of the LOB, where orders arrive in the market as a random point process and the resulting properties of the price is studied; (iii) computational agent based models, where a set of heterogeneous agents trade in a realistic environment, such as a LOB. I will mostly focus on the ﬁrst two approaches, despite the fact the third approach often provide important insights, especially for testing alternative policy measures. 3 Modeling approaches Modeling order ﬂow and price formation is a challenging task because of the complexity of the system and the large number of variables potentially involved. The modeler has diﬀerent choices to make, which in part depend on the available data and methods, but more often depend on the objectives of the model. The ﬁrst choice is whether to work in continuous or in discrete time. The ﬁrst option is the most complete, i.e. it does not discard any information of the process of price formation. Inter-event times can, in fact, provide relevant information on the event is going to occur. For example, the price change triggered by a trade can depend on the time elapsed from the last trade. The modeling in discrete time disregards this information but allows to use all the machinery of discrete time series analysis (ARMA, VAR, etc). Discrete time modeling can be deployed either by advancing the clock by one unit any time a speciﬁc event occurs, for example a trade or an order arrival, or by considering a ﬁnite interval of physical time, say 1 second, and by considering aggregated quantities (e.g. average or end-of-period LOB, total order ﬂow, one second price return, etc). Let us consider ﬁrst the continuous time approach and let K the number of available limit prices1. Denoting with pi t and qi t, (i = 1,...,K ) the price and the number of shares on the i−th limit price at timet, the LOB dynamics is described by the continuous-time processLt = (pi t,qi t :i = 1,...,K ). The order ﬂow is described by the multivariate marked point process whose components are the intensity of limit orders (λi t), cancellations (νi t), and buy and sell market orders (µb t andµs t). The marks correspond to the volumes of the order, but for expositional simplicity we will assume that all the orders have unitary volume. In general the rates are not constant in time but can depend on the past history of the order ﬂow, on the state of the order book ( L{s<t}), and possibly on other covariates. Let us call Ot the multivariate point process generated by the intensities (λi t,νi t,µb t,µs t :i = 1,...,K ) and fully describing the order ﬂow. It is important to stress that the state of the LOB at a given time is completely determined by the past order ﬂow, plus some initial condition. In other words, once we choose an observable pricept as reference (for example the midprice, the microprice, the ask), there exists a deterministic function F such that ∆pt≡pt−pt−τ =F (Lt−τ,Os∈(t−τ,t)) (1) 1Following (Cont et al., 2010), we considerK large enough that it is unlikely that in the considered period orders are placed outside the grid. 4 Thus, from a purely econometric point of view, one could simply model the point process process Ot. This type of models is often analytically tractable and, for this reason, it has been explored in the past twenty years in several papers. The Zero Intelligence (or Santa Fe) model of (Daniels et al., 2003) and the model in (Cont et al., 2010), for example, consider independent Poisson processes for the diﬀerent components of Ot. In order to include memory of the past order ﬂow, (Abergel and Jedidi, 2015) considers instead a multivariate Hawkes processes able to describe auto- and lagged cross-correlation between the diﬀerent components of the order ﬂow. The observable reference price in the LOB might not the fully reﬂect the economic conditions of the ﬁrm. For this reason, many models postulate the existence of an unobservable eﬃcient price, which typically follows a semimartingale dynamics. Market data (e.g. trade or mid price) are a noisy version of the eﬃcient price and a lot of econometric eﬀort is devoted to remove the microstructure noise either to ﬁlter it or to estimate from ultra high frequency data some of its statistical properties (for example the volatility) useful in applications such as option pricing or risk management. Although order ﬂow determines uniquely (observable) price changes, it is possible that a better model (in terms, for example, of explained variance) is obtained by considering the order ﬂow intensities as dependent on LOB state Lt or of a function of it, such as the reference price pt. The reason is that, in general, the relation between intensities and past order ﬂow is strongly non-linear and high dimensional. On the contrary, simpler and easier to estimate parametric models can be chosen by identifying the drivers that supposedly inﬂuence real traders decision to submit a speciﬁc type of order 2. For example, real traders likely decide when and where to place an order taking into account the LOB state and the price. Thus one could use a model, which instead of modeling autonomously the order ﬂow, makes the intensities dependent on the state of the LOB or of part of it (Huang et al., 2015). Choosing to build models using functions of the order ﬂow could be also useful when deciding to restrict the dimensionality of the problem and restricting it to a subpart of the order ﬂow (and of LOB). The reasons for this choice are manyfold: either for data availability (especially in the old times), for purely statistical reasons (dimensionality reduction and improved estimation), because one believes that some parts of the order ﬂow (e.g. trades) might be more informative on price dynamics, or because we are interested in modeling a part of the order ﬂow and its eﬀect on price (for example our order ﬂow in a real trading problem). In these cases the reduced model giving the price as a function of the (sub)order ﬂow becomes stochastic and the randomness describes the eﬀect of the unmodeled part of order ﬂow. Following this line, one can take two approaches: 1) Treat the order ﬂow as exogenous to the price. In this case, the model connects the considered part of the order ﬂow to the price, but neglects the reverse eﬀect, i.e. how price dynamics can aﬀect order ﬂow. Classical market microstructure models following this approach are the Roll model (and its generalization) and the Madhavan-Richardson-Roomans (Madhavan et al., 1997) 2A recent alternative approach is to use modeling approach suited for high-dimensional non linear models, such as Deep Neural Networks. Even in these cases however it might be better to use LOB state rather than past order ﬂow to forecast the LOB state at a future time. For example, Deep Learning has been used to forecast short term price movement from LOB state and recent order ﬂow (see, for example, (Sirignano, 2019)). 5 model. More recently, the Transient Impact Model (TIM, see (Bouchaud et al., 2004, 2009)) and its generalizations with multiple propagators have been proposed to describe the relation between order ﬂow and price. In a nutshell, the general TIM can be written in discrete time (see below for the continuous time version) as pt = ∑ s<t Gπs(t−s)f(vs) +ξt +p−∞ (2) where vs is the signed volume of the order at time s, f(x) = sgn( x)h(|x|) with h(.) a concave function3, as observed empirically (Lillo et al., 2003), πs indicates the type of event at time s (e.g. market order, limit order at a given price, etc),Gπs(t−s) is a function, termed kernel or propagator, quantifying the lagged eﬀect of the event πs at time s on the price at time t, and ξt is a noise term describing the eﬀect on price of all the orders which are not considered in the model. If the functions Gπs are not constant, Eq. (2) describes the transient nature of impact of eventπs, i.e. the fact that the eﬀect of an order on price is not permanent, but declines with time. Many empirical analyses show that Gπs are slowly decaying functions, typically well ﬁtted asymptotically by a power law function. The transient nature of impact can be related to the very persistent autocorrelations of order ﬂow (see next section) and to the diﬀusivity and eﬃciency of prices (see (Bouchaud et al., 2009) for an extensive discussion). While the original TIM was considering only one type of events, namely market orders, subsequent works have included also limit orders and cancellations, while others have discriminated more ﬁnely between orders changing and not changing the price, since the (lagged) eﬀect on price is shown to be diﬀerent in these cases (Eisler et al., 2012; Taranto et al., 2018). The TIM describes trades that impact prices, but with a time dependent, decaying impact function G(t). One can interpret the same model slightly diﬀerently. Considering the model with one propagator associated with trades and taking f(vt) = sgn(vt)≡ϵt, one can rewrite the model as ∆pt =G(1)(ϵt− ˆϵt) + ˜ξt, (3) ˆϵt =− ∑ s>0 G(s + 1)−G(s) G(1) ϵt−s (4) with ˜ξt = ∆ξt. The quantity ˆϵt can be seen as the (linear) predictor of trade sign given the past history of the signs and the model tells us that the deviation of the realized signϵt from an expected level ˆϵt impacts the price linearly and permanently. If ˆϵt is the best possible predictor of ϵt, then the above equation leads by construction to an exact martingale for the price process. This model has been termed History Dependent Impact Model (HDIM) (Lillo and Farmer, 2004; Bouchaud et al., 2009; Taranto et al., 2018) and in the simple setting above is mathematically equivalent to the TIM when the best predictor is linear in the past order signs. (Taranto et al., 2018) shows that 3To avoid dealing with volume ﬂuctuations, strongly dependent on LOB state, often it is chosen f(x) = sgn(x). sgn(x) denotes the sign function. 6 as soon as one attempts to generalize the model to multiple event types, TIM and HDIM become no longer equivalent. In fact, the HDIM with diﬀerent events can be rewritten as ∆pt =Gπt(1) [ ϵt + ∑ s<t κπs,πt(t−s) Gπt(1) ϵs ] + ˜ξt (5) where κπs,πt(t−s) is an inﬂuence kernel that depends on both the past event type πs and the current event πt. The matrix of two point kernels makes the model more complicated to estimate (see (Taranto et al., 2018)) while clearly HDIM reduces to TIM whenκπs,πt(t−s) is a function only of the triggering event πs. The approach taking as exogenous the order ﬂow includes also other models connecting the order ﬂow in a given time interval with the simultaneous price change. A paradigmatic example is given by (Cont et al., 2014) which introduces a stylized model of the order book predicting a contemporaneous linear relation between the price change in a given time interval and a linear combination of level I order ﬂow components (the Order Flow Imbalance or OFI). The goodness of the model (for large tick stocks) is testiﬁed by the high R2 empirically obtained in the linear regression between ∆pt and OFI. 2) The above approach, however, leaves the order ﬂow as completely exogenous. The limits of this approach are evident for example when considering the negative lag response, i.e. the lagged cross correlation between past price returns and future order ﬂow, i.e. R(τ) = E[f(vt)(pt+τ−pt)] (6) with τ < 0. When the simple TIM model with only one propagator for trades is calibrated usingR(τ) (or other equivalent methods) with τ >0, it is observed that the predicted negative lag response is smaller than the empirical one, indicating, as intuitive, that a declining (increasing) price attracts in the future more buy (sell) trades (Taranto et al., 2018). To overcome this problem, one jointly models the dynamics of price and order ﬂow. The seminal work in this context is (Hasbrouck, 1991) who proposed a discrete time structural VAR model for the vectorxt = (∆pt,f (vt))′,vt being the volume of the market order at time t, of the form A0xt = p∑ i=1 Aixt−i +ξt (7) and A0 = ( 1 g 0 1 ) and Ai are other 2× 2 matrices to be estimated. The parameter g describes the immediate impact of a trade on price. This model has been generalized in several directions. First, instead of considering only market orders and a single reference price (Hasbrouck used the midprice), (Hautsch and Huang, 2012) considers a vector containing bid and ask prices, the queue volume at the ﬁrst three quotes on either sides of the LOB, and two dummy variables indicating the occurrence of buy and sell trades. 7 They modeled this ten dimensional vector yt with the Vector Error Correction Model ∆yt =µ +αβ′yt−1 + p∑ i=1 Γi∆yt−i +ξt (8) where µ is a constant vector, α and β denote the loading and cointegrating matrices and Γ i are parameter matrices. Using impulse response function, they measured impact, separately on bid and ask prices, of the arrival of a limit order on a queue (for an approach based on TIM, see (Eisler et al., 2012)), as well of course the impact of the arrival of a market order. The second generalization considered instead continuous time models. For example, (Bacry and Muzy, 2014) introduces an Hawkes process for the four dimensional counting process Pt = (T + t ,T + t ,N + t ,N− t )′, where the ﬁrst two components describe the arrival of buy and sell market orders and the last two the upward/downward movements of the reference price. The model for the intensityλt reads λt =µ + ∫ t −∞ Φ(t−s)dPs (9) whereµ is a constant baseline intensity, Φ(t−s) is a 4× 4 matrix of kernels describing the lead-lag eﬀects. Some care must be taken to model the immediate impact (the g term in the Hasbrouck model above) by introducing a Dirac delta component in some elements of Φ( t−s). While this model can be directly put in connection with the Hasbrouck’s VAR, its generalizations can easily include other components of the order ﬂow, such as limit orders and cancellations, or even to take into account order volume (see, for example, (Rambaldi et al., 2017) discussed below). Moreover the continuous time approach allows to consider in the modeling the time between events, which are clearly neglected in discrete time approach ´ a la Hasbrouck. Understanding the relation between order ﬂow and price is important for many reasons, such as to create realistic LOB simulators, to study the stability of markets under diﬀerent rules, etc. However, it is often very relevant to study how price reacts to a speciﬁc sequence of orders generated by a speciﬁc trading decision, i.e. what we called a metaorder, because this is related to transaction cost (mainly due to market impact) and to the release of private information into the prices. It is evident that, since we are neglecting a very large fraction of orders, those due to all other traders, the relation between price dynamics and order ﬂow of a single metaorder will become very noisy and large samples are required to obtain clean measures. Section 6 presents some empirical evidences on the market impact of metaorders and the price dynamics during their execution. 4 Order ﬂow Order ﬂow is the process describing the arrival of orders in the market. If this works with a LOB, then the order ﬂow is the multivariate point process describing the arrival of market orders, limit orders, and cancellations. Since limit orders (and cancellations) are also characterized by a limit 8 price, a component of the multivariate process should be associated with each limit price, making immediately the problem high-dimensional. Diﬀerent point process models of order ﬂow have been proposed, ranging from (compound) Poisson processes (Daniels et al., 2003) to self exciting Hawkes processes (Abergel and Jedidi, 2015; Rambaldi et al., 2017). Here we ﬁrst review some of the empirical evidences and stylized facts observed in order ﬂow which make challenging the development of a realistic model of the LOB. The ﬁrst empirical evidence (even chronologically) is the so called diagonal eﬀect (Biais et al., 1995) i.e. orders of a speciﬁc type are more likely to be observed just after orders of the same type. Interestingly, (Rambaldi et al., 2017) extends this analysis by using a Hawkes process approach and shows that, by including volume into the analysis, the diagonal eﬀect is markedly stronger for same-type same-size orders (see below). The diagonal eﬀect is the manifestation of a more signiﬁcant regularity observed in real LOBs: components of the order ﬂow are extremely persistent, i.e. long range autocorrelated in time. To present a speciﬁc example, consider only market orders, where volume is neglected and time is discretized in such a way that it increases by one unit each time a new market order arrives. Denoting with ϵt the sign of the t-th market order, being equal to +1 (−1) for a buy (sell) order, it has been empirically shown (Lillo and Farmer, 2004; Bouchaud et al., 2004) that its autocorrelation function behaves asymptotically as C(τ)≡Cor[ϵt,ϵt+τ]∼τ−γ with γ∈ [0, 1]. The empirical value of γ≃ 0.5 shows that the market order sign is a long memory process, i.e. it lacks a typical time scale, with Hurst exponent H = 1−γ/2≃ 0.75. A similar behavior has been observed for the other components of the order ﬂow. Several explanations have been proposed for this stylized fact, empirically observed in many diﬀerent markets, asset classes, and time periods. The theories can be clustered in two classes: the ﬁrst states that this is the eﬀect of herding, i.e. several investors share the same view on the asset around the same time and trade accordingly. The second explanation is instead related to the fact that each trader creates an autocorrelated order ﬂow and this is due to the practice oforder splitting. Despite the fact that it is possible to create agent based models with either of the two mechanisms reproducing a correlated order ﬂow, the assessment of the mechanism mainly responsible for this observation should be based on empirical evidences. (Toth et al., 2015) proposes a method to disentangle the herding and splitting contributions to the autocorrelation. The idea to use labeled data, i.e. data where the identity of the trader sending the order is known (even if anonymized). The autocorrelation function of order ﬂow can be exactly decomposed asC(τ) =Csplit(τ)+Cherd(τ) where the ﬁrst (second) term is the contribution to the correlation considering only cases when the two market orders at time t and t +τ were placed by the same (diﬀerent) trader(s). To measure the relative importance of the two components, (Toth et al., 2015) uses brokerage data. Some exchanges provide data where each order contains the coded identity of the broker who sent the order. An extensive investigation of LSE data shows unambiguously that Csplit(τ) explains always more than 75% of C(τ) and, except for very short τ (one or two trades) the value is above 85%. This empirical ﬁnding strongly indicates that order splitting is the main driver of the correlated order ﬂow. Similar results are obtained when using data with agents rather than brokers. Market orders describe only part of the order ﬂow dynamics. Among the several approaches 9 to describe the full correlation structure of order ﬂow (and price) we mention here the one using Hawkes processes. Generalizing a pioneering paper (Large, 2007), (Bacry et al., 2016) models level-I order book data by using 8-dimensional Hawkes process whose components are market, limit, cancel order (buy and sell), and mid-price changes (up and down). Using a non-parametric estimation method, their main ﬁnding is that the dominating driver of the process is self-excitation (i.e., once more, the diagonal eﬀect). The only exceptions are the mid-price components for which cross-excitation eﬀects are strongly dominating. Moreover there is a signiﬁcant mean reversion of price, since present price changes trigger price changes in the opposite direction. Interestingly most of the estimated diagonal kernels of the Hawkes process are slowly decreasing and well described by a power-law behavior, consistent with the long memory described above. This type of approach can be generalized in several directions. For example, (Muni Toke, 2010) considers a full order book modeling using Hawkes process to disentangle the role and interaction between liquidity takers and providers. Another generalization considers the fact that orders are also characterized by a volume. Mathematically one can treat volumes as marks of the multivariate point process. Alternatively, when only few levels are considered in the analysis, one can bin the volume in D groups and consider the volume process as the superposition of D unmarked point processes, each of which corresponds to one of the possibleD values that volume can take (Rambaldi et al., 2017). It is found that order size does matter, since kernels for diﬀerent volume bins are quite diﬀerent. Moreover large orders trigger cascade of small orders and small limit orders and cancellations strongly cross-excite, indicating hectic order re-positioning by market makers. Despite the fact one can decide to model the (marked) multivariate process autonomously, obtaining as a ‘byproduct’ the state of the LOB and, as a consequence, the price dynamics, it is likely that LOB state (but also recent price dynamics) describes better, or in a more parsimonious way, the local intensities of the orders arrival. The intuition is also related to the fact that traders often condition the decision of submitting an order to the state of the LOB. This suggests a class of models where intensities are a function of the LOB state. This approach has been pioneered in (Huang et al., 2015) where orders arrivals are modeled as Poisson processes whose intensity is a function of the current state of the LOB. Thus the empirically observed autocorrelation of the order ﬂow is seen as a ‘consequence’ of the persistence of the queue size, but, conditionally on them, the arrival of orders follows a Poisson process. A natural extension of this model considers the order arrival intensity as a function both of the LOB state and of the past order ﬂow. By using an Hawkes model with a kernel depending on both these variables, the State Dependent or Queue Reactive Hawkes models (Morariu-Patrichi and Pakkanen, 2018; Wu et al., 2019) have been proposed. 5 Cross impact Up to now we have considered the market impact of trades and orders from a single asset. However, institutional investors rebalancing their portfolio very often trade simultaneously many assets. Both the optimal execution problem and the assessment of transaction costs of metaorders should 10 therefore take into account possible interactions between assets. Generically, there are three sources of interaction: (i) statistical dependence in asset prices, i.e. the well-known fact that returns of diﬀerent assets are correlated; (ii) commonality in liquidity across assets (Chordia et al., 2000), i.e. the fact that, for example, the arrival rate of signed market (or limit) orders is correlated across assets, and (iii) quote revision eﬀects, i.e. a trade in an asset can lead market makers to modify the bid and ask price in another related asset. The (lagged) correlation between price and order ﬂow is termed cross-impact. As in the single asset case, the entire order ﬂow completely determines the (reference) prices of the assets, thus one can trivially explain cross-impact (as well as self-impact) as a mere consequence of order ﬂow dynamics and correlations. However, when conditioning to a subset of the order ﬂow (for example a market order or the child orders of a metaorder), or when the future price evolution is of interest, the dynamics becomes stochastic, because of the unmodeled part of the order ﬂow and suitably modeling cross- impact becomes critical for predictions or ex-ante cost estimation. Under this conditioning, cross- impact can be dissected as the result of the three sources described above (Benzaquen et al., 2017). Cross-impact has been empirically studied recently, see e.g. (Benzaquen et al., 2017; Schneider and Lillo, 2019) and its role in optimal execution has been highlighted in (Mastromatteo et al., 2017; Tsoukalas et al., 2019). We review here some results obtained when considering the market order ﬂow. First, there is a measurable cross asset eﬀect between order ﬂow and price as can be measured by the cross response function, which generalizes Eq. 6 as Rij(τ) = E[f(vi t)(pj t+τ−pj t)] (10) between an order on asset i at time t and the price change of asset j in [t,t +τ]. Rij(τ) is found to be diﬀerent from zero and smaller than Rii(τ) by a factor ∼ 5 (Benzaquen et al., 2017; Schneider and Lillo, 2019). To investigate the source of this lagged correlation (Schneider and Lillo, 2019), by investigating empirically the high frequency dynamics of Italian sovereign bonds traded in an double auction market, ﬁnd evidence that both lagged correlations of orders across assets and quote revisions play a role in forming cross-impact. This result is obtaned by investigating the eﬀect on price of bonds of isolated trades, i.e. trades on a bond such that no other trade is observed in other bonds a time window around it. This results indicates that both commonality in liquidity taking and price revision across assets are responsible for cross impact eﬀects. The TIM can be easily extended to the multi asset case. Considering the continuous time version of the TIM, the price of asset i at time t is pi t =pi 0 + ∑ j ∫ t 0 fij( ˙xj s)Gij(t−s)ds + ∫ t 0 σi sdWi s (11) where fij( ˙xj s) is the (instantaneous) impact on the price of asset i of trading asset j at a rate ˙xj s, Gij(·) is the decay kernel describing the lagged eﬀect of trading on price, σi s is the volatility of asset i and Wi s is a Wiener process. This model can be estimated on real data and it is found that: (i) fij is non-linear and well described by a power law function with an exponent smaller than 1 as 11 forfii; (ii) the kernels Gij also display a power law behavior similar to Gii, but with a signiﬁcantly smaller amplitude; (iii) the matrix {Gij}i,j=1,N has a strong sectorial structure, similar to the one observed for returns (Benzaquen et al., 2017; Schneider and Lillo, 2019). These regularities and the modeling can be successfully used to design optimal portfolio executions (Mastromatteo et al., 2017). Another important question is whether a model like (11) is always well posed or if there are trading strategies Π = {xt}t∈[0.T ] allowing for price manipulation. More precisely, we remind that a round-trip trade is a sequence of trades whose sum is zero, i.e. a trading strategy Π with∫T 0 ˙xtdt = 0. A price manipulation is a round-trip trade Π whose expected cost C(Π) is negative and the principle of no-dynamic-arbitrage states that such a price manipulation is impossible. For the multi asset TIM this implies that C(Π) = ∑ i,j ∫ T 0 ˙xi tdt ∫ t 0 fij( ˙xj s)Gij(t−s)ds≥ 0 (12) (Schneider and Lillo, 2019) proves a series of theorems constraining the form of f and G in order to avoid price manipulation. In particular authors showed that for bounded decay kernels instan- taneous cross-impact f must be an odd and linear function of trading intensity and cross-impact from asset i to asset j must be equal to the one from j to i. When a non vanishing bid-ask spread is considered, some inequalities between spread, maximum trading speed, and cross-impact asymmetry must be veriﬁed to avoid price manipulation. 6 Market impact of metaorders While the above described models generically describe the relation between order ﬂow and price, it is often of practical and academic interest to study the price dynamics when conditioning this relation to the execution of a (large) order by a speciﬁc trader following a single trading decision (a metaorder). The seminal paper of (Kyle, 1985) shows that for a trader with insider information it is optimal to split the volume to be executed in many transactions to be executed incrementally over an extended period of time. A part from the practical problem of minimizing transaction costs, the relation between metaorder execution and price dynamics is relevant to understand how information is incorporated into price. In fact, a metaorder by deﬁnition corresponds to a trading decision, which in general is the response of the trader to a piece of information. For this reason, it is important to understand, not only how the price changes during the execution of the metaorder, but also the long term level reached by the price when the transient eﬀects due to the imbalance between supply and demand are dissipated. Note again the diﬀerence between the relation between order ﬂow and price dynamics when one considers all market participants or only the order ﬂow generated by the trading decision of a single trader. As said above, price dynamics is a deterministic function of the order ﬂow, while, when conditioning on the order ﬂow of a speciﬁc trader, we expect a very noisy relation between signed 12 volume and price change. However the objective here is not to have an high R2 between them, but to answer the question: how much my trading activity consequent to a trading decision is going to aﬀect on average the price? Measuring market impact of metaorders is typically quite complicated because it requires suit- able data that cannot be inferred from public (e.g. market) data. In fact, it is necessary to have access to data where one can track the activity of a single trader (broker or investor) following a given trading decision. For this reason, most of the empirical researches on this topic has been performed by using trading data from a given institution or trading desk (Torre and Ferrari, 1998; Almgren et al., 2005; Toth et al., 2011). A part from the diﬃculty of accessing such data, this type of analyses runs the risk of being biased, since the sample is limited to a speciﬁc fund, which might have an idiosyncratic trading style. Market wide investigations of market impact of metaorders have been conducted by following two approaches. First, some exchanges exceptionally provide data where the coded identity of the market member is disclosed; thus by using suitable statistical methods, one can infer metaorders as sequences of trades/orders by the same member on the same asset with the same sign (see for example, (Moro et al., 2009; Vaglica et al., 2010; T´ oth et al., 2010)). The other approach requires the access to databases collected by specialized institutions and containing information about the metaorder executions of a large set of investors. The most important example is probably the dataset provided by ANcerno Ltd, a transaction cost analysis ﬁrm for institutional investors. According to some estimates, it accounts for more than 10% of CRSP volume in US markets, thus providing a wide coverage of metaorder trading activity from many diﬀerent institutional investors. Methodologically there are two main problems in measuring market impact of metaorders. First, impact might depend on several conditioning variables, such as the market conditions at the time of the trade, the execution algorithm, etc., thus diﬀerent conclusions might be drawn depending on the choice made. Second, market impact of metaorders is typically very noisy (see above), and, as a consequence, large datasets are required to obtain small error bars on the estimated impact. It is important to stress that market impact contributes as a drift term to the unperturbed dynamics of price. For this reason, in order to measure market impact it is fundamental to take into account the sign of the trade of the metaorder. The main quantity of interest is the metaorder impact deﬁned as I(Q,T )≡ E[ϵ∆ logp|Q,T ] (13) where ∆ logp is the logprice change between the end and the start of the metaorder, Q is the size of the metaorder (in shares), T is the metaorder duration (in seconds or in volume time, to minimize possible intraday eﬀects), and ϵ is the sign of the metaorder (i.e ϵ = +1 for a buy and ϵ =−1 for a sell order). Notice that I(Q,T ) is directly related to the average impact cost of a metaorder execution. In fact, for an execution described by Π = {xt}t∈[0,T ], where xt is the asset position at time t, the expected implementation shortfall cost, i.e. the diﬀerence between the expected cost and the theoretical cost obtained by marking to market the trade with the initial price, is C(Π) = ∫T 0 ˙xtI(xt,t ) dt, where ˙xt is the time derivative of xt (i.e. the trading speed). 13 Market impact is better described in terms of normalized quantities which also allows to consider diﬀerent assets and diﬀerent time periods in the same analysis. The ﬁrst key quantity is the daily (or volume) fraction, deﬁned as φ = Q/V , where V is the average daily traded volume 4. The second quantity is the participation rate η, i.e the ratio between Q and the volume traded in the market during the execution. The third one is the metaorder duration T , which can be obtained from T =φ/η. Remarkably, many empirical studies (Torre and Ferrari, 1998; Moro et al., 2009; Zarinelli et al., 2015; Toth et al., 2011; Bershova and Rakhlin, 2013; Waelbroeck and Gomes, 2015) seem to agree on the validity of the ‘square-root impact law’, obtained when conditioning on the volume fraction of the metaorder I(Q,T )≈Yσ √ φ (14) where Y ≃ 1 is a numerical constant and σ is the daily volatility of the asset. Eq. 14 has been empirically shown also for disparate asset classes as options (Toth et al., 2016) and Bitcoin (Donier and Bonart, 2015). This empirical relation is at ﬁrst sight surprising: it indicates that the style of trading (for example using limit orders or market orders), the duration T of the execution, the trading speed (i.e. the number of shares traded per unit time), etc, are not relevant! These observations indicate that there must be some limitations to the validity of this ‘law’. For example, the prefactor Y might depend on the trading algorithm. More recent and extensive empirical analyses (Zarinelli et al., 2015) clarify the limits of the square-root impact law and highlight some deviations. Speciﬁcally: • Considering a power law dependence on T and η, (Zarinelli et al., 2015) investigates the regression I(Q,T ) =A TδTηδη·noise (15) to measure the dependence of metaorder impact separately on participation rate and duration. The ﬁtted exponents are δT = 0.54± 0.01 and δη = 0.52± 0.01, and A = 0.207± 0.005. The fact that both exponents are very close to 1/2 indicates thatI(Q,T )≈√φ, at least as a ﬁrst approximation, even when considering the eﬀect of participation rate and duration. • By consideringI(Q,T ) as a function only of φ =Q/V , it is clear that a logarithmic function ﬁts the data better than a power law function; this indicates a linear behavior of impact for small volumes and an extra concavity (likely due to a selection bias) for very large volumes. Below we will present two possible explanations for the linear behavior of the impact for small φ. • By consideringI(Q,T ) as a function of both variables, (Zarinelli et al., 2015) introduces the market impact surface and showed that a double logarithmic function outperforms the power law form of Eq. 15. 4V and σ (see below) are typically estimated over the past 10 ÷ 25 trading days, excluding the day when the metaorder is executed. 14 Interestingly, Eq. 15 can be predicted from the execution of a metaorder with constant par- ticipation rate in the continuous time TIM model with f(v) = sgn( v)|v|δ and G(t) = t−γ with δT = 1−γ and δη =δ, thus δ =γ = 1/2 (Gatheral, 2010). Notice that the square root impact law is not related to the fact that volatility scales as the square root of (execution) time, which, for a ﬁxed participation rate, is proportional to metaorder size. First, according to deﬁnition 13, market impact is a drift term and the inclusion of the metaorder signϵ is critical in the deﬁnition, while neglectingϵ simply highlights the relation between volatility and volume. Second, the result of the regression of Eq. 15 indicates that, by controlling for both T andη, market impact is mainly dependent on√Tη =√φ. Third, as shown explicitly in (Bucci et al., 2019b), market impact curves of metaorders with φ & 5· 10−4 (roughly 80% of those in the ANcerno database) are independent on T and consistent with a square root dependence on φ. Once more, impact of the remaining small metaorders are better described by a linear relation. (Bucci et al., 2019b) also shows that the variance of impact depends linearly on T , as expected by the diﬀusivity of price, and this price uncertainty largely exceeds the average reaction impact contribution (which in turn explains why the R2 in the market impact estimation is typically very small). From a modeling perspective, the square root impact law and its deviations are well described by the Locally Linear Order Book (LLOB) model for the coarse-grained dynamics of latent liquidity (Donier et al., 2015). In a nutshell, LLOB is a limit order book model whose quantity of interest is the densityϕ(x,t ) of latent orders around pricex at timet. Conventionally, one can chooseϕ to be positive for buy latent5 orders (corresponding tox<p (t), wherep(t) is here the current transaction price) and negative for sell latent orders (corresponding to x>p (t)). The coarse-grained dynamics of the latent liquidity is well described by ∂tϕ =D∂xxϕ−νϕ +λ sgn(y) +m δ(y) , (16) where y≡ p(t)−x, and ν describes order cancellation, λ new order deposition and D∂xx limit price reassessments. The ﬁnal “source” term corresponds to a metaorder of size Q executed at a constant rate m = Q/T , corresponding to a ﬂux of orders localized at the transaction price p(t). In the absence of a metaorder ( m = 0), Eq. (16) admits a stationary solution in the price reference frame, which is linear when y is small, i.e. ϕst(y) =Ly whereL =λ/ √ Dν is a measure of liquidity. The total transaction rate J is simply given by the ﬂux of orders through the origin, i.e. J≡D∂yϕst|y=0 =DL. In the limit of a slow latent order book (i.e. νT ≪ 1), the price trajectory pm(t) during the execution of the metaorder (obtained as the solution of ϕ(pm,t ) = 0) is given by the self-consistent 5The LLOB model has been originally developed for describing the latent liquidity, not necessarily the visible one. However close to the spread the two liquidities should coincide. 15 expression (Donier et al., 2015) pm(t) =p0(t) +y(t), (17) y(t) = m L ∫ t 0 ds√ 4πD(t−s) exp [ −(y(t)−y(s))2 4D(t−s) ] , (18) where p0(t) is the price trajectory in the absence of the metaorder that starts at t = 0 and ends at t =T . Interestingly, when impact is small, i.e. if ∀t,s it is|y(t)−y(s)|≪ D(t−s), the above expression for the price dynamics coincides with the TIM with δ = 1 and γ = 1/2. Price impact of a metaorder in the LLOB model is then deﬁned asI(Q,T ) =y(T ), and is found to be given by I(Q,T ) = √ DQ J F(η) , with η≡ Q JT , (19) where η is the participation rate and the scaling function F(η)≈ √ η/π for η≪ 1 and≈ √ 2 for η≫ 1. Hence, I(Q,T ) is linear in Q for small Q at ﬁxed T , and crosses over to a square-root for large Q. Note that in the square-root regime, impact is predicted to be independent of the execution time T , as approximately observed empirically (see the discussion above). The theoretical predictions of LLOB model have been empirically tested in (Bucci et al., 2019a) where, using a large dataset of more than 8 million metaorders from the ANcerno database, it has been shown a remarkable qualitative agreement between the data and the model. However the original model in (Donier et al., 2015) predicts the crossover of impact from the linear to the square root regime at η∗ = 1, while empirical data shows that this value is much closer to 10 −3. (Benzaquen and Bouchaud, 2018) generalizes the model of (Donier et al., 2015) by introducing (at least) two types of liquidity providers, acting on two diﬀerent time scales: slow and persistent agents are able to resist the impact of the metaorder and fast agents who lubricate the high-frequency activity of markets. The introduction of two types of agents modiﬁes the value of the crossover participation rate η∗. (Bucci et al., 2019a) shows that the LLOB model with two types of agents ﬁts quantitatively extremely well the shape ofI(Q,T ) as a function of φ andη when tested on the ANcerno database. Beside the total impact of a metaorder, it is interesting to investigate the properties of the average price dynamics during and after the execution of a metaorder, because this analysis gives insightful information on the price impact dynamics and the role of information in trading. The ﬁrst problem has been investigated in (Zarinelli et al., 2015) by computing the average price path during metaorders’ execution by considering subsets of metaorders with diﬀerent duration T and participation rate η. Again, large samples are required due to the high level of noise in this type of data and ANcerno dataset allows to perform robust statistical analyses. One of the investigated question is whether, given two metaorders with the same participation rateη and diﬀerent durations T1 and T2 (T1 < T2), the market impact reached at time T1 is the same for the two metaorders. The empirical answer is clearly negative: The market impact trajectories deviate from the market impact surface. For small participation rates, this eﬀect is stronger and price trajectories are 16 well above the immediate impact. Moreover, in most cases the price reverts before the end of the metaorder (see also (Bacry et al., 2015)), while for largerη, the price trajectories become closer and closer to the values of the impact surface. The observation of non-overlapping trajectories might be explained in terms of executions with variable participation rate. A front-loaded execution, i.e., an execution with a decreasing participation rate, produces a strong impact at the beginning and a milder impact toward the end, as observed in real data. This choice might be due to risk aversion (Almgren and Chriss, 2001) or to the attempt to catch as much liquidity on the book as possible. It is quite interesting to observe that the TIM model with a front-loaded execution is able to reproduce the observed fact that price impact trajectories revert during the execution of the metaorder. On the contrary, a model with permanent impact, such as the Almgren-Chriss model, (Almgren and Chriss, 2001) always gives monotonic price trajectories if the sign of the trades is uniform. The behavior of price after the end of the metaorder is more complicated to estimate, in part because the noise level is even larger than during the metaorder execution. The observed average price dynamics is consistent with a reversion of the price with respect to the value reached at the end of the execution. This is another conﬁrmation of the transient nature of market impact as described, for example, by the TIM. The long term value of the price is even more complicated to estimate for several reasons. First, the very slow decay of impact requires to measure impact on a long time horizon, when volatility eﬀects become dominant. Second, end of day eﬀect and overnight returns could make diﬃcult to estimate permanent impact if the decay continues the days after the metaorder execution. Third, metaorders are sometimes split over multiple days creating an autocorrelation of metaorders, which makes hard to estimate the ‘bare’ decay of price impact. From a theoretical point of view, in the ‘fair pricing’ theory of (Farmer et al., 2013) an equilib- rium condition is derived between liquidity providers and a broker aggregating informed metaorders from several funds. The theory predicts that the average price payed during the execution is equal to the price at the end of the reversion phase. If metaorder size distribution is power law with tail exponent 3/2 (as empirically observed), the impact is predicted to decay towards a plateau value whose height is 2/3 of the peak impact, i.e. the impact reached exactly when the metaorder execution is completed. Interestingly, several empirical studies reports results compatible with the 2 /3 factor (Moro et al., 2009; Zarinelli et al., 2015; Bershova and Rakhlin, 2013; Waelbroeck and Gomes, 2015) although the latter paper notes that the impact of uninformed trades appears to relax to zero. On the other hand, (Brokmann et al., 2015) underlines the importance of metaorders split over many successive days, as this may strongly bias upwards the apparent plateau value. After accounting for metaorder autocorrelations (from a single fund), the paper concludes that impact decays as a power-law over several days, with no clear asymptotic value. A more extensive analysis has been performed using the ANcerno database in (Bucci et al., 2018) which shows that while at the end of the same day the average price is on average close to 2 /3 of the peak impact, the decay continues the next days, following a power-law function at short time scales, and apparently converges to a non-zero asymptotic value at long time scales (roughly 50 days) close to 1 /3 of the peak impact. For such long time lags, however, market noise becomes dominant and makes it diﬃcult to conclude 17 on the asymptotic value of impact, which is a proxy for the (long time) information content of the trades. 7 Co-impact In the previous section, market impact of a metaorder is deﬁned by conditioning only on its prop- erties (size and duration). However, in a given day there is typically a large number of funds simultaneously trading the same stock. As empirically observed in (Zarinelli et al., 2015) by inves- tigating the ANcerno database, there is a clear tendency of traders to send metaorders with the same sign (buy or sell) on the same asset. The reason for this coherent behavior are manyfold, but probably the most important one is related to the similarity of trading strategies among institu- tional investors. One can thus ask how the presence of other metaorders, modiﬁes market impact and the associated transaction cost of a given metaorder. This crowding eﬀect on market impact has been termed co-impact (Bucci et al., 2020). We are thus changing the conditioning variables in the deﬁnition of market impact by considering a vector of simultaneously present metaorders. We will then averaging this quantity by using their joint distribution, keeping as conditioning variable the metaorder whose impact we are interested in. (Bucci et al., 2020) investigates how the expected open to close daily logreturn ∆p(d)≡ logpclose/popen depends on the order ﬂow generated by the ANcerno metaorders. Consider a day whenN metaorders are simultaneously present, each described by ˜φi≡ ϵiQi/V , (i = 1,...,N ), where V is again the average daily volume and ϵi and Qi are, respectively, the sign and the size of the i-th metaorder. Deﬁning the vector ˜ϕN = (˜φ1,.., ˜φN), the quantity of interest is I( ˜ϕN)≡ E[∆p(d)| ˜ϕN] (20) This is however a function ofN variables and some parametric restriction must be made to estimate it from data. (Bucci et al., 2020) empirically ﬁnds that the above quantity is well described by I( ˜ϕN) = Y·fδ(Φ), where ˜Φ = ∑N i=1 ˜φi and fδ(v) = sgn(v)|v|δ with δ≃ 1/2. Thus the average price mainly reacts with a square root law to the total net order ﬂow of ongoing metaorders. This means that the market, due also to the fact that trading is anonymous, is unable to individually distinguish them. Despite the insensitivity of the price to individual metaorders is quite intuitive, it also raises some issues on how the square root impact can hold. Let consider a simple example where there is a buy metaorder with order ﬂow ˜φ >0, which is traded simultaneously with other metaorders with total order ﬂow ˜φm > 0. Assuming that the square root law applies for the total order ﬂow, the observed impact is E[∆p(d)|˜φ, ˜φm]∝ √ ˜φ + ˜φm (21) Keeping ˜φm ﬁxed, when ˜φ→ 0 market impact tends to a constant, for˜φ≪ ˜φm, instead, E[∆p|˜φ, ˜φm] is linear in ˜φ, and only when ˜φ≫ ˜φm a square root behavior is expected. Thus, how can a non-linear impact law survive in the presence of a large number of simultaneously executed metaorders? 18 The argument can be made mathematically more precise by asking what is the expected impact of a metaorder, labeled with k, when other N− 1 are simultaneously being executed. Given the evidence above, this impact can be written as 6 IN(˜φ)≡ E[∆p(d)|˜φk = ˜φ,N ] =Y ∫ d˜φ1...d˜φNP ( ˜ϕN|˜φk = ˜φ)fδ(˜φk + ∑ i⁄=k ˜φi) (22) One can then obtain the unconditional impact by averaging IN(˜φ) over the distribution P (N) of the number of metaorders per day. Thus IN(˜φ) depends on the joint distribution of order ﬂows P ( ˜ϕN) and (Bucci et al., 2020) derives the analytical expression for IN(˜φ) under diﬀerent speciﬁcation for it (for example multivariate Gaussian). A crossover from a linear to a square root behavior is predicted and the transition point depends on the number of metaordersN and on their correlation (more generally, statistical dependence). When N is small, a small investor will observe linear impact with a non-zero intercept I0, crossing over to a square-root law at larger ˜φ. The interceptI0 grows with the correlation between the signs of the metaorders and can be interpreted as the average impact of all the other metaorders. When the number of metaorders is large and the investor has no correlation with their average sign, one should expect on a given day a square-root impact randomly shifted upwards or downwards byI0. Averaged over all days, a pure square-root law emerges, which explains why such behavior has been reported in many empirical papers. Calibrating such model on real data requires to make some assumptions on the joint distribution P ( ˜ϕN). (Bucci et al., 2020) shows that the correlation of absolute volume fractions φi =|˜φi| is negligible, while correlation between metaorder signs plays an important role. By calibrating a simple heuristic model where a single factor drives the metaorder signs, (Bucci et al., 2020) reproduces to a good level of precision the diﬀerent regimes of the empirical market impact curves as a function of ˜φ,N, and the correlation of their signs. In particular, for a metaorder uncorrelated with the rest of the market, the impacts of other metaorders cancel out on average. Conversely, any intercept of the impact law can be interpreted as a non-zero correlation with the rest of the market. It is interesting to make a comparison with what simple models of market impact predict on price impact when many informed agents are simultaneously present. (Bagnoli et al., 2001) investigates the equilibrium in a one-period Kyle model (Kyle, 1985). N symmetrically and informed agents trade one asset in a market where uninformed agents and market makers are also present. Bagnoli et al. (2001) shows that the Kyle’s lambda, i.e. the proportionality factor between price impact and aggregated order ﬂow, scales as N−1/α, where α is the exponent of the stable law describing the price and uninformed order ﬂow distribution. Moreover if the second moment of both variables is ﬁnite, Bagnoli et al. (2001) shows that the Kyle’s lambda scales as 1/ √ N. Interestingly, Figure 3 of Bucci et al. (2020) shows that market impact of a ANcerno metaorder decreases with the number of metaorders simultaneously present. 6Note that we are conditioning on the signed volume fraction ˜φk, which, under buy-sell symmetry, is equivalent to compute the expectation of ϵk∆p(d) conditional to absolute volume fraction φ. In other words, also here we are measuring a drift term. 19 From a practical perspective, the model and the empirical observations are important for traders to estimate (pre- and post-execution) the cost of their trades, and thus to help them deciding when is the right moment to trade. For example, (Briere et al., 2020), investigating the ANcerno database, ﬁnds an approximately linear relation between the implementation shortfall of a metaorder and the net trading imbalance due to the other metaorders simultaneously traded. When the trade is in the same direction as the net order ﬂow imbalance, one could expect to pay a signiﬁcant trading cost up to 0.4 points of price volatility, while one could expect to beneﬁt from a price improvement of 0.3 points of volatility when the trader is almost alone in front of his competitors aggregate ﬂow. In a normal trading situation, the information on the ongoing metaorders is not available, thus statistical and machine learning methods could be used to infer, at least partly, this information from the visible order ﬂow. 8 Conclusion As it should be clear from this short review, in the last twenty years we have made huge progresses in understanding the important and fascinating problem of how price is formed in ﬁnancial markets as the result of order ﬂow and trading activity. This advancement is due to the availability of very detailed and rich datasets and to the development of sophisticated models able to capture, at least partly, the strong dependencies and feedbacks between orders and prices. Still much remains to do. For example, most models are inherently stationary and with ﬁxed parameters, while liquidity, as many market variables, are highly dynamic and latent. Methods from econometrics (ﬁltering, score driven models) and machine learning (reinforcement learning) can provide the tools for tackling this important aspect of market dynamics. Combining these models with optimal execution or optimal market making solutions available in real time would certainly provide a great addition for the industry. References Abergel, F. and Jedidi, A. (2015). Long-time behavior of a hawkes process-based limit order book. SIAM Journal of Financial Mathematics , 6:1026–1043. Almgren, R. and Chriss, N. (2001). Optimal execution of portfolio transactions. Journal of Risk , 3:5–40. Almgren, R., Thum, C., Hauptmann, E., and Li, H. (2005). Direct estimation of equity market impact. Risk, 18(7):5862. Bacry, E., Iuga, A., Lasnier, M., and Lehalle, C.-A. (2015). Market impacts and the life cycle of investors orders. Market Microstructure and Liquidity , 1:1550009. 20 Bacry, E., Jaisson, T., and Muzy, J. (2016). Estimation of slowly decreasing hawkes kernels: application to high-frequency order book dynamics. Quantitative Finance, 16:1179–1201. Bacry, E. and Muzy, J.-F. (2014). Hawkes model for price and trades high-frequency dynamics. Quantitative Finance, 14:1–20. Bagnoli, M., Viswanathan, S., and Holden, C. (2001). On the existence of linear equilibria in models of market making. Mathematical Finance, 11(1):1–31. Benzaquen, M. and Bouchaud, J.-P. (2018). Market impact with multi-timescale liquidity. Quan- titative Finance, 18:1781. Benzaquen, M., Mastromatteo, I., Eisler, Z., and Bouchaud, J.-P. (2017). Dissecting cross-impact on stock markets: An empirical analysis. Journal of Statistical Mechanics , 2017:023406. Bershova, N. and Rakhlin, D. (2013). The non-linear market impact of large trades: Evidence from buy-side order ﬂow. Quantitative Finance, 13(11):1759–1778. Biais, B., Hillion, P., and Spatt, C. (1995). An empirical analysis of the limit order book and order ﬂow in the paris bourse. Journal of Finance , 50:11655–1689. Bouchaud, J.-P., Farmer, J. D., and Lillo, F. (2009). How markets slowly digest changes in sup- ply and demand. In Handbook of Financial Markets: Dynamics and Evolution , pages 57–160. Elsevier. Bouchaud, J.-P., Gefen, Y., Potters, M., and Wyart, M. (2004). Fluctuations and response in ﬁnancial markets: the subtle nature of ’random’ price changes. Quantitative Finance, 4(2):176– 190. Briere, M., Lehalle, C.-H., Nefedova, T., and Raboun, A. (2020). Modeling transaction costs when trades may be crowded: A bayesian network using partially observable orders imbalance.Machine Learning for Asset Management: New Developments and Financial Applications , pages 387–430. Brokmann, X., Serie, E., Kockelkoren, J., and Bouchaud, J.-P. (2015). Slow decay of impact in equity markets. Market Microstructure and Liquidity , 1(02):1550007. Bucci, F., Benzaquen, M., Lillo, F., and Bouchaud, J.-P. (2018). Slow decay of impact in equity markets: Insights from the ancerno database. Market Microstructure and Liquidity, 4(3):1950006. Bucci, F., Benzaquen, M., Lillo, F., and Bouchaud, J.-P. (2019a). Crossover from linear to square- root market impact. Physical Review Letters, 122(10):108302. Bucci, F., Mastromatteo, I., Bouchaud, J.-P., and Benzaquen, M. (2019b). Impact is not just volatility. Quantitative Finance, 19(11):1763–1766. 21 Bucci, F., Mastromatteo, I., Eisler, Z., Lillo, F., Bouchaud, J.-P., and LeHalle, C.-A. (2020). Co- impact: crowding eﬀects in institutional trading activity. Quantitative Finance, 20(2):193–205. Chordia, T., Roll, R., and Subrahmanyam, A. (2000). Commonality in liquidity. Journal of Financial Economics, 56(1):3 – 28. Cont, R., Kukanov, A., and Stoikov, S. (2014). The price impact of order book events. Journal of Financial Econometrics, 12:47–88. Cont, R., Stoikov, S., and Talreja, R. (2010). A stochastic model for order book dynamics. Opera- tions Research, 58(3):549–563. Daniels, M. G., Farmer, J. D., Gillemot, L., Iori, G., and Smith, E. (2003). Quantitative model of price diﬀusion and market friction based on trading as a mechanistic random process. Physical Review Letters, 90(10):108102–4. Donier, J. and Bonart, J. (2015). A million metaorder analysis of market impact on the bitcoin. Market Microstructructure and Liquidity , 1:1550008. Donier, J., Bonart, J., Mastromatteo, I., and Bouchaud, J.-P. (2015). A fully consistent, minimal model for non-linear market impact. Quantitative Finance, 15:1109. Eisler, Z., Bouchaud, J.-P., and Kockelkoren, J. (2012). The price impact of order book events: Market orders, limit orders and cancellations. Quantitative Finance, 12:1395–1419. Farmer, J., Gerig, A., Lillo, F., and Waelbroeck, H. (2013). How eﬃciency shapes market impact. Quantitative Finance, 13:1743–1758. Gatheral, J. (2010). No-dynamic-arbitrage and market impact. Quantitative Finance, 10(7):749– 759. Hasbrouck, J. (1991). Measuring the information content of a trade. The Journal of Finance , 46:179–207. Hautsch, N. and Huang, R. (2012). Measuring the information content of a trade. Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control , 36:501–522. Huang, W., Lehalle, C.-A., and Rosenbaum, M. (2015). Simulating and analyzing order book data: The queue-reactive model. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 110:107–122. Kyle, A. S. (1985). Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica: Journal of the Econo- metric Society, 53:1315–1335. Large, J. (2007). Measuring the resiliency of an electronic limit order book. Journal of Financial Markets, 10:1–25. 22 Lillo, F. and Farmer, J. (2004). The long memory of the eﬃcient market. Studies in nonlinear dynamics & econometrics, 8:3. Lillo, F., Farmer, J. D., and Mantegna, R. N. (2003). Econophysics: Master curve for price-impact function. Nature, 421:129–130. Madhavan, A., Richardson, M., and Roomans, M. (1997). Why do security prices change? a transaction-level analysis of nyse stocks. Review of Financial Studies , 10:1035–1064. Mastromatteo, I., Benzaquen, M., Eisler, Z., and Bouchaud, J.-P. (2017). Trading lightly: Cross- impact and optimal portfolio execution. Risk, 30:82–87. Morariu-Patrichi, M. and Pakkanen, M. (2018). State-dependent hawkes processes and their appli- cation to limit order book modelling. arxiv.org/pdf/1809.08060. Moro, E., Vicente, J., Moyano, L. G., Gerig, A., Farmer, J. D., Vaglica, G., Lillo, F., and Mantegna, R. N. (2009). Market impact and trading proﬁle of hidden orders in stock markets. Physical Review E, 80(6):066102. Muni Toke, I. (2010). Market making in an order book model and its impact on the bid-ask spread. In Econophysics of Order-Driven Markets . Springer. Rambaldi, M., Bacry, E., and Lillo, F. (2017). The role of volume in order book dynamics: a multivariate hawkes process analysis. Quantitative Finance, 17(7):999–1020. Schneider, M. and Lillo, F. (2019). Cross-impact and no-dynamic-arbitrage. Quantitative Finance, 19(1):137–154. Sirignano, J. (2019). Deep learning for limit order books. Quantitative Finance, 19(4):549–570. Taranto, D., Bormetti, G., Bouchaud, J.-P., Lillo, F., and Toth, B. (2018). Linear models for the im- pact of order ﬂow on prices i. propagators: Transient vs. history dependent impact. Quantitative Finance, 18:903–915. Torre, N. G. and Ferrari, M. J. (1998). The market impact model. Horizons, The Barra Newsletter, 165. Toth, B., Eisler, Z., and Bouchaud, J.-P. (2016). The square-root impact law also holds for option markets. Wilmott, 85:70. Toth, B., Lemperiere, Y., Deremble, C., De Lataillade, J., Kockelkoren, J., and Bouchaud, J.-P. (2011). Anomalous price impact and the critical nature of liquidity in ﬁnancial markets. Physical Review X, 1(2):021006. 23 T´ oth, B., Lillo, F., and Farmer, J. (2010). Segmentation algorithm for non-stationary compound poisson processes. with an application to inventory time series of market members in a ﬁnancial market. European Physical Journal B, 78:235–243. Toth, B., Palit, I., Lillo, F., and Farmer, J. (2015). Why is equity order ﬂow so persistent? Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control , 51:218–239. Tsoukalas, G., Wang, J., and Giesecke, K. (2019). Dynamic portfolio execution. Management Science, 65(5):2015–2040. Vaglica, G., Lillo, F., and Mantegna, R. N. (2010). Statistical identiﬁcation with hidden markov models of large order splitting strategies in an equity market. New Journal of Physics, 11:075031. Waelbroeck, H. and Gomes, C. (2015). Is market impact a measure of the information value of trades? market response to liquidity vs. informed trades. Quantitative Finance, 15:773–793. Wu, P., Rambaldi, M., Muzy, J.-F., and Bacry, E. (2019). Queue-reactive hawkes models for the order ﬂow. arxiv.org/pdf/1901.08938. Zarinelli, E., Treccani, M., Farmer, J. D., and Lillo, F. (2015). Beyond the square root: Evidence for logarithmic dependence of market impact on size and participation rate. Market Microstructure and Liquidity, 1(02):1550004. 24