Time-dependent relations between gaps and returns in a Bitcoin order book Roberto Mota Navarro, 1, a) Paulino Monroy Castillero, 2, b) and Francois Leyvraz 1, c) 1)Instituto de Ciencias F´ ısicas, Universidad Nacional Aut´ onoma de M´ exico, Cuernavaca, Morelos, 62210, M´ exico. 2)Department of Solar Energy and Environmental Physics, Swiss Institute for Dryland Environmental and Energy Research, Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research (BIDR), Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Sede Boqer Campus, 8499000 Midreshet Ben-Gurion, Israel (Dated: 8 June 2021) Several studies have shown that large changes in the returns of an asset are associated with the sized of the gaps present in the order book In general, these associations have been studied without explicitly considering the dynamics of either gaps or returns. Here we present a study of these relationships. Our results suggest that the causal relationship between gaps and returns is limited to instantaneous causation. I. INTRODUCTION The study of ﬁnancial markets has revealed that some of the properties of the price formation process can be explained to a great extent as a consequence of the mar- ket structures upon which trading is conducted rather than as a consequence of the trading strategies employed by the market participants 1–4. One such example are continuous double auction markets, in which trades are mediated via a limit order book. Several studies have shown that the statistical proper- ties of the orders stored in a limit order book have an eﬀect on price formation. For example, an agent based model proposed by Farmer et al. 2 is able to predict 96% of the variance in the spread of 11 stocks, even though the model has only one free parameter and assumes no rationality-based strategies in the agents, showing that the structure of an order book alone plays a big role in the price formation process. Goldstein et al 3, report that as a consequence of decreasing the minimum price varia- tion (tick size) between orders in the NYSE, going from 1/8 to 1/16 of a dollar, the spreads and volumes reduced their sizes, favoring thus participants which consume liq- uidity from the book. Other studies have shown that there are statistical re- lationships between the density of price levels occupied by limit orders in the book and the price ﬂuctuations. In the agent based models presented by Tilo et al, and Cristelli et al 5,6, it was shown that when large gaps be- tween occupied large levels are present in the book, the tails of the returns distribution become fat, so that large changes in price are more common. Of particular rele- vance to the investigation of the relationships between order book structure and price dynamics is the empiri- cal study conducted by Farmer et al7, which showed that contrary to the intuitive assumption of large price ﬂuctu- ations being a consequence of orders with large volumes a)Electronic mail: robertomota@ﬁsca.unam.mx b)Electronic mail: monroyca@post.bgu.ac.il c)Electronic mail: leyvraz@ﬁsca.unam.mx arriving to the book 8 and consuming several occupied price levels in a single event, the largest ﬂuctuations are actually caused by the presence of large gaps in the order book. These studies suggest that there is a relationship re- sembling causality between the gaps in the order book and the returns in the sense that large price ﬂuctuations seem to appear only when large gaps are present in the book. To reach this conclusion, the aforementioned works rely on comparisons among members of a population of order books and in the observation of the properties of the returns and gaps collected over time, without track- ing the changes in gap sizes over time and the subsequent changes in returns they would induce. Thus it is natural to wonder whether, in addition to the results obtained at a population level already reported in the literature, one can observe the same causal relation- ship in a single instance of an order book as the evolution of the gaps is tracked over time. To help us answer this question, we make use of direct causal discovery methods that are designed to take into account the chronological order of the states of the gaps and returns so that we are able to determine if a cause and eﬀect correspondence exists in this scenario. The conﬁrmation and quantiﬁca- tion of a causal relationships between the present state of the gaps and the future states of the returns could, in principle, allow us to build improved volatility forecast- ing models that take into account the granularity of the order book as a regressor variable. In the following we will focus our analysis on a data set from the Bitcoin/USD market because extensive order book states were available freely. The structure of the remaining sections is as follows. In section II we discuss the methods employed to repre- sent the states of the order book as a set of multivariate time series which is then divided into non-adjacent time windows in order to extract diﬀerent statistics from each of them, as well as the procedure to obtain the correlation function average. Then we describe the two causal dis- covery methods applied: Granger causality and Additive Noise Models (ANM). Section III contains the results of the correlation and causality tests between the diﬀerent series extracted from the data, and ﬁnally we discuss the arXiv:2106.02187v2 [q-fin.ST] 7 Jun 2021 2 relevance of these results and conclude on section IV. II. METHODS A. Data pre-processing We analyzed a set of order book states from the Bit- coin trading platform BTC-e containing the ﬁrst 20 price levels of each side of the book at a resolution of 10 sec- onds per state. The data ranges from January 2015 to August 2016 but only 14 months from this time span were included in our study since we discarded months with missing data. The months discarded are June, July and September of 2015 and January and March of 2016. The raw data of the order book can be described as follows: let an t (bn t ) denote thenth ask (bid) price discrete time indexed by t, with n = 1 corresponding to the best ask (bid). n runs from 1 to 20 in our data set. We then deﬁne the gaps gl 1(t) = ln(al+1 t /al t) (1a) gl 2(t) = ln(bl+1 t /bl t) (1b) forl∈{ 1, 2,..., 19}. We then choose a window size τ and deﬁne the time series of the maximum gaps (that is, the 100th percentiles) for a given month of data as g100(k) = max 1≤n≤19,m∈{1,2} kτ≤t<(k+1)τ gn m(t) (2) where the k∈{ 0, 1,...,⌊T τ⌋− 1} are the temporal indices of the windows, T is the amount of order book states in the given month of data at the maximum resolution of 10 seconds per state and ⌊·⌋ indicates the ﬂoor function. We deﬁneg50(k) as the time series of median gaps (that is, the 50th percentiles) in a similar way. This procedure is illustrated in ﬁgure 1. The returns are deﬁned as r(t) = ln (p(t)/p(t− 1)) (3) wherept = (a1 t +b1 t )/2 is the middle price at timet. We chose to use middle prices in order to be consistent with previous works 6,7 that explore the relationship between gaps and returns. From these we obtain the series of maximum returns which are deﬁned as r100(k) = max kτ≤t<(k+1)τ r(t) (4) with a similar deﬁnition for the median returns r50(k). The reasons behind our choice to split the data into windows are two. The ﬁrst is that by using the middle price to estimate the returns, a spurious and systematic dependence between the ﬁrst gaps and the returns is in- troduced; by utilizing windows we can mitigate this eﬀect to some extent. The second reason is that in a real ﬁ- nancial market one would usually not be concerned with FIG. 1. Procedure to obtain the series of maximum (me- dian) gaps (returns). We divide the series s(t)into a disjoint windows and extract from within each of these windows the maximum (median) value ofs(t). In the case of the gaps, the series are multivariate, containing 20 price levels per side of the book. estimating the size of the return in the next instant of time, but rather the size of the maximum return within a given future time interval, which is precisely what causal discovery methods are equipped to do if a causal rela- tionship is indeed present in the data. B. Gaps-Returns cross-correlation functions Once the series of the maximum (median) gaps and returns are obtained, we compute the average of corre- lation functions obtained locally over small periods of time between the gaps and return statistics via the fol- lowing procedure: the gap and return series G(k) and R(k) (hereG(k) stands for either g100(k) org50(k), simi- larly forR(k)) are partitioned into J disjoint windows of length ~τ. Next, a local correlation function is associated to the j th window in the returns, which is left ﬁxed, by calculating its cross-correlations with a sequence of win- dows of length ~τ located on G(k). Each window on G(k) has a lag in the index k relative to the ﬁxed j th window in R(t), and is thus identiﬁed with its corresponding lag valuel∈{− ~τ,−~τ + 1,..., ~τ− 1, ~τ}. In this way, we end up with the local correlation function Cj(l) = 1 ~τσGσR t+~τ∑ i=t (Ri− ¯R)(Gi+l− ¯G) (5) associated to the j th returns window, as shown in ﬁgure 2. Here ¯R and ¯G denote the averages andσG andσR the standard deviations of the returns and gaps within the j th window respectively. Finally, once we obtain all the local correlation functions associated to each one of the J windows in the disjoint partition of R(k), we calculate the average local correlation function between G(k) and 3 R(k) as C(l) = 1 J N∑ j=1 Cj(l) (6) FIG. 2. Measurement of local correlation functions. A local correlation function between two series of maximums s100(k) and r100(k) obtained as shown in ﬁgure 2 is computed by freezing a time window in s100(k) and calculating its corre- lations with a collection of lagged time windows in r100(k). By changing the location of the non-sliding window without intersecting its previous locations we end up with an ensem- ble of local correlation functions between s100(k) andr100(k), with one function for each non overlapping frozen window in s100(k). By averaging over the ensemble of local correlation functions we make sure to highlight the geometrical prop- erties that are present in a majority of the local functions and mitigate ﬂuctuations around the average behavior. C. Granger causality tests It is said that a signal X(t) Granger-causes another signal Y (t) if a linear model including both the past of the explained variableY (t) and the causing variableX(t) generates better predictions of the future of Y (t) than a linear model using only the past of Y (t). The perfor- mance of each model is evaluated by minimizing their sums of squared residuals (SSR) and comparing them, with a smaller quantity indicating better prediction ca- pability of the model. There are various ways in which a Granger causality test can be conducted, the particular implementation used in this work is as follows. A linear autoregressive model with a lag of p (AR(L)) is ﬁt to Y (t): YR(t) =cR + L∑ l=1 αlY (t−l) +ϵ(t) (7) This linear regression of the explained variable is called the restricted model. Another linear regression of Y (t), called full model, is also ﬁtted, but this time with the inclusion of past realizations of X(t) as regressors: YF (t) =cF + L∑ l=1 αlY (t−l) + L∑ l=1 βlX(t−l) +η(t) (8) With α,β,c R,cF being the ﬁtted coeﬃcients of the models and ϵ(t),η (t) the error terms. The index t runs from t = 1 to t =T . The hypothesis test formulated to assert whetherX(t) Granger causes Y (t) is that the predictions of the full model are not statistically better than those of the re- stricted model. To determine this, a standard F-test is usually performed, with the statistic s = (SSRR−SSRF )/L SSRF/(T− 2L− 1) (9) which follows, under a certain set of assumptions, an FL,T−2L−1 distribution, thus allowing one to compute the probability of having observed a given diﬀerence in variances between both linear models. Usually one ﬁnishes a Granger causality test with an aﬃrmation (or negation) of the causal relationship be- tweenX(t) andY (t), when the hypothesis was discarded (or not), under a signiﬁcance level of p (the p value). In this work we rather based our conclusions directly on the statistics since this number serves as a proxy for the size of the eﬀect that the inclusion of X(t) has on the pre- dictability of Y (t), beyond merely answering in a binary way whether the presence of such a relationship is statis- tically defensible. The reason to proceed in this manner is that the distribution observed fors diﬀers from the ex- pected F-distribution, which is unsurprising, since both the returns and gaps display fat tails. To make the eﬀect sizes easier to interpret, we deﬁne them simply as s = (SSRR−SSRF ) SSRF , (10) where we do not normalize by the degrees of freedom of the F distribution corresponding to the test statistic s, such modiﬁcation does not alter the qualitative aspects of the results since we compare them with adequate con- trols. We will present the results of the Granger causality tests as a histogram of thes values as they vary from one time window to the next and compare this with surrogate data which arise from a random shuﬄe of the original data, and should thus not show causal behavior. We will use the nomenclature standard Granger to re- fer to the tests that only take into consideration lagged versions of the suspect causal variable and instantaneous Granger for the tests that include the causal variable with zero lag, as described in 9. The instantaneous Granger causality tests are im- portant because they will allow us to better distin- guish whether the eﬀects are essentially instantaneous or whether they can be used for forecasting. D. Additive Noise Model causal discovery Causal discovery through Additive Noise Models (ANM)10 is a technique in which the explained variable 4 Y is modeled as a function of the causing variableX with an additive and independent noise term ϵ that acts as a proxy of the cumulative eﬀect of every other latent causal variable that could aﬀect the explained variable. So, the explained variable Y is modeled as: Y =f(X) +ϵ. (11) The central idea behind this technique is to assume that the data from two time series {(xi,yi),i = 1,..., ˜τ} are variates of a pair of random variables X and Y , and that they are related via a one-way causal relationship X → Y in which X directly aﬀects Y without the in- verse relationship existing at the same time (that is, Y aﬀecting X) and assuming that any other causal eﬀect that could come from causal variables other than X can be represented as additive noise ϵ, independent of X, as shown in equation 11. To conduct a causality test by ANM one ﬁrst needs to obtain an estimation of the function f which we will denote ˆf via a suitable regression method and then, from ˆf, obtain the residuals ˆϵi as: ˆϵi =yi− ˆf(xi). (12) After this is done, one tests the assumption that the variableX is independent of ϵ. This can be done, given the regression analysis, by looking for a correlation betweenxi and the residuals ˆϵi. In this work we made use of the Python package Causal Discovery Toolbox (CDT) 11 which includes a module for ANM discovery. The CDT implementation uses Gaussian Process Regression 12 to perform the regression analysis and a standard test for independence, namely, the Hilbert Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) 13 to measure the dependence betweenX andϵ. Let us denote the magnitude of the HSIC statistic by ZX→Y ≥ 0, this serves as an estimation of the possibly non-linear corre- lation between xi and the residuals ˆϵi. If ZX→Y is big enough so that a correlation is detected, then it is dis- carded that X and Y follow an additive noise model in the direction X→Y . With these deﬁnitions at hand we now denote the eﬀect size of the ANM causal discovery method as the score: SX,Y =ZY→X−ZX→Y (13) which is also provided by the CDT implementation. The advantage of using the score SX,Y overZX→Y is that in order to validate an ANM in the direction X→ Y it is not enough to obtain a low value of ZX→Y , but also a high value ofZY→X to be able to discard the causal rela- tionship in the opposite direction. Indeed, merely having a low value of ZX→Y , does not distinguish between X causing Y and X being independent from Y. In this way the sign of SX,Y indicates the direction of the causal re- lationship if such a relationship is detected. III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION A. Correlations over time We measured the correlations as a function of time between the maximum and median gaps and returns by splitting the order book multivariate series into disjoint windows of 60 time steps at a resolution of 10 seconds per time step. Next, we extracted from each of these windows the 50th and 100th percentiles (median and maximum), as described by equation 2. Once we derived the se- ries of maximums and medians at the selected scale, we proceeded to calculate the average correlation function between them using a sliding window of 100 data points, where each data point is one of the maximums or me- dians extracted previously at a scale of 60 time steps. This procedure was executed on each month of data sep- arately. The average local correlation function between the percentile series was then computed. Figures 3 and 4 show the correlation functions between the complete set of gaps and the returns and between only the ﬁrst gaps and the returns, respectively. Note that the magni- tude of the correlations is greatest when considering the maximum events, and quickly decreases in size as one considers lower percentiles, in particular, the correlation between the medians (50th percentile) is very small, com- pared to the correlation between the maximums. For the computation of the correlation functions we considered two diﬀerent scenarios: either we limited the set of gaps from which we extracted the maximum and medians to just the gaps in the ﬁrst position, or we ex- tracted them from the complete set of available gaps. When only the ﬁrst gaps are considered ( g1 1 and g1 2), we observe that the maximum correlation between any pair of percentiles is attained at zero lag, having lower values for negative and positive lags. When the complete set of gaps is used, on the other hand, the 100 th and 99th percentiles (the maximums) attain their maximum cor- relation at lag zero but the median (percentile 50) has its maximum at positive lags. Since the returns are the ones being ﬁxed, the delayed position of the maximum correlation in the median implies that return statistics in the present are associated with future gap statistics. The reasons behind the delayed position of the maximum are unclear but they do not entail a causal relationship between gaps and returns. The median size of gaps does not correlate as strongly to the median size of returns as do the maximums. By constrast, the correlation between the median return and the maximum gap is not as weak, as shown in ﬁgure 5, thus, both the typical and maximum size of returns are statistically associated with the maximum gaps. 5 FIG. 3. Average local correlations between the maximum (p = 100), 99th percentile ( p = 99) and median ( p = 50) of the full gaps and returns. There is an abrupt change in the magnitude of the correlations as one considers percentiles other than the maximum. At a lg of zero, the correlations of 99th percentiles are almost 4 times smaller than those between the maximums. FIG. 4. When only the ﬁrst gaps ( g1 1 and g1 2) are considered, the correlations between the maximums, 99th percentiles and median gaps and returns decrease gradually as lower per- centiles are taken into consideration in sharp contrast with the correlations of the full gaps. FIG. 5. Average local correlations between the median re- turns and maximum gaps. The correlation average is greater than in the previous case between the median of both vari- ables. Return sizes ranging from the typical value (50th per- centile) to the maximum value (100th percentile) are associ- ated with the maximum gap size. These results also hold for window sizes diﬀerent from 100 time steps. B. Granger causality tests The fact that the correlation functions do not vanish immediately for lags diﬀerent from zero is compatible with a causal relationship but insuﬃcient to demonstrate it. A direct causality measure such as Granger causal- ity can be used in order to distinguish whether the rela- tionships observed are consistent with the idea of causal eﬀects or are better explained as correlations. For this purpose, aside from the correlation functions between the gap and return percentiles, we conducted simple Granger causality tests in both causal directions: gaps to returns and vice-versa. The Granger tests were conducted at four diﬀerent timescales ( τ = 30, 60, 90 or 120 steps at 10 seconds per step) by dividing each month of the series r50,r 100,g 50 and g100 into disjoint windows with a length of ~τ = 500 time steps, as described in ﬁgure 6. This segmentation has the purpose of increasing the sample size of causality scores, which would be too small if we only conducted the tests on the 14 months of available data. It is important to remark that within the series r50,r 100,g 50 and g100, each time step corresponds to either a maximum or a median gap (return) taken over a scale τ as mentioned before. FIG. 6. Illustration of the partitioning of each month of data into windows to increase the sample size of the Granger tests. A given month (January in the ﬁgure) of a series obtained as described in 1 is partitioned into disjoint windows of ˜τ = 500 time steps and a Granger test is conducted between each pair of windows. This procedure is performed on all 14 months of data available and the results are collected to compute the various distributions of Granger causality scores of ﬁgures 7 and 8. The maximum lag over the windows (indexed byk) was chosen via the Bayesian information criterion 14(BIC), which was performed on the auto-regressive models of each series with lag values ranging from l = 1 to l = 10. We chose the value of l that achieved the minimum me- dian BIC across this range of lags and across all values of τ. The eﬀect sizes, corresponding to the non-normalized s statistic mentioned previously (see eq 10), are shown in the ﬁgure 7, where the red histograms correspond to 6 the results of the tests on the original data while the blue ones to the tests of randomly shuﬄed copies of the data, used as controls. Except for relationship between the median returns and gaps, the distributions of causality scores of the controls and the real data have very similar shapes and supports and very few tests achieved statis- tical signiﬁcance under a critical value of p=0.01, with only 12% of tests surpassing the critical value in the case of the relationship g100→ r100 and 10% in the case of r100→g100. In the standard Granger tests as well as in the ones that include instantaneous eﬀects, no asymmetry be- tween the eﬀect sizes of both causal directions g100 → r100 and r100 → g100 is evident, as such, it is roughly equally likely to measure a given eﬀect size in either di- rection. FIG. 7. Eﬀect sizes for the Granger causality tests. Red corresponds to the tests conducted on the original data and blue to the tests on shuﬄed surrogates. The dotted black line marks the critical value corresponding to a p-value of p=0.01. Since the random shuﬄing destroys any time dependence be- tween time series, the shuﬄed surrogates represent the null hypothesis of no causality between gaps and returns. The distributions of eﬀect sizes of the tests conducted on the real data are very similar to those conducted on the surrogates both in the shape and support of their distributions, in ac- cordance to a lack of a Granger causal relationship between these two signals. When instantaneous windows of the causal variable are added in the linear regressions of the explained variables, that is, when the minimum lag in the regressive models is zero, a very diﬀerent result is observed, as shown in ﬁgure 8. Although the controls and the real data distributions are similar for the medians, for the maximums the shapes of the distributions become very dissimilar and the eﬀect sizes blow up, with 100% of the tests achieving statistical Standard Instant g100→r100 0.12 1.00 r100→g100 0.10 1.00 g50→r50 0.04 0.11 r50→g50 0.30 0.27 TABLE I. Proportions of statistically signiﬁcant causality scores in the Granger tests for the null hypothesis of no causal eﬀect under a p-value of p=0.01. The standard tests throw a very small number of signiﬁcant tests. When we consider the inclusion of instantaneous windows in the linear models of the test, the causality scores blow up, with every single test surpassing the critical region, in the case of the maximum gaps/returns. The medians remain with low percentages of signiﬁcant tests. signiﬁcance in both causal directions. This suggests that we do not detect a true causality allowing to forecast return sizes reliably from the knowledge of gaps. FIG. 8. Eﬀect sizes for the Granger causality tests with in- stantaneous regression term. This time the distributions of eﬀect sizes between the original data and the controls are very diﬀerent when considering the maximums in both causal directions. The median pairs still are remarkably similar. C. Additive Noise Models tests Now we describe the results of the application of causal discovery by means of Additive Noise Models. Since ANM tests do not inherently consider the chronologi- cal order between the causal and explained variables as Granger causality does, we performed tests between the gap and return percentile series considering no lag be- tween them, which corresponds to instantaneous causal 7 relationships, and between lagged versions of the series, mimicking the chronological order taken of the standard Granger causality tests. There are two key diﬀerences between this way of forcing chronological order into the ANM tests and the way in which Granger causality nat- urally considers time via the lags in its regressive models. The ﬁrst diﬀerence is that for a given maximum lag value τ ∈ N, the test of Granger takes into account lagged observations ranging from 1 to τ time-steps in the past while the ANM test will only consider a lag of τ time- steps. The second diﬀerence is that in the case of non- zero lags, only the positive results have meaning since negative causality scores would correspond to causal ef- fects from the series located in the future to the series located in the past. FIG. 9. Eﬀect sizes for the ANM tests applied to the maxi- mum returns and gaps with a lag value of L = 0. A positive eﬀect size (Sg100,r100) corresponds to a causal eﬀect from the gaps size to the returns size and a negative one ( −Sr100,g100) to an eﬀect from the returns to the gaps. The dotted black lines mark the two-tailed critical values corresponding to a p-value of p=0.01. The shapes of the control and data distri- butions are very dissimilar and a signiﬁcant proportion of the cases fall far away from the tails of the controls. The results of the ANM tests, shown in ﬁgures 9,10, 11 and table II, are in agreement with the Granger causality tests in both cases: the case where no lag is considered, which shows the highest deviation of causality scores with respect to the control scores distribution, and the lagged cases, where the distribution of scores becomes similar to the control distribution, even when considering a lag of a single time step. For the causal relationships between the medians, no statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect is found independently of the value of the lag since the ANM causality scores are totally contained within the values of the control distri- bution. A peculiarity of the causality scores between the medians is that these are all negative for the data and the controls. A possible explanation of this phenomenon is given in the discussion section. We repeated the Granger and ANM tests between the gaps and two diﬀerent deﬁnitions of volatility: as the av- erage of absolute logarithmic returns and as the standard deviation of logarithmic returns. We obtain the same FIG. 10. Eﬀect sizes for the ANM tests for the causal re- lationship g100 → r100 with positive lag values. Only the positive causality scores correspond to a detection of causal eﬀects since negative values would imply that the future re- turn sizes have an eﬀect on past gap sizes. The dotted black lines mark the one-tailed critical values corresponding to a p-value of p=0.01. As opposed to the case with zero lag, now the shapes of the control and data distributions are similar and only a small fraction of the tests fall far from the tails of the controls. L = 0 L = 1 L = 3 L = 7 g100→r100 0.35 0.12 0.05 0.03 r100→g100 0.21 0.26 0.08 0.03 TABLE II. Proportions of statistically signiﬁcant causality scores in the ANM tests at a level of p = 0.01. We see that mostly when the gaps and returns series are considered with- out a lag a considerable proportion of tests are statistically signiﬁcant. qualitative results in those tests and could not discard the null hypothesis of absence of a causal relationship. IV. DISCUSSION A. Simultaneous causal relationships There are statistical associations between the maxi- mum gaps and maximum returns and the maximum gaps and median returns that do not immediately die oﬀ as evidenced by the correlation functions shown in ﬁgures 4 and 5. With the exception of the median gaps and re- 8 FIG. 11. Eﬀect sizes for the ANM tests for the causal relation- ship r100→ g100 with positive lag values. Only the positive scores are associated to realistic causal eﬀects. The dotted black lines mark the one-tailed critical values corresponding to a p-value of p=0.01. Again, the shapes of the control and data distributions are similar and few tests fall outside the critical zone under p = 0.01. turns, these correlations attain their highest magnitude at zero lag in a similar way to that in which the causality tests attain the highest scores when the observations are taken into account with the inclusion of instantaneous windows. In such scenario, all the tests for Granger causality be- come statistically signiﬁcant in both causal directions: g100 → r100 and r100 → g100, which only indicate a strong simultaneous relationship between maximum gaps and maximum returns but without pointing out a par- ticular direction (ﬁgure 8), this indicates that there is no direction to the “causality” observed. Furthermore, the ANM tests diﬀer signiﬁcantly at both tails of the causality scores distribution with respect to the control distribution (ﬁgure 9). So, with the inclusion of instantaneous time periods, the Granger tests fully reject the null hypothesis of no causal eﬀect. Similarly, although the ANM tests do not fall completely outside of the control distribution sup- port, they make it diﬃcult to accept the null hypothesis since more than half of the tests reach statistical signiﬁ- cance with a diﬀerence of 1.66 times more tests favoring the direction g100 → r100 than the opposite direction r100→g100. These results imply that there is a link between the size of the maximum gap and maximum return of mid- dle price within the same time interval [ t,t +τ]. There- fore, the correlation functions and the causality tests with instantaneous windows are consistent with the results shown in previous literature 6,7 since they show that the existence of large gaps in the book is associated with the generation of large returns, when returns are deﬁned as mid-price returns. There are, however, caveats with the positive results of the instantaneous causality tests: since the returns were deﬁned as a function of the middle price, an artiﬁcial de- pendence of the returns on the ﬁrst gaps of the order book is induced. The maximum gap is usually the ﬁrst one: in the data analyzed around 30% of the maximum gaps are located at the ﬁrst level, as shown in ﬁgure 12. Ap- pearance or disappearance of solely a ﬁrst gap due to any reason (limit orders placements, cancellations or transac- tions) implies a change of mid-price proportional to the size of that ﬁrst gap. Thus, maximum returns within the time interval [t,t +τ] often correspond to changes when the ﬁrst gap is also the maximum gap. This correspon- dence naturally rises a strong statistical relation between the sizes of the maximum returns and the ﬁrst gaps. FIG. 12. Distribution of the positions at which the maximum gaps is located. The sign of the positions correspond to the sides od the book: positive for the asks and negative for the bids. That is, a value of −1 indicates the ﬁrst gap in the bids and correspondingly, a value of 1 indicates the ﬁrst gap in the asks. It can be seen that is unlikely to ﬁnd the maximum gap beyond the ﬁfth position, with a probability of roughly 30% of being located in the ﬁrst position of either side. For these reasons we must be very careful when inter- preting the positive results of the instantaneous causality tests. B. Time lagged causal relationships With respect to the standard causal scenario where lagged versions of the observations are considered, both the Granger and ANM tests throw mostly non-signiﬁcant results (7, 10, 11 and table II). Among all tests, only few of them achieve statistical signiﬁcance, so their distribu- tions for each case are very similar to their respective control distributions. This similarity is important since randomly permuted surrogates keep the same moments 9 and distribution as the original data but any structure that depends on the temporal order is destroyed15, which turns them into a very aggressive control scenario. So, even when we destroy all chronological structure we get very similar causality score distributions to the ones ob- tained in the original data, a result that strongly suggests the absence of a cause and eﬀect relationship. FIG. 13. Distribution of gap sizes for the median and maxi- mum gaps. It can be seen that the maximum gaps explore a bigger support than the median gaps and that the cuantiza- tion of the gaps induced by the minimum price change of 0.01 USD is very present in the median gaps. The inset shows a fragment of the median gaps as a function of time, and, as expected from the support of distribution, the time series is heavily discretized. As mentioned earlier, all the ANM tests for the medi- ans resulted non statistically signiﬁcant since the support of the distribution of causality scores from the data is completely contained within the support of the controls distribution, with the peculiarity that in all tests, both in the data and the controls, the test statistic is nega- tive. This would suggest the causal direction r50→ g50 if the tests were statistically signiﬁcant, which is not the case. Aside from that, the correlation function between the median gaps and returns shown in Figure 3 and the distribution of Granger causality test eﬀect sizes in the direction r50→g50 shown in Figure 7 could suggest the existence of a small causal eﬀect on the median size of the gaps stemming from the median returns. We think this is not the case since the median gaps usually reside above the ﬁrst levels in the order book, where the mar- ket activity rarely consumes volume. Although we do not have deﬁnite answer to this issue, a possible expla- nation could be that this is an artifact of the quantized nature of the median gap sizes along with the fact that the median gaps explore only a small region of possible values, as opposed to the maximum gaps that explore a wide range of values from a few cents to several dollars, as seen in Figure 13. Taken together, the nullity of the standard causality tests suggest that the size of the largest return found within the time interval [t +τ + 1,t + 2τ + 1] can not be causally linked to the size of the largest gap found in the preceding interval [t,t +τ], again, to the extent of the causality deﬁnitions assumed by the techniques we used and the time scales we explored. It does not appear to be the case that the results found previously in the literature explaining the diﬀerences in the tails of the returns distributions of diﬀerent compa- nies as a consequence of the granularity of their respec- tive order books apply when the granularity of a single order book is tracked over time. This could be a partic- ularity the bitcoin/dollar market so a replication of this study on the stock market would be of use to test for this possibility. V. CONCLUSIONS The work presented here broadens previous works on the relationship between the granularity of the order book and the returns across a population of order books in which we took into consideration a single instance of an order book and tracked the evolution of the gap sizes across time with the aid of causal discovery methods in an attempt to test the hypothesis of the presence of large gaps in the book as a primary source of large returns. We have shown for the Bitcoin/USD trading platform BTC- e, that the evolution across time of large price ﬂuctua- tions does not seem to be a consequence of ﬂuctuations in the size of the gaps present in the book in the sense that having access to the present state of the gaps appears to be of little use to create estimates of the future size of maximum returns in future windows of time. On the other hand, when the same time interval is considered in both the series of gaps and returns, we found that the the size of the maximum gap is an excellent predictor of the size of the maximum return. These results could be a particularity of the ﬁnancial market that we studied or of the minimum time scales imposed by the data but at the very least they impose restrictions on the temporal hori- zon and precise deﬁnition of causal relationship that one can expect between the granularity of the book and the tail properties of the returns. Knowing such restrictions can be of help to better guide the sources of informa- tion considered in the creation of volatility forecasting models. A replication of our tests on diﬀerent markets, at smaller timescales and possibly with complementary causal discovery tools would be of much use to obtain stronger constraints on the conclusion that knowledge of the state of the gaps in the order book does not seem to beneﬁt the estimation of future price ﬂuctuations. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank Hern´ an Larralde for his help- ful discussion and feedback. The authors gratefully ac- knowledge the ﬁnancial support from CONACyT, Grant Nos. Proyecto Fronteras 201 and CONACyT CB 254515, 10 and the UNAM PAPIIT research, Grant No. IN113620. Roberto Mota Navarro thanks CONACyT for a Ph.D. scholarship. 1Bruno Biais, Pierre Hillion, and Chester Spatt. An empirical analysis of the limit order book and the order ﬂow in the paris bourse. the Journal of Finance , 50(5):1655–1689, 1995. 2J Doyne Farmer, Paolo Patelli, and Ilija I Zovko. The predictive power of zero intelligence in ﬁnancial markets. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 102(6):2254–2259, 2005. 3Michael A Goldstein and Kenneth A Kavajecz. Eighths, six- teenths, and market depth: changes in tick size and liquidity pro- vision on the nyse. Journal of Financial Economics , 56(1):125– 149, 2000. 4Martin D Gould, Mason A Porter, Stacy Williams, Mark Mc- Donald, Daniel J Fenn, and Sam D Howison. Limit order books. Quantitative Finance, 13(11):1709–1742, 2013. 5Thilo A Schmitt, Rudi Sch¨ afer, Michael C M¨ unnix, and Thomas Guhr. Microscopic understanding of heavy-tailed return distri- butions in an agent-based model. EPL (Europhysics Letters) , 100(3):38005, 2012. 6Matthieu Cristelli, V Alﬁ, L Pietronero, and A Zaccaria. Liquid- ity crisis, granularity of the order book and price ﬂuctuations. The European Physical Journal B , 73(1):41–49, 2010. 7J Doyne Farmer, Laszlo Gillemot, Fabrizio Lillo, Szabolcs Mike, and Anindya Sen. What really causes large price changes? Quan- titative ﬁnance, 4(4):383–397, 2004. 8Xavier Gabaix, Parameswaran Gopikrishnan, Vasiliki Plerou, and H Eugene Stanley. A theory of power-law distributions in ﬁnancial market ﬂuctuations. Nature, 423(6937):267–270, 2003. 9Gebhard Kirchg¨ assner and J¨ urgen Wolters.Introduction to mod- ern time series analysis . Springer Science & Business Media, 2007. 10Joris M Mooij, Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, Jakob Zscheis- chler, and Bernhard Sch¨ olkopf. Distinguishing cause from eﬀect using observational data: methods and benchmarks. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):1103–1204, 2016. 11Diviyan Kalainathan and Olivier Goudet. Causal discovery tool- box: Uncover causal relationships in python. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.02278, 2019. 12Stephen Roberts, Michael Osborne, Mark Ebden, Steven Reece, Neale Gibson, and Suzanne Aigrain. Gaussian processes for time-series modelling. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences , 371(1984):20110550, 2013. 13Arthur Gretton, Olivier Bousquet, Alex Smola, and Bernhard Sch¨ olkopf. Measuring statistical dependence with hilbert-schmidt norms. In International conference on algorithmic learning the- ory, pages 63–77. Springer, 2005. 14Rachel A Gordon. Regression analysis for the social sciences . Routledge, 2015. 15Gemma Lancaster, Dmytro Iatsenko, Aleksandra Pidde, Valentina Ticcinelli, and Aneta Stefanovska. Surrogate data for hypothesis testing of physical systems. Physics Reports, 748:1– 60, 2018. 16Diviyan Kalainathan, Olivier Goudet, and Ritik Dutta. Causal discovery toolbox: Uncovering causal relationships in python. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 21(37):1–5, 2020.