The Role of Binance in Bitcoin Volatility Transmission Carol Alexander ∗ , Daniel F. Heck † and Andreas Kaeck ‡ August 9, 2021 Abstract We analyse high-frequency realised volatility dynamics and spillovers between centralised crypto exchanges that oﬀer spot and derivatives contracts for bitcoin against the U.S. dollar or the stable coin tether. The tether-margined perpetual contract on Binance is clearly the main source of volatility, continuously transmitting strong ﬂows to all other instruments and receiving very little volatility from other sources. We also ﬁnd that crypto exchanges exhibit much higher interconnectedness when traditional Western stock markets are open. Especially during the U.S. time zone, volatility outﬂows from Binance are much higher than at other times, and Bitcoin traders are more attentive and reactive to prevailing market conditions. Our results highlight that market regulators should pay more attention to the tether-margined derivatives products available on most self-regulated exchanges, most importantly on Binance. Keywords: Bitcoin ETF; Crypto Exchanges; Realised Volatility; Trading Volume; Volatility Transmission. JEL classiﬁcation: C22, C5, E42, F31, G1, G2 ∗University of Sussex Business School. Email: c.alexander@sussex.ac.uk †University of Sussex Business School. Email: d.heck@sussex.ac.uk ‡University of Sussex Business School. Email: a.kaeck@sussex.ac.uk arXiv:2107.00298v3 [q-fin.TR] 6 Aug 2021 The microstructure of crypto asset and derivatives markets is very complex, very diﬀerent from that of other asset classes, and not yet well understood in the academic literature. One key diﬀerence to traditional markets is its fragmentation, with numerous self-regulated, centralised and decentralised, exchanges operating in peripatetic tax-haven locations to avoid scrutiny of their practices and proﬁts. On the other hand, the US-based Coinbase and other centralised exchanges like Bitstamp and Kraken now provide a relatively secure market place for trading spot crypto-crypto and crypto-ﬁat pairs. Currently, it is the self-regulated derivatives exchanges that are of most concern to regulators. Alexander and Heck (2020) and other empirical research has established the dominance of these ex- changes in price discovery of the major crypto assets, especially for bitcoin (BTC). The main aim of this paper is to study the high-frequency transmission of volatility from the self-regulated derivatives exchanges to the U.S. or European regulated spot exchanges and to investigate potential time variation in the transmission mechanism throughout the trading day. Understanding volatility ﬂows is important for centralised exchanges and their market makers, who tend to operate simultaneously on several exchanges. A transmission of volatility into the exchange is a signal for market makers to widen spreads. This is because order slippage increases with realised volatility, and slippage reduces proﬁts either directly, if the market maker pays the slippage costs, or indirectly because it induces a downwards pressure on order ﬂow. To oﬀset the slippage costs that are expected from an inﬂow of volatility, the market maker will try to increase spreads. Note that trading fees diﬀer widely across exchanges. Those with greater trading volume, like Coinbase and Binance, also tend to have higher realised volatility and a large, highly-competitive set of market makers. But responding to volatility ﬂows by increasing spreads is diﬃcult in this environment, as is passing on slippage costs to clients – both would reduce the order ﬂow. A reduction in order ﬂow is also bad for exchanges, which seek to avoid a ‘toxic ﬂow’ situation. This is where there is a surfeit of professional traders – such as brokers, over-the-counter desks, high-frequency traders and the exchange’s own designated market makers – who prefer to trade with uninformed retail traders rather than other informed traders. For this reason, exchanges with many market makers provide incentives for large trades by lowering their fees. Understanding volatility ﬂows is also important for European and U.S. regulators who recently responded to the rapid growth in crypto trading during 2021 with extensive proposals for reform. 1 1In July 2021 the European Commission proposed new regulations for Markets in Crypto Assets (MiCA) which makes cryptocurrency exchanges responsible for the loss of consumer assets because of fraud, cyber-attack or negligence. Shortly 1 The proposals exemplify concerns about self-regulated exchanges such as Binance, which act not only as a trading platform, but also as broker, custodian and central counterparty for clearing trades. Knowing whether the main source of volatility on Coinbase, Kraken, Bitstamp and other regulated crypto exchanges comes from Binance, or other exchanges of concern, is very useful to inform the ongoing debates surrounding these regulatory reforms. To the best of our knowledge, no previous study has analysed high-frequency volatility ﬂows within and between the major crypto spot and derivatives exchanges and we aim to ﬁll this gap. We analyse realised volatility spillovers through the lens of a multivariate version of the Logarithmic Multiplica- tive Error Model (LogMEM; Bauwens and Giot (2000); Nguyen et al. (2020)). Formally, the model decomposes realised volatility into a product of its conditional mean and an error term which has unit mean and follows a distribution with non-negative support. The conditional mean is usually assumed to be autoregressive, depending both on its own lagged values and those of other variables of inter- est.2 To estimate the model, we derive robust realised volatility measures from the spot BTC-USD price on three spot exchanges (Coinbase, Kraken and Bitstamp) and three self-regulated exchanges (Binance, and Huobi) and from the prices of the main bitcoin perpetual contracts traded on Binance and another self-regulated exchange, Bybit. Contrary to the existing literature, we base our analysis on high-frequency data, using second-by-second observations to compute realised volatility at the ﬁve- minute frequency which, due to microstructure noise, is the highest frequency which allows a reliable transmission analysis. All other studies on volatility spillovers between diﬀerent cryptocurrencies (Yi et al., 2018; Katsiampa et al., 2019; Wang and Ngene, 2020; Caporale et al., 2021; Sensoy et al., 2021) or between individual crypto-exchanges (Cheah et al., 2018; Ji et al., 2021) rely on daily observations, and/or they focus exclusively on the much smaller spot market, which could lead to erroneous con- clusions. By analysing realised volatility on major spot and derivatives exchanges at the ﬁve-minute frequency we study more informative volatility ﬂows at a much more granular level. Our main empirical ﬁnding is that the tether-margined perpetual contract on Binance is the main emitter of volatility, continuously transmitting strong ﬂows to all other instruments throughout the afterwards a U.S. senator Don Beyer presented congress with a 58-page draft of the Digital Asset Market Structure and Investor Protection Act, proposing sweeping reforms and clarifying the responsibilities of the Federal Reserve, the SEC and the CFTC. 2Since we analyse realised volatility, we also include an asymmetric response component to capture the leverage eﬀect typically observed in ﬁnancial markets (Bollerslev et al., 2006). LogMEMs are particularly well suited for modelling realised volatility dynamics as they ensure the non-negativity of volatility and can be extended to allow for occasional zero observations which can occur in high-frequency time series. 2 Figure 1 Volatility Flows Between the Main BTC-USD Instruments Note: The ﬁgure shows the magnitude of volatility ﬂows between six major BTC-USD instruments including: Coinbase spot (CB); Binance spot (BI Spot); Huobi spot (HU); Binance tether-margined BTC perpetual (BI USDT), Binance USD perpetual (BI USD) and Bybit USD perpetual (BY). The ﬂows are estimated using a multivariate LogMEM on the ﬁve-minute realised volatility between 1 January and 31 March 2021. The parameters that are not signiﬁcant are set to zero. The direction of ﬂow is indicated by its colour, and the size is proportional to the width at its origin or destination, these being equal. Our ﬁndings suggest that trading bitcoin against tether on Binance is the main source of volatility. Binance’s indirect USD perpetual emits much less volatility and mainly receives ﬂows from the tether-margined product. day. And, out of all instruments included in our analysis, this contract also receives the lowest volatil- ity ﬂows. Figure 1 depicts the overall magnitude of the volatility ﬂows detected by our LogMEM as a circular plot, omitting Bitstamp and Kraken because prior analysis shows Coinbase to be the main volatility transmitter within spot markets. The Binance tether-margined perpetual exhibits very strong, positive volatility spillovers to all other instruments, while it receives only weak (and negative) volatility ﬂows from Binance spot, even less from Coinbase, and no signiﬁcant transmission from any other instrument. Both Coinbase and Binance spot also have a negative volatility transmission to the other instruments, and the Binance USD perpetual only transmits volatility to the Bybit perpetual. Volatility shocks on the perpetual swaps are very short lived, so we can explain these ﬂows if traders on spot exchanges need longer to react to these shocks that traders on perpetuals. That is, once the volatility has risen on spot exchanges, the transient volatility increase in perpetuals has already been reversed. Finally, both Bybit and Huobi are receivers rather than transmitters of volatility. Both their fee structure and their time-of-day volume patterns indicate that Bybit and Huobi attract diﬀerent types of traders to Binance. Because these and the spot exchanges generate much weaker volatility ﬂows than Binance, they have substantially less contagion potential. 3 Next we study whether the strength of the Binance volatility outﬂows varies within the trading day. We ﬁnd that they are lowest during Asian trading, intensify substantially during European trading and ﬁnally reach their maximum during U.S. trading hours. Not only the outward volatility ﬂows but also their short-term persistence strengthens over the course of the day. Thus, when updating their expectations, traders are more attentive and reactive to prevailing market conditions during U.S. trading hours. The bitcoin market also exhibits a higher interconnectedness when traditional Western stock markets are open. Taken together with a truly remarkable periodicity observed in time-of-day volume patterns, our results demonstrate that Western (especially U.S. based) traders are using the highly-controversial Binance exchange to trade bitcoin. A further contribution of our paper is to highlight the important role of the stable coin tether, which is pegged 1:1 to the U.S. dollar. Besides a few recent studies such as Griﬃn and Shams (2020); Ji et al. (2021); Baur and Hoang (2021), tether has not attracted signiﬁcant attention from academics or regulators. Yet, tether has become central to the entire crypto market, helping to ensure suﬃcient liquidity and activity. At the time of writing tether has a market capitalisation of around $62bn, up from $10bn in July 2020. On most days, its trading volume far exceeds any other crypto asset. For example, on 30 June 2021 tether’s trading volume was almost $63bn, exceeding that of bitcoin ($34bn) and ether ( $26bn) combined. We make several other contributions to the literature. First, we reveal a remarkable intra-day pattern of both trading volume and realised volatility on crypto instruments that to the best of our knowledge has not yet been documented in the related literature. Between midnight and 16:00 UTC, both volume and volatility evolve in a clear U-shape. After that, all instruments exhibit a continuous decrease in volume and volatility to an average level. The minimum is generally attained during early UTC morning. In fact, the intraday pattern found on crypto instruments seems similar to traditional FX markets, such as the Deutsche Mark/USD exchange rate (Andersen and Bollerslev, 1997). Strikingly, we also ﬁnd distinct four-hourly spikes in both trading volume and realised volatility that are very pronounced on the ﬁrst ﬁve minutes of every eighth hour (i.e. from 00:00 to 00:05, 08:00 to 08:05 and 16:00 to 16:05 UTC). We relate these unusual spikes to the funding payments on the perpetuals. Possibly, some market participants modify their positions across multiple exchanges just after funding on some perpetual has occurred or they take advantage of some mispricing between spot and perpetuals. Secondly, since realised volatility and trading volume are deeply interconnected and 4 usually go hand-in-hand, one might ask if results on volatility spillovers are mirrored by trading volume ﬂows. To answer this question, we repeat the LogMEM analyses replacing realised volatility by ﬁve- minute trading volume. The volume ﬂow results are in sharp contrast to the volatility transmissions. Volume ﬂows mainly from the spot instruments, especially on Coinbase and Binance, but also from the Bybit perpetual. There are negligible volume outﬂows from the main emitter of volatility, i.e. Binance’s tether-margined perpetual. Finally, we shed more light on the relationship between trading volume and realised volatility. This highly-relevant microstructure question has been studied extensively in traditional asset classes. For example, Nguyen et al. (2020) ﬁnd that trading volume positively aﬀects volatility, and volatility negatively aﬀects trading volume. Similarly, Chevallier and S´ evi (2012) document a positive and statis- tically signiﬁcant eﬀect of trading volume on realised volatility for both oil and gas futures. However, within the crypto market, the volume-volatility relationship has attracted only little attention. To the best of our knowledge, no study has yet examined this issue using high frequency data on multiple instruments. We document a strong signiﬁcant bi-directional causality relationship between trading volume and realised volatility at the ﬁve-minute frequency. Using a bivariate LogMEM, we ﬁnd that an increase in volatility is preceded by an increase in trading volume in the previous ﬁve-minute interval. However, in the subsequent ﬁve-minute period, the relationship is reversed, leading to a negative eﬀect of volume on volatility and a positive inﬂuence of volatility on volume. We attribute this inversion to a longer response time (i.e. a time delay) of volatility. The remainder of this paper is organised as follows: Section 1 describes the exchanges and instru- ments included in our analysis; Section 2 describes our second-by-second data, outlines the realised volatility calculation and discusses the characteristics of intra-day patterns of 5-minute volume and realised volatility; Section 3 explains the econometric framework; Section 4 presents our results on volatility transmission, both within and between diﬀerent instrument groups, and provides an eco- nomic interpretation of the intra-day variation; Section 5 examines volume ﬂows between the diﬀerent instruments, and the volume-volatility relationship; and Section 6 summarises and concludes. 1 Exchanges and Instruments Trading on crypto assets and their derivatives has grown substantially since July 2020, when a landmark ruling by the Oﬃce of the Comptroller of the Currency permitted their custody in federally chartered 5 U.S. banks. From $275 trillion in July 2020, the total market capitalization of crypto assets rose to a peak of over $1,750 trillion in May 2021, on a monthly trading volume exceeding $5 trillion. The notional traded on the major crypto derivatives exchanges grew even faster over this period, from less than $500 bn in July 2020 to around $6 trillion in May 2021. 3 Despite continuous growth, the crypto spot market remains tiny compared with the market for derivatives which remains self-regulated, with the notable exception of the bitcoin and ether futures and options on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME). Most self-regulated exchanges oﬀer two types of bitcoin derivatives products, namely inverse (also called coin-margined) and linear contracts. The former are rather complicated products: for ease of use, they are quoted in USD but their actual quote currency is bitcoin so they are contracts on USD/BTC instead of BTC/USD. This way, the self-regulated exchanges can avoid onboarding ﬁat currencies entirely, even though crypto-ﬁat prices are traded. On the other hand, the linear products are exactly like derivatives in traditional asset classes – i.e. they are denominated, margined and settled in the same currency. However they do not use a ﬁat currency and instead use a digital currency such as tether (USDT) or another stable coin. We only admit the major (well-established) bitcoin spot exchanges (Bitstamp, Coinbase, Huobi, Kraken) as well as major (self-regulated) crypto derivatives exchanges into our analysis (Binance, Bybit). However, we exclude futures from our analysis and focus on the very popular perpetual futures, also called perpetual swaps, or simply perpetual contracts, which generally exhibit much higher trading volumes. Table 1 reports the product speciﬁcations for diﬀerent perpetual contracts. The USD-contracts are of inverse type, i.e. their base currency is BTC so they are contracts on USD/BTC instead of BTC/USD. The tether-contracts however are ordinary linear products, that is they are settled in tether. As is usual with crypto products, the perpetuals allow very high leverage and can be traded 24/7. 4 A key point to note from Table 1 is that the fees on all the self-regulated derivatives exchanges follow 3Sources: Statistica and CryptoCompare Exchange Review 4These contracts have most in common with currency swaps (either crypto–crypto or crypto–ﬁat) where the only cash-ﬂows are between perpetual ﬁxed and ﬂoating legs and these are usually exchanged every 8 hours via a funding payment that is designed to tie the perpetual contracts price to the spot price. Thus, the funding rate is positive when the perpetuals price exceeds the spot, but can be negative when the spot exceeds the perpetuals price. Please note that even though the crypto–ﬁat contracts are usually denoted as BTCUSD for example – in traditional FX markets, this quotation would mean that BTC is the base currency and USD is the quote currency – all cashﬂows are in cryptocurrencies so that exchanges do not have to deal with traditional ﬁat currencies and their onboarding process. But they also combine the features of both futures and spot positions in that they do not expire before being closed out (similar to a spot position) and they allow very high-leverage trading (like a futures contract). In contrast to ordinary futures, perpetual contracts are not exposed to any roll-over risk and the basis is very much smaller than it is for futures. 6 Table 1 Perpetuals Speciﬁcations USD Contracts USDT Contracts Binance Bybit Binance Type Inverse Inverse Linear Contract Size 100 USD 1 USD 0.001 BTC Margin Requirement 0.8%* 1% 0.8%* Settlement Currency BTC BTC USDT Trading Days 24/7 24/7 24/7 Funding Frequency 8 hrs 8 hrs 8 hrs Fees (maker/taker) 1/5 -2.5/7.5 2/4 Tick Size 0.1 USD 0.5 USD 0.01 USDT Note: The table shows the main speciﬁcations of the perpetual contracts included in our analysis. All fees reported here are in basis points. *The leverage on Binance depends on the notional value of the position. The larger the position, the lower the leverage allowed. (at least partly) a maker-taker model. That is, orders that add liquidity to the book (non-marketable limit orders) are charged less than orders that reduce liquidity (market orders or marketable limit orders). In the case of Bybit, maker fees are even negative, i.e. liquidity-increasing orders are refunded a certain percentage of the order size, independent of the user’s past trading volume. For their USD perpetual, Binance follow a tiered maker-taker model refusing ordinary users maker rebates. Only VIP investors with a 30-day trading volume of at least 50,000 BTC and a balance of 2,000 of their in-house token (called Binance Coin; BNB) obtain maker rebates. Similarly, the spot exchanges do not oﬀer maker rebates and follow a volume-dependent fees schedule of at most 50bps (Coinbase and Bitstamp), 26bps (Kraken), 20bps (Huobi) and 10bps (Binance). Bitstamp is the only spot exchange not oﬀering discounts for liquidity-increasing orders. Binance, Bybit and Huobi are still completely self-regulated. There is no supervisory authority establishing any rules to prevent malpractice, misconduct and manipulation. Admittedly, it is a very challenging task to regulate these venues because the traders could simply switch to some other venue still oﬀering very loose or no regulation, of which there are plenty. However, even though we cannot rule out the possibilitys of price or volume manipulation, this does not prevent a proper spillover analysis. If anything, the lack of supervision makes our study more interesting for market participants and regulators. 7 Figure 2 Bitcoin Price from 1 January to 31 March 2021 Note: The ﬁgure shows the bitcoin price on Coinbase in USD, from 1 January to 31 March 2021. 2 Prices, Volumes and Realised Volatility The crypto market evolves at an extremely fast pace – not only through innovations such as Decen- tralised Finance (DeFi) and Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) but also due to actions of regulators in the US, China and, more recently, many countries particularly concerned about Binance’s activities. Therefore, we are interested in high-frequency inter-exchange volatility ﬂows, rather than any long- term dynamics. For this reason we choose a one-second data sampling frequency so that we are able to compute realised volatility every ﬁve minutes. We focus on the recent bull market from 1 January to 31 March 2021, where the price of bitcoin rose by almost 100% from $30,000 to around $60,000. Figure 2 shows the detailed price evolution over this three-months period. We retrieved data on all instruments from coinAPI.5 The dataset consists of second-by-second price and volume data and covers the period from 1 January to 31 March 2021, summing up to more than 7.5 million observations per instrument and almost 60 million in total. Table 2 provides summary statistics on the trading activity of the diﬀerent instruments included in our analysis. We can see that trading on perpetuals (both USD and USDT) and BTC/USDT spot pairs is highly active. Transactions occur in at least three out of four seconds – for the tether-instruments, this fraction is even more than 95% – 5Data and software provider coinAPI links with hundreds of crypto spot and derivatives exchanges, oﬀering his- torical and streaming order-book and trades in tick-by-tick or highest granularity data from all major centralised and decentralised exchanges. 8 Table 2 Volume Data Statistics Type Currency Instrument Count ADV MaxDV Spot USD Bitstamp 1,867,238 (24%) 392.92 1,364.60 Coinbase 6,554,500 (84%) 1,187.42 3,499.38 Kraken 1,777,536 (23%) 345.03 893.02 USDT Binance 7,716,626 (99%) 3,858.29 8,410.34 Huobi 7,420,413 (95%) 1,586.62 4,194.10 Perpetuals USD Binance 5,798,339 (75%) 5,481.04 15,084.64 Bybit 6,748,841 (87%) 7,368.11 17,755.14 USDT Binance 7,712,699 (99%) 15,006.25 36,297.44 Note: The table shows the number of second intervals where at least one trade was conducted (Count, in absolute terms and as percentage of the total number of second-intervals), the average daily volume (ADV, in million USD) and the maximum daily volume (MaxDV, in million USD), during the period from 1 January to 31 March 2021. and the average daily volume (ADV) exceeds $1.5 bn. The highest ADV occurs on the Binance USDT perpetual with even more than $15 bn. Out of the three USD spot pairs, only Coinbase is able to keep up. Transactions are conducted in 84% of one-second intervals and its ADV is about $1.2 bn. With trading volumes of less than half a billion U.S. dollar and transactions occurring only in about every fourth second, Bitstamp and Kraken lag far behind. It is well documented that trading volume exhibits a certain intra-day pattern. In North American equity markets, many studies ﬁnd a U-shaped pattern (Jain and Joh, 1988; McInish and Wood, 1990), while Cai et al. (2004) and Ozenbas (2008) document a more M-shaped behaviour on the London Stock Exchange. For major currency pairs, Danielsson and Payne (2001) and McGroarty et al. (2009) ﬁnd a similar M-shaped volume pattern with peaks at London and New York opening times. Figure 3 shows the intra-day pattern of trading volume for BTC/USD and BTC/USDT, both on spot exchanges and perpetual contracts, measured as the median ﬁve-minute trading volume over the period from 1 January to 31 March 2021. 6 As can be seen, volume follows a similar pattern on spot and perpetuals. First, it evolves in a U-shape with very distinct peaks at midnight and 16:00 UTC. The most extreme spike can be observed on the Huobi USDT spot pair, where the median trading volume increases ﬁvefold from around $5 m to almost $25 m at 16:00 UTC. After the afternoon spike, trading volume on all instruments continuously decreases to an average level. The three USD spot pairs reach their minimum between 09:00 and 10:00 UTC, while the volumes on perpetuals and USDT spot pairs seem to be at their lowest in the early morning around 03:00 UTC. Consequently, we can only partly conﬁrm the results of Eross et al. (2019) who document an inverted U-shape on Bitstamp with a peak at around 6Note that the number of transactions shows an analogous intra-day pattern. 9 14:00 UTC. However, their data spans 2014 to 2017 and so the diﬀerence in intra-day trading volume could be explained by a signiﬁcant evolution of the crypto market over the last three years. The two graphs of Figure 3 show another interesting feature. Trading volume exhibits distinct spikes that are very pronounced on the ﬁrst ﬁve minutes of every eighth hour, i.e. from 00:00 to 00:05, 08:00 to 08:05 and from 16:00 to 16:05 UTC. There is only one explanation for these spikes that we can think of, namely the funding payments on the perpetuals. 7 Possibly, some market participants hold accounts across multiple spot and derivatives exchanges and systematically modify their positions just at the time of funding payments. This could be to take advantage of some mispricing between spot and perpetuals. Next we analyse time-of-day patterns in realised volatility. Using our second-by-second price data for any given exchange, we calculate its realised volatility at a ﬁve-minute frequency. This seems to be a reasonable trade-oﬀ between too much microstructure noise at a higher frequency and potentially missing signiﬁcant volatility ﬂows at lower frequencies (Andersen, 2000; Nguyen et al., 2020). Since there is still a lot of noise in the data, we calculate realised volatility using the robust estimator based on pre-averaging (Jacod et al., 2009). Here, the one-second log returns are locally smoothed using a weighted average, which reduces the inﬂuence of microstructure noise to some extent. In particular, the pre-averaged log returns are given by rt = kn∑ j=1 g ( j kn ) rt+j wherert denotes the ordinary (not pre-averaged) log returns and g is a real-valued weighting function, commonly chosen as g(x) = min(x, 1−x).8 Following the empirical analysis of Hautsch and Podolskij (2013), the bandwidth kn of the local pre-averaging window is chosen to be ⌈θ√n⌉ where n is the number of observations (in our case, n = 300) and θ∈ [0.3, 0.6]. The exact choice of the smoothing parameter θ depends mostly on the sampling frequency and the liquidity of the asset. Since we are interested in accuracy for multivariate spillovers, rather than individual volatility estimates, we set θ consistently as 0.4 for all instruments. Therefore, the optimal bandwidth is ⌈0.4 √ 300⌉ = 7. For each 7Some spikes are evident every 4 hours. While the contracts considered here (Binance, Bybit) are funded at 00:00, 08:00 and 16:00 UTC, other major perpetuals such as the BitMEX one exchange cash ﬂows at 04:00, 12:00 and 20:00 UTC. 8The only requirements on the weighting function g : [0, 1]→ R are that it is continuous, piecewise continuously diﬀerentiable with piecewise Lipschitz derivative, and having g(0) = g(1) = 0. Since the tent-shaped function g(x) = min(x, 1−x) is the simplest functions meeting these criteria, it is commonly chosen as weighting function. 10 Figure 3 Volume Intra-Day Pattern Note: The ﬁgure shows the intra-day pattern of ﬁve-minute trading volume (in million USD) for USD spot pairs (upper graph), USDT spot pairs (middle graph) and perpetuals (lower graph), measured as the median ﬁve-minute volume over the period from 1 January to 31 March 2021. All times are in UTC. 11 ﬁve-minute interval, the pre-averaging estimator of realised variance is then calculated as the sum of squared pre-averaged one-second returns. Finally, to obtain the pre-averaged realised volatility, we take the square root of the realised variance and annualise it by a factor of √12× 24× 365.9 Since the crypto market is still not as liquid as more established asset classes, it is possible that a very limited number of transactions occur during some ﬁve-minute intervals. Therefore, we apply a threshold on trading activity in order to obtain reliable volatility estimates. If there are transactions in less than 20% of the one-second intervals, we set the volatility estimate of that ﬁve-minute period equal to zero. Given the volume data statistics in Table 2, this threshold will be of little or no concern for Coinbase, Huobi and the three Binance instruments, but it may be relevant for Bitstamp and Kraken. For this reason, we use a zero-augmented log-normal distribution in the LogMEM to account for zero observations in the conditional mean speciﬁcation explicitly. This way, it will not become a major issue if these two exchanges occasionally exhibit a comparatively large number of zero values. Table 3 reports summary statistics for ﬁve-minute realised volatility over the period from 1 January to 31 March 2021. The average levels of volatility on Coinbase, Bitstamp, Huobi, Bybit and the three Binance instruments are similar, but that of Kraken is signiﬁcantly lower, probably due to comparatively low trading activity. For the same reason, Bitstamp and Kraken show rather a high standard deviation of more than 60% – compared to about 43% on the six remaining instruments – paired with a zero 25%-quantile. We also note that all eight instruments show a minimum volatility of zero, implying that our trading activity threshold is not met at least once for all instruments. Overall, except for Bitstamp and Kraken, the realised volatility statistics are quite similar. Finally, it is striking that Kraken shows an extremely high maximum volatility of 63. This outlier value was attained on 22 February 2021 between 14:20 and 14:25 UTC when the price on Kraken jumped up and down with an increasing amplitude resulting in a very high realised volatility not reﬂected by the other exchanges. This extremely large bid-ask bounce was probably caused by some exchange-speciﬁc issues, such as server problems. To reduce, but not entirely eliminate, the impact of such anomalous values we winsorize the realised volatility data before our empirical analysis. The intra-day pattern of realised volatility is closely related to that of volume (Berger et al., 2009; 9This pre-averaging reduces the inﬂuence of zero returns on the realised volatility measure. If no transaction has been executed within a one-second interval, we ﬁll this gap with the previous price which leads to a zero return and therefore induces a downward bias in realised volatility. Even without pre-averaging, using the last available price is the most appropriate way to deal with one-second intervals in which no transaction has taken place, because it seems intuitive that an instrument with lower trading activity should also exhibit a lower realised volatility. 12 Table 3 Realised Volatility Statistics Coinbase Bitstamp Kraken BinanceS Huobi BinanceT Bybit Binance $ Mean 0.6985 0.6217 0.4709 0.7237 0.7299 0.7630 0.6146 0.7068 Std 0.4255 0.6102 0.6837 0.4155 0.4147 0.4371 0.4408 0.4409 Min 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 25% 0.4344 0 0 0.4650 0.4721 0.4909 0.3347 0.4311 50% 0.5945 0.6262 0.4012 0.6235 0.6302 0.6534 0.5044 0.5990 75% 0.8326 0.9504 0.7358 0.8541 0.8620 0.8972 0.7562 0.8464 Max 11.6779 8.0250 63.3657 8.5440 7.8419 7.4741 6.6263 7.7105 Note: The table shows summary statistics on the ﬁve-minute realised volatility over the period from 1 January to 31 March 2021. Binance S, Binance T and Binance $ denote the BTC/USD spot pair, the USDT perpetual and the USD perpetual, respectively, on Binance. Bubak et al., 2011). Figure 4 depicts the ﬁve-minute realised volatility on the spot exchanges (above) and the other, self-regulated exchanges below. As with trading volume it ﬁrst follows a U-shape with distinct peaks at midnight and 16:00 UTC and smaller spikes at 04:00 and 08:00 UTC. After 16:00, it slowly declines to between 50% and 80%, with another visible spike at 20:00 UTC. In the upper graph, we can also see that Bitstamp and Kraken exhibit a lower volatility than Coinbase and the remaining USDT spot pairs and perpetual contracts. The diﬀerence is especially pronounced from midnight until 11:00 UTC, i.e. during Asian and early European trading hours. Therefore, we suppose that the active traders on Bitstamp and Kraken are mainly American and European. Otherwise the eight instruments exhibit a similar intra-day pattern for realised volatility. Finally, we note that the extremely large volatility on Kraken around 14:20 UTC is caused by the exchange-speciﬁc outlier discussed above and will be winsorized at 0.05% in our empirical analysis. Apart from the spikes at times of funding payments on the perpetuals, the intra-day pattern of bitcoin volatility seems similar to the results of Andersen and Bollerslev (1997) for the Deutsche Mark/USD exchange rate. They ﬁnd that volatility starts at a relatively high level around 00:00 UTC, then slowly decays for about 3 hours. After that, trading activity increases to a local maximum around the opening time of European markets. The global maximum is attained at the opening of U.S. markets. Afterwards, the volatility slowly declines and only starts to pick up again around 8 hours later. It is important to account for this deterministic intra-day pattern in our empirical analysis, but we cannot model the intra-day pattern explicitly in the MEM because the number of parameters to be estimated would become too large. Therefore we do so in a non-parametric way by dividing each 13 Figure 4 Volatility Intra-Day Pattern Note: The ﬁgure shows the intra-day pattern of 5-minute realised volatility (in million USD) for USD spot pairs (upper graph) as well as USDT spot pairs and perpetuals (lower graph), measured as the average ﬁve-minute realised volatility over the period from 1 January to 31 March 2021. All times are in UTC. realised volatility observation by the average realised volatility of the respective ﬁve-minute interval.10 Nguyen et al. (2020) use a 250-day moving average as their diurnal adjustment factor but this is not possible in our study, so we simply use the average over the complete period from 1 January to 31 March 2021, as depicted in Figure 4. Since our sample period is much shorter than in Nguyen et al. (2020), time-variation is not of great concern. Then, as mentioned above, we Winsorize the top 0.05% of our diurnally-adjusted realised volatility values, i.e. all observations greater than the 99.95%-quantile are 10To reduce the impact of extreme outliers, we could use the median ﬁve-minute volatility as a diurnal adjustment factor. However, Kraken exhibits zero median values in the early UTC morning and for this reason we must rely on the mean ﬁve-minute volatility. Apart from Kraken in the early morning, mean and median intra-day patterns have a very similar shape anyway. 14 Figure 5 Histograms of Five-Minute Realised Volatility Note: The ﬁgure shows histograms of the ﬁve-minute realised volatility for USD spot pairs (top row), USDT spot pairs (middle row) and perpetuals (bottom row), both before (red) and after (blue) diurnal adjustment and Winsorizing, covering the period from 1 January to 31 March 2021. Note that due to the quite large number of zero observations on Kraken and Bitstamp, we excluded these zero values, allowing a better comparison across instruments. set equal to this quantile. To see the eﬀect of this data ﬁltering, Figure 5 exhibits the distributions of the ﬁve-minute realised volatility across the eight instruments, both before and after diurnal adjustment, winsorizing and excluding the relatively large number of zero observations for Kraken and Bitstamp, to allow a better comparison across instruments. These histograms conﬁrm the summary statistics and graphs already discussed. That is, the realised volatility histograms for Coinbase, Huobi, Bybit and the three Binance instruments exhibit similar, low-range features. But due to relatively low trading activity, Bitstamp and Kraken exhibit quite a high portion of zero values and consequently, their histograms have lower modal values than those of the remaining six instruments. Overall, the histograms seem appropriate and we can use the ﬁltered data in our empirical study. 15 3 Methodology: Multiplicative Error Model Since volatility is a non-negative variable, we base our analysis on the Multiplicative Error Model (MEM) introduced in Engle and Russell (1998).11 This model implicitly guarantees the non-negativity of the variables of interest and overcomes certain diﬃculties and ineﬃciencies of the standard Gaussian approach when modelling non-negative time series. 12 In the original MEM, parameter restrictions have to be imposed to ensure non-negativity which exacerbates model estimation and interpretation. Therefore, we use the LogMEM(p,q) introduced by Bauwens and Giot (2000), where the logarithm is applied to the conditional mean in its speciﬁca- tion, making any non-negativity constraints obsolete. Our univariate model for realised volatility x is therefore given by xt =µtεt (1) logµt =ω + p∑ j=1 αj logxt−j +γ logx− t−1 + q∑ j=1 βj logµt−j (2) where εt≥ 0 is a unit mean iid innovation, log x− t−1 = logxt−1 if the return of the respective interval is negative and zero otherwise, p and q determine the lag structure and ( ω,α 1,...,α p,γ,β 1,...,β q) are constant model parameters. As required, exogenous variables such as dummies to capture time variation may also be included in the conditional mean equation. Finally, we need to specify the conditional distribution of the innovations. As shown by Allen et al. (2014), the log-normal distribution yields consistency and asymptotic normality of the Quasi-Maximum Likelihood (QML) estimator in the LogMEM and exhibits superior ﬁnite sample properties compared to other widely-used error distributions. Since we analyse high-frequency time series, it is quite likely to encounter zero observations, which the log-normal distribution is not able to capture. Therefore, we follow Nguyen et al. (2020) and apply the zero-augmented version of the log-normal distribution as 11Originally, the MEM has been proposed to model durations between transactions and it is therefore often called Autoregressive Conditional Duration (ACD) model. However, throughout this paper, we refer to the model and its extensions by the more general term Multiplicative Error Model. 12As argued by Engle (2002), the two approaches that are usually applied when dealing with non-negative ﬁnancial time series (either ignoring the non-negativity or taking logs) suﬀer severe disadvantages, like a very diﬃcult maximum likelihood estimation or the need to work with very peculiar distributions. 16 proposed by Hautsch et al. (2014). Its density function is given by f(x) = (1−p+)δ(x) +p+ 1√ 2πxs exp ( −1 2 (log(x)−m s )2) 1{x>0} where δ(x) is a point probability mass at zero, m =−0.5s2− logp+ due to the requirement of unit mean and p+ denotes the probability of strictly positive observations in the time series. 13 Since the logarithm is only deﬁned for strictly positive values, we modify the conditional mean speciﬁcation in (1) by adding auxiliary parameters α0 which capture the eﬀect of zero volatilites on the conditional mean, i.e. logµt =ω + p∑ j=1 αj logxt−j 1{xt−j >0} + p∑ j=1 α0 j 1{xt−j =0} +γ logx− t−1 + q∑ j=1 βj logµt−j. (3) This speciﬁcation can easily be extended to multiple dimensions to obtain the vector Logarithmic Multiplicative Error Model (vLogMEM(p,q)). It is given by xt =µt⊙εt logµt = w + p∑ j=1 Aj ( logxt−j⊙ 1{xt−j >0} ) + p∑ j=1 A0 j 1{xt−j =0} + Γ logx− t−1 + q∑ j=1 Bj logµt−j (4) where⊙ denotes the Hadamard (element-by-element) product and the indicator functions should be interpreted component-wise. Model parameters are now collected in the vector w and the matrices A1,..., Ap, A0 1,..., A0 p, Γ and B1,..., Bq. The speciﬁcation of the error distribution is much more challenging in the multivariate model, since the variables of interest are likely to be interdependent. There are three ways of dealing with this. First, we could use the multivariate log-normal distribution, which is one of the very few multivariate distributions with non-negative support (Taylor and Xu, 2017). This distribution is, however, not able to capture probability mass at zero and an appropriate adaption as in the univariate case is far from trivial. Second, we could apply copulae to link the univariate distributions of variables (Cipollini et al., 2017). Due to the non-trivial fraction of valid zero observations, this approach is quite challenging since we would have to estimate the zero-augmented mixture distributions and the copula jointly (Nguyen et al., 2020). Therefore, we follow the third option where the innovations of the individual variables are 13To limit the number of parameters in the LogMEM, we set p+ equal to the empirical ratio of strictly positive observations, rather than estimating it when ﬁtting the model. 17 assumed to be orthogonal and only lagged interdependence is allowed. This assumption requires both the covariance matrix of innovations and the long-term persistence matrix B to be diagonal, which makes this approach equivalent to ﬁtting the above univariate models for each variable individually, with the lagged values of the remaining instruments as exogenous variables. Even though this equation- by-equation approach leads to a loss in eﬃciency, it still yields consistent estimates in a QML context. Moreover, compared to a model allowing full interdependence, the procedure limits the number of parameters to be estimated and thus sidesteps the curse of dimensionality (Escribano and Sucarrat, 2018). 4 Volatility Transmission 4.1 Univariate Dynamics To detect any diﬀerences between the instruments we ﬁt the univariate LogMEM given in Equations (1) and (3) to the diurnally-adjusted ﬁve-minute realised volatility of each instrument. We only report empirical results for models with one lag ( p = q = 1). As argued by Nguyen et al. (2020), the maximum number of lags is expected to be three but it is lower in practice due to ﬁnite sample issues, for example.14 Table 4 reports parameter estimates, together with the log-likelihood value, the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) and the half-life of the conditional mean. Overall, the volatility dynamics are quite similar across all eight instruments. Not only is the total persistence of realised volatility – the sum of α and β – very high, varying between 0.96 and 0.98 for all instruments, but also the individual degrees of short-term persistence (captured by α) and long-term persistence (captured by β) are very similar at around 0.38−0.4 and 0.57−0.6, respectively. Only the Bybit contract stands out – its short-term and long-term persistence are 0.29 and 0.68, respectively, which indicates that traders on Bybit are less reactive to prevailing market conditions than on the remaining seven instruments. A possible explanation might be related to the trading activity resulting from Bybit’s fee structure, which oﬀers maker rebates of 2.5bps for all users, and the leverage 100 oﬀered on its perpetual contract which has a size of only $1. These properties make the product very attractive for smaller retail traders who 14 As a robustness check, we have conducted a thorough analysis on the number of lags included in the LogMEM. In general, the total persistence – the sum of all α andβ – as well as the distribution parameter s are independent of p and q. The mean squared error and the Ljung-Box test statistic change only very marginally, while log-likelihood and BIC improve only when increasing the number of lags from one to two. The main diﬀerence seems to be the “spread” of the persistence across the α and β parameters, which is in line with Nguyen et al. (2020). 18 Table 4 Univariate LogMEM(1,1) Coinbase Bitstamp Kraken BinanceS Huobi BinanceT Bybit Binance $ ω −0.0042∗∗ −0.1675∗∗∗ −0.1701∗∗∗ −0.0069∗∗∗ −0.0073∗∗∗ −0.0056∗∗∗ 0.0025 −0.0042∗∗ α 0.3741∗∗∗ 0.3837∗∗∗ 0.3808∗∗∗ 0.3896∗∗∗ 0.3859∗∗∗ 0.4012∗∗∗ 0.2871∗∗∗ 0.3781∗∗∗ α0 0.0089 −0.0648∗∗∗ −0.2879∗∗∗ −0.1964∗ −0.0681 0.0020 0.0316 −0.2373∗∗∗ γ 0.0324∗∗∗ 0.0379∗∗∗ 0.0527∗∗∗ 0.0326∗∗∗ 0.0330∗∗∗ 0.0305∗∗∗ 0.0359∗∗∗ 0.0345∗∗∗ β 0.5901∗∗∗ 0.5995∗∗∗ 0.5972∗∗∗ 0.5733∗∗∗ 0.5791∗∗∗ 0.5610∗∗∗ 0.6829∗∗∗ 0.5851∗∗∗ s 0.2837∗∗∗ 0.2826∗∗∗ 0.4825∗∗∗ 0.2617∗∗∗ 0.2545∗∗∗ 0.2548∗∗∗ 0.4074∗∗∗ 0.2958∗∗∗ LL −753 −21,217 −25,898 503 1,314 1,448 −8,353 −1,594 BIC 1,568 42,494 51,857 −944 −2,566 −2,835 16,769 3,248 h 95 204 156 92 97 90 114 93 Note: The table reports parameter estimates, log-likelihood (LL), Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) and half-life (h, in minutes) for the univariate LogMEM(1,1), ﬁtted to diurnally-adjusted ﬁve-minute realised volatility over the period from 1 January to 31 March 2021. Binance S, Binance T and Binance $ represent the BTC/USD spot pair, the USDT perpetual and the USD perpetual, respectively, on Binance, while the parameter s denotes the standard deviations of the log residuals. The asterisks ∗∗∗,∗∗, ∗ indicate signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively, based on robust standard errors. The half-life is calculated as log(0 .5)/ log(α +β), assuming strictly positive values and no asymmetric response. are usually considered rather uninformed and therefore, the disclosure of new information or a change in market conditions may have less inﬂuence on Bybit than on the other seven instruments. Both the highest short-term persistence and the lowest long-term persistence are observed on the Binance USDT perpetual. Interestingly, the two tether spot pairs (Binance, Huobi) exhibit the second and third highest (lowest) short-term (long-term) persistence. With standard errors of less than 0.01, the diﬀerence to the estimates for USD-instruments (Coinbase, Bitstamp, Kraken, Binance USD perpetual) is signiﬁcant. Therefore, we conclude that when updating their expectations, traders on the tether-margined products – especially on the Binance USDT perpetual – pay more attention to current market conditions than those on the USD-margined instruments. The half-life, which in our model measures the time it takes the logarithm of the conditional mean to halve its distance to the long-term mean, is quite similar for Coinbase, Huobi and the three Binance instruments.15 On these exchanges, it takes on average between 90 and 97 minutes until the eﬀect of a volatility shock on the traders’ expectation for the volatility within the next ﬁve-minute interval has halved. The lowest half-life is found on the Binance USDT perpetual, which once more indicates that the traders on this product pay most attention to the current state of the market when updating their expectations. On Bitstamp, Kraken and Bybit, it takes the traders’ expectation much longer to revert to the long-term average, which is probably caused by quite low trading volume on Bitstamp and Kraken and rather uninformed trading activity on Bybit. 15The half-life is calculated as log(0 .5)/ log(α +β), thus assuming only strictly positive realised volatility values and no asymmetric response. 19 As expected, the estimate of the auxiliary parameter α0 is either not statistically signiﬁcant or neg- ative, therefore reducing the conditional mean after a zero observation occurs. Moreover, the estimate of the asymmetric response component is positive and highly signiﬁcant on all eight instruments, which conﬁrms the presence of the leverage eﬀect often documented in other asset classes. The strength of this eﬀect is very similar across instruments at around 0.03, only Kraken stands out with a compar- atively high estimate of 0.05. This implies that a negative return increases the volatility expected by traders for the next ﬁve-minute interval by about 7% to 10% more than a positive return. Finally, the distribution parameter s is quite similar on Coinbase, Bitstamp, Huobi and the three Binance instruments. Only Kraken and Bybit once again exhibit a signiﬁcantly higher parameter estimate, indicating a greater standard deviation of innovations. Compared to the ﬁndings of Nguyen et al. (2020) for the U.S. Treasury market, all eight crypto instruments exhibit a much higher (lower) degree of short-term (long-term) persistence, implying higher sensitivity to prevailing market conditions and shorter memory than the Treasury notes. The total persistence however is higher on the U.S. Treasury market, albeit only slightly (0.99 compared to between 0.96 and 0.98). Interestingly, during the 2007-2009 ﬁnancial crisis as well as before and after economic announcements, the Treasury market exhibits elevated short-term persistence and its realised volatility dynamics appear to be more similar to those of crypto instruments. 4.2 Multivariate Dynamics In this section, we analyse multivariate volatility ﬂows among instruments. To provide an overview without substantially increasing the number of model parameters, we ﬁrst ﬁt the multivariate Log- MEM given in Equation (4) to each group of instruments separately. That is, we estimate the model for the three USD spot pairs (Coinbase, Bitstamp, Kraken), then we ﬁt it to the two tether spot pairs (Binance, Huobi) and after that to the three perpetual swaps (Binance USDT, Bybit, Binance USD). Finally, we ﬁt the model to all instruments jointly, except for Bitstamp and Kraken. Due to the comparatively large number of zero values, their exclusion makes estimation and interpretation of the model more straightforward. To be consistent with the univariate analysis above, we estimate the models with one lag ( p =q = 1).16 Compared to the univariate analysis, the estimates for the inter- cept, the asymmetric response component and the distribution parameter do not change signiﬁcantly 16If more lags are included, the overall results behave very similar to the univariate case and do not change signiﬁcantly (see footnote 14). 20 and are thus not reported. Similarly, to economise on space we do not include the estimates for matrix A0 since it contains purely auxiliary parameters. USD Spot Pairs: Table 5 reports the estimates for matrices A and B of the vLogMEM(1,1) ﬁtted to diurnally-adjusted ﬁve-minute realised volatility on the three USD spot pairs. 17,18 It also includes the model’s log-likelihood values and BIC. We can see that the estimates on Coinbase change only marginally compared to the univariate results in Table 4 – the short-term persistence α decreases from 0.37 to about 0.34, while the long-term persistence level β reduces only from 0.59 to 0.58 – indicating that the volatility on Coinbase is rather independent of Bitstamp and Kraken. 19 By contrast, the levels of persistence on Bitstamp and Kraken change substantially once lagged volatility of Coinbase is included, which indicates a certain degree of dependence on the latter. On Bitstamp, short-term (long-term) persistence reduces from 0.38 (0.60) to 0.28 (0.55), while the estimates on Kraken drop from 0.38 and 0.60 to about 0.21 and 0.50. The non-diagonal entries of matrix A which capture the lagged dependence among exchanges reveal strong volatility ﬂows from Coinbase to Bitstamp and Kraken but not vice versa. While the estimates for spillovers from Coinbase to Bitstamp and Kraken are highly signiﬁcant at 0.12 and 0.20, the reversed ﬂows are much less (0.05 and 0.004, respectively) and in the case of Kraken, they are not even signiﬁcant. Putting these numbers in simple economic terms, a 29%-shock in realised volatility on Coinbase (i.e. εt = 1.2) – which is the conditional standard deviation of the innovations on Coinbase assuming only strictly positive values – leads to a relative increase of about 3.1% (5.2%) in expected volatility on Bitstamp (Kraken).20,21 On the other hand, a one-standard deviation shock on Bitstamp – again assuming only non-zero volatility values – increases the expected volatility on Coinbase only by 1%. Among Bitstamp and Kraken, we detect similar unidirectional volatility ﬂows. Spillovers from 17Since we include only one lag in our LogMEM, we omit the indices of the two matrices A1 and B1. 18For reasons of better readability, we report non-signiﬁcance rather than signiﬁcance of the parameter estimates. 19By short-term persistence, we mean the diagonal entries of the matrix A, i.e. the volatility ﬂows of an instrument to itself. Based on how much this parameter changes compared to the univariate analysis, we can draw conclusions about the dependencies among instruments. 20Note that we use the log of the conditional mean in the LogMEM, therefore we ﬁrst have to apply the exponential function to obtain the conditional mean itself. Moreover, for the calculation of the standard deviation, we assume there were only strictly positive volatility values, i.e. the innovations follow a simple log-normal distribution. Otherwise, we would have to take A0 into account as well, but since these are purely auxiliary parameters necessary to model the volatility at high frequency and the impact of zero volatility values is not the object of this study, we assume only strictly positive values. 21Also note that this amount is not the complete increase. Since the contemporaneous correlation among innovations, which our model does not capture, is still quite high even at the ﬁve-minute frequency, the actual increase will be a little more. 21 Table 5 Multivariate LogMEM(1,1) – USD Spot Coinbase Bitstamp Kraken A Coinbase 0.3383 0.0546 0.0044 ns Bitstamp 0.1184 0.2846 0.0248 Kraken 0.2006 0.1285 0.2073 B Coinbase 0.5760 Bitstamp 0.5522 Kraken 0.4975 LL −653 −20,962 −25,418 BIC 1,408 42,025 50,937 Note: The table reports parameter estimates, log-likelihood value and BIC for the vLogMEM(1,1), ﬁtted to ﬁve-minute realised volatility on Coinbase (CB), Bitstamp (BS) and Kraken (KK) over the period from 1 January to 31 March 2021. The superscript ns indicates that the estimate is not signiﬁcant at the 1%-level. For better readibility, the parameters capturing short-term persistence are highlighted in red. Bitstamp to Kraken are highly signiﬁcant at 0.13, while the reversed ﬂows are quite weak and only about 0.02. That is, a one-standard deviation volatility shock on Bitstamp leads to a relative increase of 3.2% in expected volatility on Kraken. By contrast, a one-standard deviation shock on Kraken raises the expected volatility on Bitstamp only marginally by less than 1%. Following these results, we conclude that within the ﬁat-margined spot market, Coinbase is the main source of volatility. It exhibits major ﬂows to both Bitstamp and Kraken and receives only little volatility from Bitstamp. Among the two smaller exchanges, Bitstamp and Kraken, the former is the larger emitter of volatility, albeit its ﬂows to Kraken are signiﬁcantly smaller than those from Coinbase. Finally, Kraken transmits only very marginal ﬂows to Bitstamp and is the main receiver of volatility. USDT Spot Pairs: Table 6 reports parameter estimates, log-likelihood values and BIC for the two tether spot pairs on Binance and Huobi. Similarly to the ﬁat-margined analysis above, we see a signiﬁcant reduction in short-term persistence on Binance – it drops from 0.39 in the univariate analysis to less than 0.26. Huobi on the other hand experiences only a slight reduction in short-term persistence from 0.39 to about 0.36, which suggests that realised volatility on Huobi is rather independendent of Binance. This is also conﬁrmed by the non-diagonal entries of matrix A. With a highly signiﬁcant estimate of 0.14, volatility ﬂows from Huobi to Binance are very strong, whereas the reversed ﬂows from Binance to Huobi are not even signiﬁcant. Therefore, we conclude that within the tether-margined spot market, volatility mainly emerges on Huobi from where it then spills over to Binance. 22 Table 6 Multivariate LogMEM(1,1) – USDT Spot BinanceS Huobi A BinanceS 0.2591 0.1377 Huobi 0.0282 ns 0.3586 B BinanceS 0.5679 Huobi 0.5780 LL 556 1,316 BIC −1,030 −2,551 Note: The table reports parameter estimates, log-likelihood and BIC for the vLogMEM(1,1), ﬁtted to ﬁve-minute realised volatility on Binance Spot (BI S) and Huobi (HU) over the period from 1 January to 31 March 2021. The superscript ns indicates that the estimate is not signiﬁcant at the 1%-level. For better readibility, the parameters capturing short-term persistence are highlighted in red. Perpetual Swaps: Table 7 reports parameter estimates, log-likelihood value and BIC for the three perpetual swaps. We see that the dynamics of the Binance tether-margined perpetual are rather inde- pendent of the other two contracts, with its parameter estimates showing almost no changes compared to the univariate analysis. By contrast, the two ﬁat-margined perpetuals on Binance and Bybit ex- perience signiﬁcant parameter changes – especially their short-term persistence reduces substantially from 0.29 to 0.14 for Bybit and from 0.38 to 0.25 for Binance. On Bybit, the long-term persistence also drops signiﬁcantly to 0.61. These results suggest that realised volatility on the two USD perpetuals on Binance and Bybit depends strongly on the tether-margined Binance contract. The non-diagonal entries of matrix A indicate strong unidirectional ﬂows from the Binance USDT perpetual to the two USD-margined products. With estimates of 0.18 and 0.15, the Binance tether- contract transmits a large amount of volatility to both the Bybit and Binance ﬁat-perpetual – on Bybit, its inﬂuence even exceeds the short-term persistence. Our estimates imply that a one-standard deviation volatility shock on the USDT-product leads to a relative increase of 4.3% (3.4%) in expected volatility on the Bybit (Binance) USD-contract. By contrast, the Binance tether-margined perpetual does not receive any signiﬁcant volatility ﬂows, as can be seen from the two non-signiﬁcant entries in the ﬁrst row of A. Among the two USD perpetuals, Binance seems to be more important in terms of volatility transmission. Spillovers from Binance to Bybit are estimated as 0.09, while the reversed ﬂows are not signiﬁcant at the 1%-level. Based on these results, we conclude that the main source of volatility within the perpetuals market is the tether-margined contract on Binance. From there, large amounts of volatility are transmitted to the two largest ﬁat-margined perpetuals on Bybit and Binance. In addition, there are smaller volatility 23 Table 7 Multivariate LogMEM(1,1) – Perpetuals BinanceT Bybit Binance $ A BinanceT 0.3939 0.0126 ns −0.0089ns Bybit 0.1831 0.1402 0.0867 Binance$ 0.1462 0.0083 ns 0.2471 B BinanceT 0.5620 Bybit 0.6113 Binance$ 0.5753 LL 1,450 −8,114 −1,549 BIC −2,799 16,331 3,199 Note: The table reports parameter estimates, log-likelihood and BIC for the vLogMEM(1,1), ﬁtted to ﬁve-minute realised volatility on the Binance USDT perpetual (BIT ), Bybit perpetual (BY) and Binance USD perpetual (BI$) over the period from 1 January to 31 March 2021. The superscript ns indicates that the estimate is not signiﬁcant at the 1%-level. For better readibility, the parameters capturing short-term persistence are highlighted in red. ﬂows from the Binance USD-contract to Bybit. The fact that Bybit only receives, but does not transmit volatility might again be related to its market structure. Both fees and contract speciﬁcations make the product highly attractive for retail traders, generating rather uninformed trading activity to which traders on Binance do not react. Moreover, it might increase the time that traders on Bybit need to pick up signals from other exchanges, leading to a lagged dependence on realised volatility of Binance. Main Instruments: Table 8 reports the estimates for matrices A and B of the six-dimensional vLogMEM(1,1) ﬁtted to ﬁve-minute realised volatility on Coinbase, Huobi, Bybit and the three Binance instruments. It also includes the model’s log-likelihood values and BIC.22 As before, the degree of short- term persistence changes signiﬁcantly compared to the univariate dynamics. The most extreme change occurs on the Binance USDT spot pair – the estimate reduces from 0.39 to 0.07 – while the Binance tether-perpetual is the only instrument where the inclusion of lagged interdependence leads to an increase in short-term persistence. As in the previous multivariate analyses, the remaining parameters (asymmetric response component, long-term persistence, standard deviation of log residuals) do not change signiﬁcantly. Only on Bybit, the level of long-term persistence drops slightly from 0.68 in the univariate analysis to about 0.62. Overall, the Binance USDT perpetual has the second lowest level of long-term persistence – only on the Binance USDT spot pair, it is marginally smaller – and by far the highest degree of short-term 22To detect potential time-variation, we have also estimated the model for each of the three months separately. The overall results however do not change signiﬁcantly, indicating that the realised volatility dynamics are quite stable over time. 24 persistence. Therefore, the result from the univariate analysis that traders on this contract are more sensitive to prevailing market conditions than on the remaining ﬁve instruments still holds, once we allow for lagged interdependence. For better illustration, Figure 1 shows the magnitude of volatility ﬂows (i.e. the non-diagonal entries of matrix A) as a circular plot. Note that non-signiﬁcant entries are set to zero. From this ﬁgure it becomes clear that the Binance USDT perpetual is the main source of volatility. It exhibits very strong spillovers to all other instruments, while it only receives quite weak volatility ﬂows from Coinbase and Binance spot. The two remaining perpetuals (Bybit and Binance USD) are far less important and besides some volatility ﬂows between the two products, there is only a minor spillover from Bybit to Huobi. Interestingly, both Coinbase and Binance spot transmit volatility to all other instruments. However, as can be seen in Table 8, all of these ﬂows are negative. An explanation for this might be that traders on these spot exchanges need longer to react to (temporarily) increased volatility on the perpetual swaps. Once the volatility has risen on the spot exchanges, the transient increase on the perpetual contracts is already reversed, leading to a negative estimate of the volatility transmitted from spot exchanges. Finally, both Bybit and Huobi seem to be receivers rather than transmitters of volatility. Besides a weak spillover between the two instruments and minor ﬂows from Huobi to Binance spot, we detect no signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the remaining four instruments. 4.3 Intra-day Variation of Spillovers Similar to the FX market, crypto exchanges operate globally and are open 24/7. But trading activity varies signiﬁcantly over the course of the day, as shown by Figures 3 and 4. Therefore it is of particular importance to examine the volatility dynamics for short-term intra-day variation. 23 We do so by decomposing the trading day into three diﬀerent time periods of equal length, namely the Asian trading hours from midnight to 08:00 UTC, the European time period from 08:00 to 16:00 UTC and ﬁnally the U.S. trading hours from 16:00 to midnight UTC. For each of these three time periods, we introduce in our multivariate LogMEM(1,1) an interaction term of the log realised volatility with a dummy variable that is one during the respective time period and zero otherwise. Consequently, the 23Intra-day time-variation of the long-term persistence is rather unlikely and therefore, we focus on variation in the short-term parameters. 25 Table 8 Multivariate LogMEM(1,1) – Main Instruments Coinbase Binance S Huobi Binance T Bybit Binance $ To A Coinbase 0.2108 −0.0895 0.0352 ns 0.2548 0.0088 ns −0.0173ns 0.3762 BinanceS −0.0164ns 0.0742 0.0626 0.2439 0.0105 ns 0.0223ns 0.3806 Huobi −0.0282 −0.0851 0.2720 0.2177 0.0198 −0.0108ns 0.3962 BinanceT −0.0307 −0.0995 0.0247 ns 0.4702 0.0149 ns 0.0132ns 0.3400 Bybit −0.0761 −0.1373 0.0441 ns 0.3085 0.1450 0.1200 0.3600 Binance$ −0.0594 −0.1039 0.0110 ns 0.2606 0.0134 ns 0.2742 0.3716 From 0.0163 −0.4411 0.3346 1.7557 0.1648 0.3943 B Coinbase 0.5749 BinanceS 0.5651 Huobi 0.5780 BinanceT 0.5665 Bybit 0.6167 Binance$ 0.5805 LL −562 690 1,425 1,482 −8,072 −1,504 BIC 1,287 −1,218 −2,687 −2,801 16,307 3,170 Note: The table reports parameter estimates, log-likelihood and BIC for the vLogMEM(1,1), ﬁtted to ﬁve-minute realised volatility on Coinbase (CB), Binance Spot (BI S), Huobi (HU), Binance USDT perpetual (BI T ), Bybit (BY) and Binance USD perpetual (BI $) over the period from 1 January to 31 March 2021. The superscript ns indicates that the estimate is not signiﬁcant at the 1%-level. For better readibility, the parameters capturing short-term persistence are highlighted in red. conditional mean speciﬁcation in (4) changes to logµt = w + (A + AAS1AS + AEU1EU + AUS1US) ( logxt−1⊙ 1{xt−j >0} ) + A01{xt−1=0} + Γ logx− t−1 + B logµt−1 where 1AS, 1EU and 1U S denote the dummy variables for Asian, European and U.S. trading hours, respectively. All other variables are the same as in (4). Table 9 reports the resulting estimates for the short-term matricesA, AAS, AEU and AUS, together with log-likelihood values and BIC. For reasons of clarity and comprehensibility, entries that are not signiﬁcant at the 10%-level are already removed. We do not include the estimates for the remaining parameters since most of them do not change signiﬁcantly – only the intercepts on Coinbase, Huobi and the three Binance instruments reduce slightly to about −0.05. This shows that volatility ﬂows from the spot exchanges (Coinbase, Binance S, Huobi) are far more constant over the course of the day than those from the three perpetual swaps. In particular, ﬂows transmitted by Coinbase do not exhibit any intra-day variation and the estimates from matrixA are quite close to those in the previous analysis. Similarly, we do not ﬁnd signiﬁcant intra-day variation on Huobi, where only two entries – 26 Table 9 Multivariate LogMEM(1,1) – Intra-day Coinbase Binance S Huobi Binance T Bybit Binance $ A Coinbase 0.1906 ∗∗∗ – 0.0715 ∗ – – 0.1082 ∗∗∗ BinanceS – 0.1226 ∗∗ 0.1119∗∗∗ – – 0.1046 ∗∗∗ Huobi −0.0505∗∗ – 0.3514 ∗∗∗ – – 0.0781 ∗∗ BinanceT −0.0456∗∗ – 0.0646 ∗ 0.2669∗∗∗ – 0.1095 ∗∗∗ Bybit −0.0934∗∗∗ – – 0.1671 ∗∗ 0.0435∗∗ 0.3117∗∗∗ Binance$ −0.0779∗∗∗ – – 0.1277 ∗∗ – 0.3431 ∗∗∗ AAS Coinbase – – – 0.1546 ∗∗ 0.0826∗∗∗ −0.1902∗∗∗ BinanceS – – – 0.1172 ∗∗ 0.0577∗∗∗ −0.1087∗∗ Huobi – – – 0.1325 ∗∗ 0.0658∗∗∗ −0.1343∗∗∗ BinanceT – – – – 0.0720 ∗∗∗ −0.1420∗∗∗ Bybit – – – – 0.2177 ∗∗∗ −0.2702∗∗∗ Binance$ – – – – 0.0729 ∗∗∗ −0.1108∗ AEU Coinbase – −0.0978∗∗ – 0.1813 ∗∗∗ 0.0546∗∗ −0.1466∗∗∗ BinanceS – −0.0984∗ – 0.1402 ∗∗ 0.0462∗∗ – Huobi – – −0.0689∗ 0.1701∗∗∗ 0.0486∗∗ −0.1025∗ BinanceT – −0.1198∗∗∗ – 0.1569 ∗∗∗ 0.0469∗∗ −0.0855∗ Bybit – −0.1356∗∗∗ – 0.1447 ∗∗ 0.1885∗∗∗ −0.2818∗∗∗ Binance$ – −0.1043∗∗ – – – – AUS Coinbase – – – 0.2221 ∗∗∗ 0.0781∗∗∗ −0.1656∗∗∗ BinanceS – – −0.0848∗∗ 0.1654∗∗∗ 0.0610∗∗∗ −0.1073∗∗ Huobi – −0.0935∗ – 0.2020 ∗∗∗ 0.0572∗∗∗ −0.0956∗ BinanceT – – – 0.1902 ∗∗∗ 0.0611∗∗∗ −0.1148∗∗ Bybit – −0.1215∗∗ – 0.1903 ∗∗∗ 0.1978∗∗∗ −0.2793∗∗∗ Binance$ – – – 0.1257 ∗∗ 0.0627∗∗∗ – LL −502 760 1,489 1,565 −8,012 −1,450 BIC 1,350 −1,175 −2,633 −2,785 16,370 3,246 Note: The table reports parameter estimates, log-likelihood and BIC for the vLogMEM(1,1), ﬁtted to ﬁve-minute realised volatility on Coinbase (CB), Binance Spot (BI S), Huobi (HU), Binance USDT perpetual (BI T ), Bybit (BY) and Binance USD perpetual (BI $) over the period from 1 January to 31 March 2021. The asterisks ∗∗∗,∗∗, ∗ indicate signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively, based on robust standard errors. For better readibility, entries that are not signiﬁcant at the 10%-level are already removed and the parameters capturing short-term persistence are highlighted in red. the short-term persistence during European trading and the volatility ﬂows to Binance spot during the U.S. trading period – are negative and (weakly) signiﬁcant. The Binance USDT spot pair on the other hand only transmits volatility during European trading hours and, to a lesser extent, during U.S. trading times. The parameter estimates in the second column of AEU are very similar to the short-term estimates in Table 8 and therefore, we conclude that the previously documented volatility ﬂows from the Binance USDT spot pair are mainly caused by European trading activity. All three perpetual swaps exhibit a high degree of intra-day variation, with only eight out of the 54 associated parameters of the interaction matrices AAS, AEU and AUS being not signiﬁcant. As in 27 the previous analysis, the Binance USDT perpetual exhibits the strongest volatility ﬂows to all other instruments. However, these ﬂows intensify throughout the day and reach their maximum during U.S. trading hours, when the spillovers to all other instruments are (highly) signiﬁcant and (far) above 0.16. The Bybit and Binance USD perpetuals both exhibit signiﬁcant volatility spillovers over the whole day, but their intra-day patterns diﬀer from the tether-margined contract. While the total volatility ﬂows transmitted by Bybit are largest (lowest) in Asian (European) trading, the Binance USD perpetual emits most volatility during European trading hours and only rather little in Asian trading. We conclude that even after accounting for intra-day variation in volatility spillovers, the Binance tether-margined contract is still the instrument that generates and transmits most of the volatility. However, its leadership role is less pronounced depending on the time of day and the Bybit perpetual in particular gains relative importance during Asian trading. Overall, the volatility ﬂows among the six crypto instruments seem to strengthen over the course of the day. While the total spillover amount – measured as the sum of absolute ﬂows, excluding the short-term persistence parameter – is 1.78 in Asian trading, it increases by 30% to about 2.30 during European and U.S. trading hours. Also, when considering only the short-term persistence (i.e. the diagonal entries of the matrices), we ﬁnd a similar intra-day pattern. In Asian and European trading, the total short-term persistence of the six instruments is about 1.43 and 1.50, respectively, while it amounts to more than 1.70 during U.S. trading hours. That is, a volatility shock that occurs during the U.S. trading period raises the traders’ expectations on the realised volatility within the next ﬁve-minute interval signiﬁcantly more than a shock during Asian or European trading times. These two ﬁndings suggest that (i) during U.S. trading hours, traders pay more attention to prevailing market conditions when updating their expectations and (ii) the crypto market exhibits a higher interconnectedness when traditional Western stock markets are open, which is consistent with Figure 3. 4.4 Robustness Checks To check the robustness of our volatility transmission results, we repeat the above analysis using two alternative estimators of realised volatility. In particular, we use the Bipower Variation (BPV) of Barndorﬀ-Nielsen and Shephard (2004, 2006) calculated as BPV = π 2 n∑ j=2 |rt+j−1||rt+j| (5) 28 and the Median Realised Volatility (MedRV) by Andersen et al. (2012) which is given by MedRV = π 6− 4 √ 3 +π n−1∑ j=2 med(|rt+j−1|,|rt+j|,|rt+j+1|)2. (6) Both of these measures are robust towards (infrequent) jumps in the return series – for the BPV, a jump may be oﬀset by an adjacent small return, while the application of the median in the MedRV reduces the eﬀect of an isolated, very large return to zero. 24 In addition, due to the use of the median, the MedRV estimator is also particularly robust towards zero returns. Therefore, these two measures are well suited to check the robustness of our results towards the choice of realised volatility estimator. 25 We proceed in exactly the same way as before, i.e. we ﬁrst remove the intra-day pattern – which looks very similar to the pattern observed for the pre-averaged volatility – and winsorize the top 0.05% of the diurnally-adjusted realised volatility values. Then, we estimate both univariate and multivariate versions of the LogMEM – ﬁrst for each group of instruments separately and then for the most impor- tant instruments jointly. For reasons of brevity, we report only selected results here, but all results are available from the authors upon request.26 For most products, both MedRV and BPV are slightly more (less) short-term (long-term) persistent which is probably caused by the microstructure-reducing local smoothing applied in the pre-averaged volatility estimator. However, for all multivariate analyses, the results are consistent with those obtained using the pre-averaged realised volatility. Most importantly, as can be seen in Tables 10 and 11, the multivariate analysis including the main instruments still leads to the conclusion that the Binance USDT-margined perpetual contract is the main source of volatility. It transmits signiﬁcant, strong ﬂows to all other instruments and receives only very little volatility from Coinbase and Bybit. Interestingly, in contrast to the analysis using pre-averaged realised volatility, the volatility ﬂows from Coinbase are either not statistically signiﬁcant or slightly positive. This diﬀerence might be 24Please note that equations (5) and (6) calculate the realised variance and we need to take the square root and multiply it by√365× 288 to obtain the realised volatility. 25In addition to these two alternative measures, we also repeated the above analyses using simple squared log returns as realised volatility estimator. The results however are qualitatively similar to the pre-averaged volatility measure. Therefore, we do not report them here but they are available upon request. 26It is worth noting that we could not estimate the LogMEM for Kraken. In particular, the persistence parameters α and β converged quickly to estimates very similar to the analyses using the pre-averaged realised volatiliy. However, the three remaining parameters ( ω, α0 and s) diverged to (minus) inﬁnity. This behaviour is probably caused by an unusual extremity in the realised volatility. Due to low trading activity on Kraken, the time series exhibits quite a lot of zero values. At the same time however, we obtain extreme non-zero volatility values since we do not pre-average the one-second returns. The kurtosis of the diurnally-adjusted and winsorized realised volatility on Kraken is 39 (BPV) and 40 (MedRV) – compared to “only” 9 for the pre-averaged measure. Due to this extremity, the LogMEM probably reaches its limits and we do exclude Kraken from our robustness analysis. 29 Table 10 Multivariate LogMEM(1,1) – Main Instruments; Bipower Variation Coinbase Binance S Huobi Binance T Bybit Binance $ To A Coinbase 0.3263 −0.0063ns −0.0465 0.0931 0.0401 0.0329 0.4459 BinanceS 0.0207 0.2669 −0.0009ns 0.0991 0.0353 0.0264 0.4484 Huobi −0.0029ns −0.0223ns 0.3439 0.0425 0.0458 0.0076 ns 0.4321 BinanceT 0.0227 0.0133 ns 0.0078ns 0.3532 0.0343 0.0197 ns 0.4102 Bybit 0.0187 ns −0.0069ns 0.0327ns 0.0812 0.2073 0.0631 0.3515 Binance$ 0.0294 0.0187 ns −0.0083ns 0.1213 0.0656 0.2230 0.4394 From 0.3991 0.2669 0.2973 0.7903 0.4283 0.3455 B Coinbase 0.5154 BinanceS 0.4779 Huobi 0.5282 BinanceT 0.4699 Bybit 0.6116 Binance$ 0.5308 LL −2,841 −99 −992 −281 −9,791 −6,674 BIC 5,844 360 2,146 −400 19,744 13,511 Note: The table reports parameter estimates, log-likelihood and BIC for the vLogMEM(1,1), ﬁtted to ﬁve-minute Bipower Variation on Coinbase (CB), Binance Spot (BIS), Huobi (HU), Binance USDT perpetual (BI T ), Bybit (BY) and Binance USD perpetual (BI $) over the period from 1 January to 31 March 2021. The superscript ns indicates that the estimate is not signiﬁcant at the 1%-level. For better readibility, the parameters capturing short-term persistence are highlighted in red. related to microstructure noise. The pre-averaged volatility estimator smooths the one-second returns locally to reduce the impact of noise to a certain extent – the MedRV and BPV do not explicitly do this. Therefore, the now positive spillovers from Coinbase, the best-known crypto exchange and thus the main trading venue for less informed retail traders, might be due to microstructure noise that is transmitted to the other instruments. 5 Volume Results 5.1 Volume Flows We proceed exactly in the same way as before, i.e. we ﬁrst adjust trading volume for its intra-day pattern and winsorize the top 0.05% to reduce the inﬂuence of extreme outliers. Then we estimate the LogMEM – ﬁrst the univariate version to all instruments separately and then the multivariate model to each instrument group, and ﬁanlly to our selection of six main instruments. We also estimate the model including dummy interaction terms to detect intra-day patterns, as in Section 4.3. To economize on space, we only report selected results here – deltailed results are available from the authors upon request. 30 Table 11 Multivariate LogMEM(1,1) – Main Instruments; Median Realised Volatility Coinbase Binance S Huobi Binance T Bybit Binance $ To A Coinbase 0.3208 0.0043 ns −0.0497 0.0797 0.0425 0.0359 0.4292 BinanceS 0.0195 0.2744 −0.0051ns 0.1045 0.0341 0.0217 ns 0.4325 Huobi −0.0059ns −0.0198ns 0.3505 0.0524 0.0416 0.0023 ns 0.4446 BinanceT 0.0190 0.0187 ns 0.0127ns 0.3474 0.0365 0.0157 ns 0.4029 Bybit 0.0266 −0.0167ns 0.0188ns 0.1161 0.2098 0.0586 0.4111 Binance$ 0.0277 0.0174 ns −0.0015ns 0.1278 0.0612 0.2327 0.4494 From 0.4135 0.2744 0.3009 0.8280 0.4258 0.3272 B Coinbase 0.5153 BinanceS 0.4759 Huobi 0.5217 BinanceT 0.4713 Bybit 0.6073 Binance$ 0.5284 LL −2,347 261 −214 798 −10,250 −6,173 BIC 4,857 −358 590 −1,433 20,663 12,508 Note: The table reports parameter estimates, log-likelihood and BIC for the vLogMEM(1,1), ﬁtted to ﬁve-minute Median Realised Volatility on Coinbase (CB), Binance Spot (BI S), Huobi (HU), Binance USDT perpetual (BI T ), Bybit (BY) and Binance USD perpetual (BI $) over the period from 1 January to 31 March 2021. The superscript ns indicates that the estimate is not signiﬁcant at the 1%-level. For better readibility, the parameters capturing short-term persistence are highlighted in red. Table 12 reports the matrices A and B resulting from the vLogMEM(1,1) ﬁtted to ﬁve-minute trading volume on Coinbase, Huobi, Bybit and the three Binance instruments. The results are quite diﬀerent from the volatility ﬂows reported in Table 8. Trading volume has much more short-term persistence than realised volatility – the diagonal entries of A and B are much higher and lower, respectively – indicating that volume is much more sensitive to the current state of the market. This ﬁnding is is in line with the results of Nguyen et al. (2020) on US Treasury notes. More importantly, however, Table 12 shows that volume ﬂows between the instruments on diﬀerent exchanges have little relationship with volatility spillovers. In particular, now it is the spot pairs, espe- cially on Coinbase and Binance, that transmit the most volume to the perpetuals. Coinbase transmits over three times as much volume as the Binance tether-margined perpetual, which is the main source of realised volatility. Interestingly, among the three perpetual contracts, the Bybit contract transmits most volume even though it is the least relevant in terms of volatility generation and transmission. By contrast, the Binance USD perpetual does not transmit volume to any of the other instruments. Clearly, our previous results on volatility transmission are not simply related to volume transmis- sion. In fact, taken together we ﬁnd that it is not only volume which matters for volatility transmission, 31 Table 12 Multivariate LogMEM(1,1) for Trading Volume – Main Instruments Coinbase Binance S Huobi Binance T Bybit Binance $ To A Coinbase 0.4094 0.0664 0.0195 −0.0576 0.0175 −0.0058ns 0.4551 BinanceS 0.0768 0.4114 0.0175 −0.0529 0.0208 0.0110 ns 0.4735 Huobi 0.0880 0.0960 0.3825 −0.0572 0.0076 ns −0.0135ns 0.5093 BinanceT 0.0619 0.0546 −0.0039ns 0.3538 0.0454 −0.0019ns 0.5157 Bybit 0.0561 0.0537 −0.0272 0.0377 0.3642 −0.0065ns 0.4846 Binance$ 0.0569 0.0660 −0.0057ns −0.0119ns 0.0468 0.3176 0.4874 From 0.7491 0.7481 0.3923 0.2238 0.4947 0.3176 B Coinbase 0.4954 BinanceS 0.3915 Huobi 0.3789 BinanceT 0.3725 Bybit 0.4467 Binance$ 0.4509 LL −9,525 −8,500 −12,245 −10,817 −13,307 −12,172 BIC 19,193 17,143 24,632 21,777 26,755 24,486 Note: The table reports parameter estimates, log-likelihood and BIC for the vLogMEM(1,1), ﬁtted to ﬁve-minute trading volume (in USD) on Coinbase (CB), Binance Spot (BI S), Huobi (HU), Binance USDT perpetual (BI T ), Bybit (BY) and Binance USD perpetual (BI $) over the period from 1 January to 31 March 2021. The superscript ns indicates that the estimate is not signiﬁcant at the 1%-level. For better readibility, the parameters capturing short-term persistence are highlighted in red. but also the quality of information in this volume. We conclude that the two spot pairs on Coinbase and Binance, as well as the Bybit perpetual contract, are the instruments with the least informed traders. This is because Coinbase and Binance are the most widely known spot exchanges and the properties of the Bybit contract make it attractive for smaller, retail investors. While these exchanges transmit the most trading volume, in terms of volatility transmission they are much less relevant than the Binance tether-margined perpetual. To further corroborate that our results on realised volatility transmission are diﬀerent from volume spillovers, Table 13 reports results of estimating the vLogMEM(1,1) with dummy interaction terms to capture intra-day variation. Compared with realised volatility, the ﬁve-minute trading volume is rather stable over the course of the day, as most entries of the matrixA are highly signiﬁcant while the dummy matrices AAS, AEU and AUS have many non-signiﬁcant elements. In fact, we observe almost no intra-day volume variation on Huobi, Bybit or the Binance instruments. Only the volume ﬂows from Coinbase change signiﬁcantly: they are lowest during Asian trading hours and substantially increase during European and US trading. Overall however, the two spot pairs on Coinbase and Binance are still the main transmitters of trading volume, even after accounting for intra-day variation. In Table 32 Table 13 Multivariate LogMEM(1,1) for Trading Volume – Intra-day Coinbase Binance S Huobi Binance T Bybit Binance $ A Coinbase 0.3873 ∗∗∗ 0.0548∗∗∗ – −0.0503∗∗∗ 0.0188∗∗ – BinanceS 0.0447∗∗∗ 0.3891∗∗∗ – −0.0717∗∗∗ 0.0166∗∗ 0.0416∗∗∗ Huobi 0.0435 ∗∗∗ 0.0911∗∗∗ 0.3562∗∗∗ −0.0523∗∗∗ – – BinanceT 0.0329∗∗∗ 0.0486∗∗∗ −0.0186∗ 0.3138∗∗∗ 0.0481∗∗∗ – Bybit 0.0383 ∗∗∗ 0.0557∗∗∗ −0.0537∗∗∗ 0.0407∗ 0.3337∗∗∗ – Binance$ 0.0270∗∗∗ 0.0911∗∗∗ −0.0183∗ −0.0358∗ 0.0464∗∗∗ 0.3193∗∗∗ AAS Coinbase – – 0.0191 ∗∗ – – 0.0281 ∗ BinanceS 0.0258∗∗∗ – – – – – Huobi 0.0395 ∗∗∗ – – −0.0402∗ – – BinanceT – – – – – – Bybit – – 0.0377 ∗∗∗ – 0.0250 ∗∗ – Binance$ 0.0214∗∗ – 0.0168 ∗ – – – AEU Coinbase 0.0271 ∗∗∗ – – – – – BinanceS 0.0356∗∗∗ 0.0250∗ – 0.0329 ∗ – −0.0539∗∗∗ Huobi 0.0493 ∗∗∗ – – – – – BinanceT 0.0391∗∗∗ – – 0.0670 ∗∗∗ −0.0139∗ −0.0507∗∗∗ Bybit 0.0311 ∗∗∗ – – – 0.0272 ∗∗∗ −0.0398∗∗ Binance$ 0.0430∗∗∗ – – 0.0414 ∗∗ – – AUS Coinbase 0.0309 ∗∗∗ – – – – – BinanceS 0.0432∗∗∗ – – 0.0340 ∗ – −0.0348∗∗ Huobi 0.0591 ∗∗∗ −0.0392∗∗ 0.0274∗∗∗ – – – BinanceT 0.0385∗∗∗ – – 0.0599 ∗∗∗ – – Bybit 0.0290 ∗∗∗ – 0.0214 ∗∗ – 0.0370 ∗∗∗ – Binance$ 0.0349∗∗∗ −0.0499∗∗∗ – – – – LL −9,492 −8,434 −12,174 −10,757 −13,244 −12,128 BIC 19,310 17,194 24,674 21,838 26,814 24,581 Note: The table reports parameter estimates, log-likelihood and BIC for the vLogMEM(1,1), ﬁtted to ﬁve-minute trading volume (in USD) on Coinbase (CB), Binance Spot (BI S), Huobi (HU), Binance USDT perpetual (BI T ), Bybit (BY) and Binance USD perpetual (BI$) over the period from 1 January to 31 March 2021. The asterisks∗∗∗,∗∗, ∗ indicate signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively, based on robust standard errors. For better readibility, entries that are not signiﬁcant at the 10%-level are already removed and the parameters capturing short-term persistence are highlighted in red. 13, it is also worth noting that all instruments except for the Binance inverse perpetual exhibit an elevated short-term persistence (i.e. the diagonal entries of the matrices A, AAS, AEU and AUS) during European and/or US trading hours which once more indicates that traders pay more attention to prevailing market conditions during these times. 5.2 Volume-Volatility Relationship To study the interaction between trading volume and realised volatility, we estimate six bivariate LogMEM for Coinbase, Huobi, Bybit and the three Binance instruments. Both trading volume and 33 Table 14 Bivariate LogMEM(2,1) – Trading Volume & Realised Volatility Coinbase Binance Spot Huobi TV RV TV RV TV RV A1 TV 0.4953 −0.0548 0.5560 −0.1123 0.4935 −0.0796 RV 0.0966 0.3394 0.1364 0.3039 0.0790 0.3471 A2 TV −0.3048 0.0547 −0.3754 0.1123 −0.3171 0.0995 RV −0.0946 −0.1891 −0.1360 −0.1523 −0.0778 −0.1923 Binance USDT Bybit Binance USD TV RV TV RV TV RV A1 TV 0.5526 −0.1100 0.5157 −0.1116 0.4606 −0.0045ns RV 0.1076 0.3023 0.1384 0.2208 0.0990 0.2988 A2 TV −0.4141 0.1072 −0.3555 0.1047 −0.3101 0.0015 ns RV −0.1112 −0.1216ns −0.1396 −0.0985 −0.1035 −0.1267 Note: The table reports the parameter estimates for the matrices A1 and A2 from the bivariate LogMEM(2,1), ﬁtted to ﬁve-minute trading volume (TV) and realised volatility (RV) on Coinbase, Binance Spot, Huobi, Binance USDT perpetual, Bybit and Binance USD perpetual over the period from 1 January to 31 March 2021. The superscript ns indicates that the estimate is not signiﬁcant at the 10%-level. realised volatility are diurnally-adjusted to remove the deterministic intra-day patterns documented in Figures 3 and 4. In addition, we winsorize the top 0.05% of the two time series. In contrast with the previous analyses, we include two lags in the short-term persistence (i.e. we ﬁt a LogMEM(2,1)) thus increasing the model’s ﬂexibility and ability to capture interactions between the two variables. The resulting estimates of the six bivariate models are reported in Table 14. As before, we only report the matrices A1 and A2 since the remaining parameters are less relevant for our analysis. We see that the relationship between trading volume and volatility is similar for all of the six instruments. In the ﬁrst lag, the impact of volume on volatility is positive, while that of volatility on volume is negative. This implies that an increase in volatility is preceded by an increase in trading volume in the previous ﬁve-minute interval. However, in the second lag, the relationship is reversed, leading to a negative eﬀect of volume on volatility and a positive inﬂuence of volatility on volume. We suppose that this inversion is caused by some mean-reverting behaviour – indicated by the negative diagonal entries of A2 – and a longer response time (i.e. a time delay) of volatility. This is also supported by the diagonal entries of the matrix A1 which imply a higher short-term persistence of volume than volatility. Overall, we conclude that there is a signiﬁcant bi-directional causality relationship between trading volume and realised volatility. Except, for Binance USD perpetual, we ﬁnd that trading volume causes realised volatility, but the eﬀect of volatility on volume is not signiﬁcant in either lag. 34 6 Conclusions We analyse high-frequency realised volatility dynamics and spillovers in the bitcoin market during the most recent bull period from 1 January to 31 March 2021. Our analysis focuses on two cryptocurrency pairs, namely trading bitcoin against the U.S. dollar (the main ﬁat-crypto pair) and trading bitcoin against tether (the main crypto-crypto pair). Based on second-by-second transaction data covering the major spot and perpetual exchanges, we estimate both univariate and multivariate versions of the Logarithmic Multiplicative Error Model – ﬁrst for each group of instruments separately and then for the most important instruments jointly. Finally, we examine the inter-exchange spillovers for intra-day variation by dividing the day into three diﬀerent time zones of equal length (Asian, European, U.S. trading hours). The tether-margined perpetual contract on Binance receives the least volatility ﬂows during Asian, European and U.S. trading time zones. However, it is clearly the main emitter of volatil- ity. During European and U.S. trading, the total spillover amount is about 30% higher than during Asian trading hours, when traders on this contract are the most reactive to prevailing market condi- tions. and exchanges exhibits a higher inter-connectedness. We also show that volatility transmission patterns diﬀer markedly from volume ﬂows, where Coinbase is the main source of transmission. The results and discussions in this paper aim to illuminate tether’s ability for contagion and the role of Binance in volatility transmission within the bitcoin market. Binance is not just a trading venue, it acts as a broker and custodian of tether, and a large fraction of the recent tether issuance can be linked to Binance’s demand. 27 Thus, our concern about the dominance of Binance is exacerbated by an equal concern about tether’s ever-increasing market capitalization and its growing usage. Binance could also be implicated in the long-standing concerns about tether’s collateralization. The stable coin’s issuer, Tether Limited, originally claimed to hold one U.S. dollar for each token of tether. But in May 2021, after recurring accusations of creating un-backed tokens and a prolonged investigation by the New York Attorney General, Tether reported that only 2.9% of all tokens are actually backed by cash reserves and about 50% is in commercial paper, a form of unsecured debt that is normally only issued by ﬁrms with high-quality debt ratings. The simultaneous growth of Binance and tether even begs the question whether Binance itself is the issuer of a large fraction of tether’s $30 billion commercial paper. While the speculation surrounding the issuer(s) will continue as long as Tether 27For instance, on 31 May Paolo Ardoini, CTO of Tether and Bitﬁnex, tweeted that Binance ordered $3bn more tether to be minted, and one of Binance cold wallets held about 17.1 bn tokens, almost 30% of the total tether supply, at the beginning of July 2021. See the unoﬃcial Tether Rich List. 35 remains unwilling to undergo a reliable third-party audit, 28 it is deﬁnite that both tether and Binance require more attention from academics, practitioners and especially regulators. Our conclusions should be useful to inform the coming congress debates on the Digital Asset Market Structure and Investor Protection Act that is proposing sweeping reforms in crypto trading. In terms of future research, we are interested to assess information processing and volatility trans- mission from the diﬀerent perspective of volatility discovery. Using the methodology proposed in Dias et al. (2016) and applied to three spot exchanges by Dimpﬂ and Elshiaty (2021), one could examine how much the diﬀerent crypto instruments contribute to the common latent volatility process and whether the tether-margined perpetual contract on Binance – which we identify as the main source of volatility – is also the leading market in the volatility process. Given the declining importance of bitcoin within the crypto market, another interesting topic is a similar volatility transmission analysis within ether spot and perpetuals on diﬀerent exchanges, or for ripple and other important coins – and another analysis between bitcoin and ether and other coins, including both spot and perpetual instruments. References Alexander, C. and D. F. Heck (2020). Price discovery in bitcoin: The impact of unregulated markets. Journal of Financial Stability 50 , 100776. Allen, D., F. Chan, M. McAleer, and S. Peiris (2014). Finite sample properties of the QMLE for the Log-ACD model: Application to Australian stocks. Journal of Financial Econometrics 12 (1), 89–121. Andersen, T. G. (2000). Some reﬂections on analysis of high-frequency data. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 18 (2), 146–153. Andersen, T. G. and T. Bollerslev (1997). Intraday periodicity and volatility persistence in ﬁnancial markets. Journal of Empirical Finance 4 (2-3), 115–118. Andersen, T. G., D. Dobrev, and E. Schaumburg (2012). Jump-robust volatility estimation using nearest neighbor truncation. Journal of Econometrics 169 (1), 75–93. Barndorﬀ-Nielsen, O. E. and N. Shephard (2004). Power and bipower variation with stochastic volatility and jumps. Journal of Financial Econometrics 2 (1), 1–37. Barndorﬀ-Nielsen, O. E. and N. Shephard (2006). Econometrics of testing for jumps in ﬁnancial economics using bipower variation. Journal of Financial Econometrics 4 (1), 1–30. Baur, D. G. and L. T. Hoang (2021). A crypto safe haven against bitcoin. Finance Research Letters 38. 28See Financial Times on 14 May 2021 and the oﬃcial statement by Tether Limited on 31 March 2021. 36 Bauwens, L. and P. Giot (2000). The logarithmic ACD model: An application to the bid-ask quote process of three NYSE stocks. Annales d’ ´Economie et de Statistique 60 , 117–149. Berger, D., A. Chaboud, and E. Hjalmarsson (2009). What drives volatility persistence in the foreign exchange market? Journal of Financial Economics 94 (2), 192–213. Bollerslev, T., J. Litvinova, and G. Tauchen (2006). Leverage and volatility feedback eﬀects in high- frequency data. Journal of Financial Econometrics 4 (3), 353–384. Bubak, V., E. Kocenda, and F. Zikes (2011). Volatility transmission in emerging european foreign exchange markets. Journal of Banking and Finance 35 (11), 2829–2841. Cai, C. X., R. Hudson, and K. Keasey (2004). Intra day bid-ask spreads, trading volume and volatility: Recent empirical evidence from the London Stock Exchange. Journal of Business Finance and Accounting 31 (5-6), 647–676. Caporale, G. M., W.-Y. Kang, F. Spagnolo, and N. Spagnolo (2021). Cyber-attacks, spillovers and contagion in the cryptocurrency markets. Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions & Money . Cheah, E.-T., T. Mishra, M. Parhi, and Z. Zhang (2018). Long memory interdependency and ineﬃ- ciency in bitcoin markets. Economics Letters 167 , 18–25. Chevallier, J. and B. S´ evi (2012). On the volatility–volume relationship in energy futures markets using intraday data. Energy Economics 34 , 1896–1909. Cipollini, F., R. F. Engle, and G. M. Gallo (2017). Copula–based vMEM speciﬁcations versus alter- natives: The case of trading activity. Econometrics 5 (2). Danielsson, J. and R. Payne (2001). Measuring and explaining liquidity on an electronic limit order book: evidence from Reuters D2000-2. Working Paper . Dias, G. F., C. M. Scherrer, and F. Papailias (2016). Volatility discovery. Working Paper . Dimpﬂ, T. and D. Elshiaty (2021). Volatility discovery in cryptocurrency markets. Working Paper . Engle, R. F. (2002). New frontiers for arch models. Journal of Applied Econometrics 17 (5), 425–446. Engle, R. F. and J. R. Russell (1998). Autoregressive Conditional Duration: A new model for irregularly spaced transaction data. Econometrica 66 (5), 1127–1162. Eross, A., F. McGroarty, A. Urquhart, and S. Wolfe (2019). The intraday dynamics of bitcoin.Research in International Business and Finance 49 , 71–81. Escribano, A. and G. Sucarrat (2018). Equation-by-equation estimation of multivariate periodic elec- tricity price volatility. Energy Economics 74 , 287–298. Griﬃn, J. and A. Shams (2020). Is bitcoin really untethered? Journal of Finance 75 (4), 1913–1964. Hautsch, N., P. Malec, and M. Schienle (2014). Capturing the zero: A new class of zero-augmented distributions and multiplicative error processes. Journal of Financial Econometrics 12 (1), 89–121. Hautsch, N. and M. Podolskij (2013). Preaveraging-based estimation of quadratic variation in the presence of noise and jumps: Theory, implementation, and empirical evidence. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 31 (2), 165–183. 37 Jacod, J., Y. Li, P. A. Mykland, M. Podolskij, and M. Vetter (2009). Microstructure noise in the continuous case: The pre-averaging approach. Stochastic Processes and their Applications 119 , 2249–2276. Jain, P. C. and G.-H. Joh (1988). The dependence between hourly prices and trading volume. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 23 (3), 269–283. Ji, Q., E. Bouri, L. Kristoufek, and B. Lucey (2021). Realised volatility connectedness among bitcoin exchange markets. Finance Research Letters 38. Katsiampa, P., S. Corbet, and B. Lucey (2019). High frequency volatility co-movements in cryptocur- rency markets. Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions & Money 62 , 35–52. McGroarty, F., O. ap Gwilym, and S. Thomas (2009). The role of private information in return volatility, bid–askspreads and price levels in the foreign exchange market. Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money 19 , 387–401. McInish, T. H. and R. A. Wood (1990). An analysis of transactions data for the Toronto Stock Exchange: Return patterns and end-of-the-day eﬀect. Journal of Banking and Finance 14 (2-3), 441–458. Nguyen, G., R. Engle, M. Fleming, and E. Ghysels (2020). Liquidity and volatility in the U.S. treasury market. Journal of Econometrics 217 , 207–229. Ozenbas, D. (2008). Intra-day trading volume patterns of equity markets: A study of US and European stock markets. International Business and Economics Research Journal 7 (8). Sensoy, A., T. C. Silva, S. Corbet, and B. M. Tabak (2021). High-frequency return and volatility spillovers among cryptocurrencies. Applied Economics. Taylor, N. and Y. Xu (2017). The logarithmic vector multiplicative error model: an application to high frequency NYSE stock data. Quantitative Finance 17 (7), 1021–1035. Wang, J. and G. M. Ngene (2020). Does bitcoin still own the dominant power? an intraday analysis. International Review of Financial Analysis 71 . Yi, S., Z. Xu, and G.-J. Wang (2018). Volatility connectedness in the cryptocurrency market: Is bitcoin a dominant cryptocurrency? International Review of Financial Analysis 60 , 98–114. 38