Fragmentation, Price Formation, and Cross-Impact in Bitcoin Markets Jakob Albers∗ Department of Statistics, University of Oxford Oxford, UK jakob.albers@merton.ox.ac.uk Mihai Cucuringu Department of Statistics and Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK mihai.cucuringu@stats.ox.ac.uk Sam Howison Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford Oxford, UK howison@maths.ox.ac.uk Alexander Y. Shestopaloﬀ School of Mathematical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London London, UK a.shestopaloff@qmul.ac.uk August 21, 2021 Abstract In light of micro-scale ineﬃciencies induced by the high degree of fragmentation of the Bitcoin trading landscape, we utilize a granular data set comprised of orderbook and trades data from the most liquid Bitcoin markets, in order to understand the price formation process at sub-1 second time scales. To achieve this goal, we construct a set of features that encapsulate relevant microstructural information over short lookback windows. These features are subsequently leveraged ﬁrst to generate a leader-lagger network that quantiﬁes how markets impact one another, and then to train linear models capable of explaining between 10% and 37% of total variation in 500ms future returns (depending on which market is the prediction target). The results are then compared with those of various PnL calculations that take trading realities, such as transaction costs, into account. The PnL calculations are based on naturaltaker strategies (meaning they employ market orders) that we associate to each model. Our ﬁndings emphasize the role of a market’s fee regime in determining its propensity to being a leader or a lagger, as well as the proﬁtability of our taker strategy. Taking our analysis further, we also derive a natural maker strategy (i.e., one that uses only passive limit orders), which, due to the diﬃculties associated with backtesting maker strategies, we test in a real-world live trading experiment, in which we turned over 1.5 million USD in notional volume. Lending additional conﬁdence to our models, and by extension to the features they are based on, the results indicate a signiﬁcant improvement over a naive benchmark strategy, which we also deploy in a live trading environment with real capital, for the sake of comparison. ∗Denotes ﬁrst author; the rest of the authors are listed in alphabetical order. 1 arXiv:2108.09750v1 [q-fin.TR] 22 Aug 2021 Contents 1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 2. Background. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2.1 Historical Developments and Market Speciﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2.2 Data and Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 2.3 Remarks on Execution Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 3. Features and Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 3.1 Base Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 3.1.1 Orderbook Imbalances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 3.1.2 Trade Imbalances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 3.1.3 Past returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 3.1.4 Mean Divergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 3.2 Eliminating Nonlinearities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 3.3 Optimal Time Horizon Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 4. Network Eﬀects in Bitcoin Markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 4.1 Leader-Lagger Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 4.2 Accounting for Trading Realities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 5. Cross-Sectionally Combining Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 5.1 Baseline Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 5.2 LASSO Regression Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 5.3 Meta Features Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34 5.4 Comparisons of Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 6. Market Making Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40 6.1 Strategy Speciﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40 6.2 Methodology and Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45 6.3 Results and Comparison with Benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47 7. Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49 1 Introduction Cryptocurrency markets have seen an explosion of trade volumes over the past year, as the price of Bitcoin soared to an all time high of over 60,000 USD in April 2021, sparking a great deal of interest both from the broad public and academics alike. The trading landscape for Bitcoin in particular has matured considerably over recent years, with an ever-greater proportion of trade volume occurring in complex derivatives rather than spot (ﬁat for Bitcoin) markets. With the rise of derivatives volumes came an accompanying ﬂurry of academic works that investigate their role in the price formation process. For instance, [14,15] examine the price impact of a set of popular unregulated derivatives exchanges, [24] performs a similar analysis, and [13] surveys market microstructural diﬀerences between spot and futures markets. Further work such as [29] provides insights on the way in which the proliferation of derivatives has exacerbated price jumps and thus contributed to greater volatility. One of the main distinguishing elements of Bitcoin markets compared to traditional markets for stocks or bonds, aside from the much greater volatility for the former, is the considerable degree offragmentation inherent in the Bitcoin trading landscape. This fragmentation stems from the existence of 5-10 highly liquid exchanges where the majority of trade volume takes place. Within each of these exchanges, the volume is typically further distributed across a number of diﬀerent liquid instruments with slightly diﬀerent speciﬁcations and properties. Exchanges operate independently from one another. They are subject to diﬀerent regulatory environments depending on where they base themselves out of. They often use diﬀerent sever locations, resulting in cross-sectional arbitrages that can persist for at least as long as the time of information transfer between two distinct server locations. There is no cross-collateralization across exchanges, unlike in traditional markets where prime brokers play this role. That is, if a trader enters a long position on one exchange and an equally large short position on another exchange, he is market neutral but must still ensure that both positions are suﬃciently collateralized in order to avoid a liquidation event on either exchange. 2 Summary of main contributions. The above factors, and others discussed in subsequent sections, altogether contribute to the aforementioned fragmentation of liquidity across exchanges. This type of environment raises a number of interesting questions one can pose. The main contributions of our work is to identify possible answers to the following questions. 1. Where does new price information tend to arrive ﬁrst? In other words, which venue is most often the originator of price transmission? 2. What are the predominant directions in information ﬂow? 3. In what way exactly is price on one venue aﬀected by the arrival of new information on another market? 4. To what extent do time discrepancies in price impact enable price prediction on each venue? That is, can we leverage the cross-section of information from all markets to make reliable price predictions? 5. Can these predictions be leveraged to produce trading strategies in a natural way, which give large PnL values? Do we obtain predictive power suﬃcient to produce “alpha" in excess of transaction costs? Our paper represents an addition to the rapidly growing body of literature on Bitcoin price formation in at least the following two ways. First, it is the ﬁrst of its kind to comprehensively examine the consequences of the aforementioned fragmentation of the Bitcoin trading ecosystem. Our study encompasses the largest markets in terms of trade volume while, to the best of our knowledge all other studies focus on the impact of either a single market or a limited subset of markets. Often such subsets are made up of illiquid spot markets or for example CME Bitcoin futures markets, which have little bearing on the price due to their lack in trade volume. Second, unlike other studies, we use extremely granular limit orderbook data which allows us to produce predictive models rather than merely explaining contemporaneous returns. Paper outline. To give the reader a preview of how this is achieved, we ﬁrst lay out the structure of this paper. • To begin with, Section 2 provides necessary background knowledge pertaining to the Bitcoin trading ecosystem. This involves descriptions of the predominant markets and their trade volumes, along with some relevant information on their historical development. We will also describe relevant facts on execution cost, before giving the reader an overview of the data sets that underlie the analyses presented in this paper. This includes a description of our method for its procurement and explanations of the processing steps we employed to render the data amenable to subsequent analyses. • Next, in Section 3 we deﬁne a set of microstructural features based on orderbook and trades information that build on notions of order ﬂow imbalance [20] and price diﬀerences. The features are designed to quantify and make precise the vague notion of “informational ﬂow" mentioned in the above questions. We additionally undertake a number of preprocessing steps in order to render the features more suitable as inputs to the linear models that will be trained in later sections. • In Section 4 we begin to reap the rewards of our prior work. The previously deﬁned feature set will be employed to answer the ﬁrst three questions listed above. That is, we will investigate cross-impact between markets and derive various networks that illuminate the lead-lag relationships present between pairs of markets. We will then examine how a market’s leadingness or laggingness translates to trading realities by deﬁning natural trading strategies and performing PnL calculations. This will involve a foray into the crucial role played by transaction cost in determining not only PnL but also a market’s proneness to being a leader or a lagger. • Section 5 is devoted to the last two questions from our above list. We will compare three diﬀerent methodologies for developing powerful linear predictive models that make use of all available information. These methodologies will be compared along the two axes of explanatory power and PnL. • In Section 6 we will address a follow-up question that arises from the results of the previous section. The strategies we initially deﬁne for Sections 4 and 5 employ only taker orders (market orders or limit orders that lead to immediate execution) and we will ﬁnd that they yield particularly low PnL values on markets where the taker fee is large. But such markets typically also give large rebates to maker orders (passive limit orders). This motivates the question of whether we can devise a natural maker strategy on the basis of our linear models and whether these strategies yield positive PnLs on markets with large maker rebates. We will deﬁne such a strategy and test its performance on one market by means of a live trading experiment since, as it turns out, testing market making strategies on historical data is virtually impossible. • Finally, in Section 7 we conclude by summarizing our ﬁndings and discussing future research direction. 3 2 Background This section provides background information on various aspects pertaining to the structure of crypto markets. It is necessary to have a full contextual understanding, in order to be able to appropriately describe results in later sections. 2.1 Historical Developments and Market Speciﬁcations Crypto markets have matured considerably in recent years. This can be seen by the increasing dominance of derivatives relative to spot volumes. Nowadays, average daily volumes on derivatives markets eclipse those on spot markets by a factor of greater than ﬁve, whereas up until (and including) the year 2018 spot markets had greater average trade volumes [5,30]. On a spot market, traders transact the asset itself, while on derivatives markets traders exchange contracts whose value depends in some pre-speciﬁed way on the price of an underlying asset. For instance, on a BTC/USD spot market buyers and sellers trade “physical" Bitcoin for USD. On the other hand, on derivative markets whose underlying is BTC/USD, traders can buy or sell contracts whose value derives (hence the name “derivative") from that of the BTC/USD spot price. Derivatives provide two main advantages for traders. First, they greatly enhance the expressability of traders’ opinions on the future price of, for instance, Bitcoin. Traders that believe the price of Bitcoin will decline in the future can use derivative contracts to proﬁt from the anticipated decline by purchasing a contract whose value rises as the price of Bitcoin declines. The second advantage is that derivative contracts give traders the ability to use leverage, meaning that they canleverage a small amount of initial capital to increase their buying power. With the use of leverage comes the additional risk of forced liquidation. Simply put, with leverage, traders can take extra risk for the chance of extra reward, which substantially boosts capital eﬃciency. For more details on the mechanics of leveraged trading in crypto markets, we refer to [9]. It is generally to be expected that the aforementioned advantages of derivatives, namely improved capital eﬃciency and greater expressability of views on price development, give rise to a more eﬃcient marketplace. The easy access to leverage and its accompanying increase in capital eﬃciency can, however, also bear some disadvantages. This is particularly true for crypto markets, where the amount of leverage that many of the unregulated exchanges allow traders to employ is almost comically large when compared to traditional and regulated ﬁnancial markets. It is not uncommon for exchanges to allow 100x leverage, meaning that traders of derivative contracts can increase their buying power by a factor of 100 [1,9]. By comparison, regulated marketplaces of traditional assets such as stocks, bonds, and ETFs typically do not allow more than 5-10x leverage, with some prime brokers allowing leverage up to 20x on some exchanges (as in London and Tokyo Stock Exchanges). With such large leverage, however, comes considerable risk of ruin. For example, a trader who holds a 100x leveraged position will lose his entire initial capital if he experiences an adverse price move of just 1%. A common theme in crypto markets is that ofcascading liquidations. To illustrate what this means, suppose for instance that a large number of traders hold highly leveraged long positions. This means that a relatively small price move down can cause their positions to be forcibly liquidated by the exchange, resulting in a great deal of unnatural selling. This artiﬁcial (and unintentional) selling pressure drives the price down further which might result in more sell liquidations, and so on. Extremely high leverage is akin to gunpowder in the powder keg, and a small initial price move acts like the match to light the keg, triggering a cascade of liquidations which greatly amplify the initial small price drop to an unnaturally large one. The historical price development of Bitcoin is littered with interesting case studies of this dynamic playing out in real life. For more details, we refer the reader to [29]. Our selection of markets. When we use the term“market", we are referring to a pair ofexchange and symbol, where a symbol on a given exchange denotes either a spot market (for instance BTC/USD) or a derivative contract (for example a quarterly futures contract). New information marks its arrival on the markets as a whole in the form of traded volume. That is, when a trader possesses knowledge which she/he believes is not yet reﬂected in the current price of an asset, they will make a trade that contributes towards closing the gap between the asset’s current price and its estimated value. By this logic, if we compare two Bitcoin markets, the one with the larger average trade volume will have a greater importance to the Bitcoin trading ecosystem, since it is more often the venue on which new information initially arrives. Guided by this rationale, we choose as the basis of this paper those Bitcoin markets which have among the highest trading volumes. In Figure 1, we show a ranking of major Bitcoin markets by their average daily volumes over the course of February 2021. In the remainder of this paper, we will chieﬂy concern ourselves with the top 14 markets from this bar plot. Next, we provide further context on each of these markets along with their speciﬁcations. 4 Figure 1: Average daily trading volume in billion USD per market in February 2021 Market Speciﬁcations. Each of the markets ranked in Figure 1 can be classiﬁed as either aspot market, a futures contract market, or a so-calledperpetual contractmarket (sometimes also called a perpetual swap, or simply a perpetual). The latter market type was invented by the crypto exchange Bitmex in 2014, and, to the best of our knowledge, does not exist outside of the crypto trading world at the time of this writing (July 2021). From the previously mentioned three types of markets, the perpetual swap is the most popular among crypto traders and it has by far the largest trade volumes. Since its inception, the success and broad popularity of the perpetual contract has compelled many other exchanges to follow the blueprint originally laid out by Bitmex. Competing exchanges such as Binance, Huobi, Okex, FTX, Deribit, Bybit, and Kraken have either directly copied this derivative contract or launched a nearly identical product with some minor modiﬁcations. The combined trade volume across these perpetual contracts routinely exceeds 50 billion USD per day [10]. Given the large role this derivative product plays in the crypto markets, it is worthwhile giving some background on its mechanics. Loosely speaking, the perpetual swap can be described as a “perpetually expiring futures contract" (hence its name). It allows traders to enter leveraged long or short positions without having to pay much attention to pricing a futures premium, since the perpetual swap is designed to closely track the price of a spot market (or a basket of spot markets). The mechanism by which the close link to the spot price is achieved is the so-called “funding rate". This is a payment exchanged every eight hours (in case of the Bitmex and most other perpetual contracts) between the longs and the shorts. The magnitude and sign of this payment depends on the deviation of the perpetual’s price from the spot price over the preceding eight hour time window. For instance, if the price of the perpetual over such an eight hour time window was, on average, greater than the spot price, then the longs must make a funding payment to the shorts. The size of this payment depends on what the average deviation of the perpetual from the spot market was. The more the perpetual strayed above the spot price, the larger is the cost incurred by the longs. The introduction of this additional cost to the longs (and, in this case, rebate to the shorts) incentivizes traders to short the perpetual contract and it disincentivizes traders to open long positions. These twin incentives, when acted upon, will cause the price gap between the perpetual and spot markets to close. The reverse case where the price of the perpetual over an eight hour time window straysbelow that of the spot market is of course completely analogous. In this case, the longs will receive a rebate while the shorts incur a cost. More details on how exactly the perpetual swap functions can be found in [1]. An important property of Bitcoin derivative contracts is the type of initial capital (also known asmargin or collateral) with which the derivative can be purchased. This is typically either Bitcoin, USDT (also known as Tether), or another so-calledstablecoin. A stablecoin, of which USDT is the most prominent example, is a cryptocurrency whose value is (meant to be) pegged one-to-one to the value of a US dollar. At the time of this writing in July 2021, the market capitalization of Tether is around 61 billion USD. This provides an indication of the value that crypto traders place on being able to transact and store wealth in a quasi-USD asset which is void of many of the inconveniences associated with transacting actual USD, such as having to deal with slow bank transfers, stringnent identity veriﬁcation procedures, and so on. For more details on stablecoins in general and Tether in particular, we refer the reader to [21]. The FTX perpetual is unique among our set of 14 markets in that it allows positions to be 5 Table 1: Properties of markets under consideration in this paper Type Exchange Symbol Max. Leverage Margin Expiration Underlying hbdm_BTC_CQ Futures Huobi - 125x BTC Quarterly BTC/USD okex_BTC-USD-210326 Futures Huobi - 125x BTC Quarterly BTC/USD hbdm_BTC-USD Perpetual Huobi - 125x BTC - BTC/USD bitmex_BTC/USD Perpetual Bitmex - 100x BTC - BTC/USD deribit_BTC-PERPETUAL Perpetual Deribit - 100x BTC - BTC/USD bybit_BTC/USD Perpetual Bybit - 100x BTC - BTC/USD okex_BTC-USD-SWAP Perpetual Okex - 125x BTC - BTC/USD ftx_BTC-PERP Perpetual FTX - 101x Cross - BTC/USD binancecmfut_BTC/USD Perpetual Binance - 125x BTC - BTC/USD binancefut_BTC/USDT Perpetual Binance - 125x USDT - BTC/USDT okex_BTC-USDT-SWAP Perpetual Okex - 125x USDT - BTC/USDT tbybit_BTC/USDT Perpetual Bybit - 100x USDT - BTC/USDT thbdm_BTC-USDT Perpetual Huobi - 125x USDT - BTC/USDT huobipro_BTC/USDT Spot Bybit BTC/USDT - - - - collateralized with various stablecoins, actual USD, Bitcoin, Ethereum and many other tokens. The underlying index of the derivative contract is typically computed as a (weighted) average value of a basket of BTC/USD spot markets or BTC/USDT spot markets. It is worth pointing out that the BTC/USD price can deviate substantially from the BTC/USDT price under certain circumstances. For example, this can arise when investors lose conﬁdence in the supposed peg of USDT to the US dollar, in which case the value of a USDT will decline. On the other hand, when there is particularly high demand for USDT (due to the conveniences associated with transacting quasi USD on a blockchain), investors might be willing to pay a premium for USDT. The exact composition of the baskets making up the index can vary from exchange to exchange. The BTC/USD indices typically include at least the Coinbase, Bitstamp and Kraken spot markets, while the BTC/USDT indices typically include spot markets from Binance, Huobi, and Okex. The precise mechanism via which the index price is computed from its constituents is generally also diﬀerent between exchanges. For instance, some exchanges exclude the markets with the minimal and maximal price in the calculation, in order to achieve greater robustness of the index price and resistance to price manipulations [6]. The fact that trade volumes on derivative markets far exceed those on the spot markets which make up the derivatives’ underlying indices can create opportunities for market manipulations. Colloquially speaking, the much larger volumes on derivative markets relative to spot markets is sometimes referred to as the “tail wagging the dog" phenomenon. These realities necessitate a certain robustness in the calculation of the index price in order to have resistance to market manipulations. To give a hypothetical example of such a manipulation, suppose the index of a futures contract was made up of just one illiquid spot market, where a relatively small trade can cause a big price move while the futures contract is extremely liquid. A trader might then get the idea to, for instance, open a massively leveraged long position in the futures contract (which can be done cheaply due to its liquidity) and manipulate the price of the underlying index upward shortly before the expiration of the futures contract. The trader could then proﬁt handsomely from their leveraged long futures position when it expires at the artiﬁcially inﬂated price index price. These proﬁts could be far in excess of the cost for performing this manipulation, which consists mainly of the execution cost associated with the “sloppy" manipulative buy orders on the illiquid spot market (which can be expected to be subject to high slippage cost). While this example was a hypothetical one, actual manipulations that resemble the above have actually occurred in reality. An interesting case study can be found in [4]. In Table 1, we list some key properties of the markets considered in the remainder of this paper. We see that the 14 most liquid markets from Figure 1 include two futures contracts, 11 perpetuals, and only one spot market. The most liquid futures markets tend to be the ones whose expiry happens at the end of a quarter. Huobi and Okex, the exchanges whose quarterly futures appear in our set of markets, both list a weekly expiration, a bi-weekly one, and a quarterly one. Okex additionally oﬀers a bi-quarterly futures contract. In the remainder of this paper, we shall refer to binancefut_BTC/USDT as the “Binance USDT-margined perpetual contract" or simply the “Binance USDT perpetual". Similarly, binancecmfut_BTC/USD shall be referred to as the “Binance BTC-margined perpetual contract" or for short the “Binance BTC perpetual". Other markets will be described in the same fashion using their type, exchange, and when necessary, their margin currency. 6 Fake volume in crypto markets.For the purposes of this study, we aimed to identify the set of the most liquid Bitcoin markets which account for the majority of Bitcoin trading volume. However, the task of determining what exactly these markets are can prove more challenging than one might initially suspect. The reason for this is the prevalence of fake volume. The study [2] by Bitwise from 2019 asserts that 95% of reported volume in crypto markets is “fake". The precise meaning of the word “fake" in this context is somewhat ambiguous. It can for example simply mean that an exchange is reporting a trade volume value that does not correspond to the sum of volumes of actual trades processed in the matching engine. Volume can also be “fake" in the sense that an exchange is printing wash trades where the exchange itself is engaging in self-trading. In other cases, exchanges have been known for partnering with market makers and incentivizing them to self-trade with certain type of rebates and bonus payment. The reasons for exchanges to fake their volume can be manifold. A new exchange might use it as a method of bootstrapping a user base. Traders tend to trade on exchanges that are used by many other people and which therefore have large trade volume. If an incorrectly reported volume ﬁgure convinces a user to start trading on that exchange, then the exchange has successfully gained a new customer. From the exchange’s perspective, the cost of such practices is a loss of credibility which can negatively impact its long term success. In most cases, it is straightforward to spot fake volume because exchanges tend not to be very sophisticated about the methods they employ to achive this. Some methods border on the comical, such as printing a trade at mid-price periodically. Another method used by some exchanges in the past was to report a 24th trade volume ﬁgure which is diﬀerent from the one which can be obtained by summing up the volume of all trades printed on the exchange. For a more exhaustive list of the various ways employed by exchanges to fake volume, we refer the reader to [11] that presents a detailed study of the subject. Seasoned traders generally know from experience where the real volume resides and are therefore able to steer clear of the many pitfalls of fake volume. An excellent resource in this regard is [10] which provides adjusted volume ﬁgures where reported volumes were purged of likely fake volume when applicable. Our choice of markets for this study was made with the aforementioned caveats in mind, and on the basis of our prior and ongoing trading experience. We are conﬁdent to a high degree that the 14 markets which form the foundation of this study are not among those which are subject to fake volume. Moreover, any volume ﬁgures reported in this study are based on our own calculations using data on individual trades published by the exchange’s real time data feeds. We do not rely on values reported by the exchange, although we do ﬁnd agreement between these ﬁgures and the ones we independently calculated. 2.2 Data and Preprocessing Our data set is comprised of orderbook and trades data. Both of these sources of data were mined by subscribing to the exchange’s websocket API orderbook and trades endpoints for each of the markets under consideration in this paper. Detailed information on what exactly a websocket API is can be found in [12], though we will give a cursory description below. The data we obtained in this way was compressed and placed into ﬁle storage for later processing. Websocket API endpoints generally provide the most granular crypto market data that one can procure. These endpoints push new data to the subscriber in real time. For trades data, this means that one receives information about all executed trades on the market to which one is subscribed. In the case of orderbook data, exchanges typically publish orderbook snapshots every 5-200ms depending on market activity. Note that we therefore do not have order-by-order information (typically referred to as Level 3 data), since exchanges batch changes over a short previous time window and then publish these updates as part of a new orderbook snapshot. The frequency at which new orderbooks arrive not only depends on market activity but it also varies from exchange to exchange. In some cases, there is even variation in the update frequency within an exchange when a market has multiple websocket API endpoints with slightly diﬀerent properties. For instance, the Bybit BTC-margined perpetual oﬀers a feed that publishes a new snapshot containing 25 orderbook levels every 20ms, while at the same time oﬀering another slower feed which publishes updates every 100ms but provides information for the top 200 orderbook levels [3]. A common minimum update frequency used by exchanges (even when they do not document this) is around 20ms. That is, orderbook updates arrive at a frequency not higher than one per 20ms, even when market activity is extreme. Exceptions are Deribit and Bitmex where update frequencies are sometimes in the single digit milliseconds when market volatility is high. There is little uniformity across exchanges in the properties of their data feeds. That is, the number of orderbook levels varies from exchange to exchange (and even from market to market), the update frequencies are diﬀerent, and the data comes in a diﬀerent ﬁle format for each exchange. For each market in the set of 14 markets we consider in this paper, we receive between 25 and 75 orderbook levels. In our choice of the websocket API feed, we generally preferred speed over orderbook depth. A single day of orderbook data for all markets combined is over 30 gigabytes in size. Creating uniformity and comparability within our large and disorganized data set posed a major challenge. 7 Table 2: Lowest possible and default taker fees per market in basis points Lowest Possible Fee Ordinary Fee ftx_BTC-PERP 1.5 7 binancefut_BTC/USDT 1.53 4 binancecmfut_BTC/USD 1.8 5 huobipro_BTC/USDT 1.93 4.75 hbdm_BTC_CQ 2 4 okex_BTC-USD-210326 2.5 5 thbdm_BTC-USDT 2.7 4 okex_BTC-USD-SWAP 3 5 okex_BTC-USDT-SWAP 3 5 hbdm_BTC-USD 3.7 5 deribit_BTC-PERPETUAL 5 5 bitmex_BTC/USD 7.5 7.5 bybit_BTC/USD 7.5 7.5 tbybit_BTC/USDT 7.5 7.5 Furthermore, since the data is gathered asynchronously, timestamps of orderbooks generally diﬀer. In order to more easily compare orderbooks across markets, we resample the data to a 50ms frequency using the last seen observation [8]. Missing values can appear when a market does not publish an orderbook update for, say, 100ms. In this case, we ﬁll the missing value by propagating the last valid observation forward. For the sake of consistency, we also resample trades data to the same 50ms frequency. After applying this processing step, the buy (or sell) amount in a given 50ms window will be the sum of all buy (sell) trade amounts that occurred in this time window. The trade amounts can have diﬀerent denominations on diﬀerent markets. For example, for certain perpetual contracts, the value of one contract is 1 USD while on others it might be 100 USD or 0.001 Bitcoin. In order to have an “apples-to-apples" comparison between trade volumes across markets, we normalize all trade amounts to a USD amount, using the last seen Bitcoin price to convert amounts in Bitcoin to USD amounts. Since we are working at a 50ms granularity (our resampling frequency), we shall deﬁne the trade price over a 50ms period as the volume-weighted average price computed over all trades (irrespective of side) which took place during this 50ms window. If no trade occurs during a time window, we ﬁll the missing price value, as before, with the previous valid price observation. With these preprocessing steps, successive samples in our data set are equally spaced in time (50ms apart), making cross-market comparisons easier. For each observation, we have one orderbook per market (potentially with diﬀering numbers of levels), and information (buy amount, sell amount, average price) about a “meta trade" on each market. This is our data set in its ﬁnal form, which will be the foundation for any further analysis. 2.3 Remarks on Execution Cost The cost of execution of a taker order (one which leads to immediate execution) is composed of two diﬀerent components. The ﬁrst component is the taker fee charged by the exchange. Fees exhibit great variation across exchanges and even across markets within a single exchange. For instance, the taker fee for a derivatives contract tends to be, by and large, substantially lower than that of a spot market. A number of exchanges additionally oﬀer tiered fee structures, where certain groups of traders receive lower fees than others. These fee rebates can be very substantial. Traders can ascend to a better fee tier by having high transaction volume. The volume cutoﬀs dictating a trader’s fee tier are diﬀerent from market to market. Being in the top tier typically requires on the scale of 500 million to 1 billion USD of monthly notional volume. Certain exchanges (Binance, FTX, and Huobi) have issued their own cryptocurrency and oﬀer additional fee discounts for traders that hold this cryptocurrency in their exchange wallet. The magnitude of this additional fee discount is usually proportional to the holdings in the exchange’s native cryptocurrency. An alternative (often undocumented and under-the-table) way of obtaining a preferred fee status is through the formation of strategic partnerships with exchanges. Particularly newly launched exchanges with little liquidity are typically interested in attracting liquidity, which they can achieve, for example, by partnering with market making ﬁrms whom they incentivize to provide the desired liquidity by oﬀering various fee rebates. Table 2 displays the lowest possible (documented) taker fee that a trader in the top fee tier (who also owns a suﬃcient amount of the exchange’s native cryptocurrency, when applicable) receives. 8 Notice that these heavy fee rebates for certain “VIP" traders lead to a wealth concentration whereby VIP traders, who presumably have some measure of wealth by virtue of the requirements they must have met to be a member of the best fee tier, are capable of turning greater proﬁts (or trading proﬁtably at all) in their trading since they incur far less fee cost than, for instance, a novice trader would. The second component of the execution cost can be broadly described by the term “spread". Since the aggressor at least crosses the bid-ask spread, the minimum spread cost is at least the bid-ask spread at the time of execution. If the size of their order is greater than the liquidity available at the ﬁrst orderbook level which is aggressed against, the trader additionally “walks the book". That is, part of her/his execution occurs at one or multiple prices which are worse than the top quote. In Figure 2, we provide an illustration of the size of the spread cost incurred by an aggressor. In this plot, the set of blue bars represents the median diﬀerence in bpts between the minimum and the maximum price of a single order, while the red set of bars represents the median diﬀerence in bpts between the best price (minimum for buy orders, maximum for sell orders) and the average price of a single order. The sample consists of all orders of size> 100k USD between February 15–27, 2021. It is interesting to note that there seems to Figure 2: Price impact of taker orders of size> 100k USD. be an inverse relationship between a market’s VIP taker fee and the price impact (in other words, spread cost) of moderately large to large orders (greater than 100k USD). Writing execution cost= taker fee+spread, (1) it appears that the two terms in this equation balance one another out, in a sense. If a market has a high taker fee, the orderbook appears to be more liquid and hence the spread cost is small. On the other hand, a market with a low taker fee has little liquidity at or near the top of the book, and hence the spread cost is large. We will later see variants on this theme reappear, when we perform PnL calculations that take fees into account. 3 Features and Preprocessing 3.1 Base Features The fundamental microstructural quantity that determines price movements in a market that employs a limit orderbook is, broadly speaking,order ﬂowwhich comes in two forms. The ﬁrst one is aggressive, where traders submit market orders or limit orders that lead to immediate execution. The second one is passive, where market participants submit limit orders that do not lead to immediate execution or where such orders are canceled. Our objective in this subsection is to develop a set of base features that build on order ﬂow, and which achieve high eﬃcacy for certain tasks tackled later in this paper, such as predicting future returns or characterizing cancellation behaviour of HFT market makers. We shall discuss our base features one by one, and provide a motivation and justiﬁcation for their inclusion. In later subsections, we discuss ways of transforming and optimizing the base features for the tasks that lay ahead. 9 3.1.1 Orderbook Imbalances It is well established in the literature that the shape of the orderbook has signiﬁcant impact on the distribution of future returns [16,18–20]. The intuitive reason for this is straightforward: if the liquidity on the bid side far outweighs that of the ask side, the volume required for a price move up is much smaller than the volume required for a price move down. Thus, if we assume that the arrival of a sell order is not much more likely than the arrival of a buy order, the probability of a future price move up is larger than that of a price move down. Clearly, similar reasoning applies to the dual case where the orderbook shape takes the opposite form. The empirical evidence cited above provides ample justiﬁcation for the inclusion of an orderbook imbalance feature in our set of features. However, the question remains of the precise notion of orderbook imbalance that is most appropriate to our setting. The classical notion of orderbook imbalance is given by b−a b +a∈ [−1, 1], (2) where a and b represent the top of the ask and bid liquidity, respectively. However, this quantity suﬀers from an obvious drawback, namely that it only takes into account the liquidity at the two tops of the book. In other words, information from deeper orderbook levels is discarded. This is particularly problematic for markets where the liquidity at the top of the book tends to be very small and instead concentrates more strongly around deeper orderbook levels. Extensions of the classical orderbook imbalance [31] typically try to account for liquidity on deeper levels by means of a weighting scheme which replaces the quantitya in Eqn.(2) by∑ jwjaj, whereaj denotes the volume on orderbook levelj and wj∈ R>0 is a weight. The quantityb is of course replaced in an analogous manner. The weightwj is usually constructed in a way which reﬂects the probability of execution of an order on levelj. It can, however, be challenging to get a handle of execution probability at each orderbook level. Conventional models of orderbook dynamics imply that the probability of execution is an exponentially decaying function of the distance to the midprice. Yet, in practice, it is not only the distance to midprice that matters, but also the fee structure (and possibly other factors). We saw evidence of this in Figure(2), where we noted that a low taker fee seems to imply more liberal “walking of the book" (that is, greater trade impact and hence a larger execution probability on deeper levels compared to markets where the taker fee is large). This makes it diﬃcult in practice to choose such weights, since they must be chosen individually in a bespoke manner for each market. Further complicating things, diﬀerent markets often have diﬀerent tick sizes. For instance, the tick size on FTX is 1 USD, while Binance uses a tick size of 0.1 USD. Another concern with the classical orderbook imbalance (and most of its extensions) is that it does not adequately reﬂect uncertainty of future returns in times of high volatility when (eﬀective) spreads are large. To illustrate this point, consider an example of an orderbook during non-volatile times 3a and one shortly after a volatility spike 3b. If we compute the classical orderbook imbalance for the ﬁrst orderbook, we obtain the value−0.98 which reﬂects well what one would intuit from looking at the orderbook: the ask liquidity is large and overwhelming compared to the bid liquidity, hence we would expect, all else being equal, a price move down to be much more likely than a price move up. The second orderbook gives a classical imbalance of0.69 which one would interpret as a relatively strong predictive price signal of a price move up. However, a glance at deeper levels quickly reveals that also in this orderbook a price move down should be far more likely than a price move up. However, a glance at deeper levels quickly reveals that the liquidity distribution in this orderbook implies a far greater probability of a price drop than a price rise. What causes the discrepancy between the computed orderbook imbalance value and our intuition are the minuscule amounts posted at the two tops of the book, which ultimately have little bearing on the distribution of future returns due to their small sizes. Such small top-of-the-book amounts are a common occurrence during volatility breakouts and they often persist for several hundred milliseconds. For example, a submission of a mere 5,000 USD to the top ask would result in a vastly diﬀerent orderbook imbalance of−0.42. This phenomenon makes the classical orderbook imbalance values extremely noisy, rendering it unsuitable for practical purposes. We propose an alternative pair of orderbook-based features (one for each of the ask and bid sides) which are more robust during volatility breakouts, and which do not depend on a complicated choice of weights. Let us deﬁne the following quantities for each marketi = 1,..., 14 and for ﬁxed quantitiesN1,...,N 14∈ R≥1 IMBa,i t := (pi a,t(Ni) pi a,t(1) − 1 ) · 10000, (3) IMBb,i t := ( pi b,t(1) pi b,t(Ni)− 1 ) · 10000, (4) 10 (a) Bitmex orderbook during non-volatile times. Sizes are in USD. (b) Bitmex orderbook during volatile times. Sizes are in USD where pi a,t(x) denotes the average price one would pay at timet for a marketbuy order of sizex on marketi. Note that pi a,t(1) is simply the top ask price. Similarlypi b,t(x) is the average price for a marketsell order of sizex∈ R≥1, so thatpi a,t(1) is just the top bid price. The quantityIMBa,i can be described as the diﬀerence in basis points between the top ask price on marketi and the average price of a market order of sizeNi, and analogously for the bid versionIMBb,i. What are sensible choices ofNi∈ [1,∞) for i = 1,..., 14? Note thatNi = 1 always yieldsIMBa,i t = 0, while letting Ni→∞ we haveIMBa,i t →∞ ; thus the two extreme ends of the spectrum are void of any signal. We set Ni to be the median liquidity within the top ﬁve basis points of the top of the book on marketi. More precisely, we compute this median value for the ask side and the bid side separately, and then take the average of the two resulting values. Preliminary experiments indicate this to be a sensible choice, in the sense that the resulting features(4) appear to contain much signal and little noise. We leave it to future work to calibrate the choice ofNi in a more rigorous fashion. Let us revisit the two orderbooks considered above. The orderbook from Figure 3a has(IMBa,i t ,IMB b,i t )≈ (0, 7). The smallIMBa,i t value means that the ask side is heavily populated, while the largeIMBb,i t points at the sparsity of the bid side. From the comparison of these two values, we would unequivocally conclude that a price drop is far more likely than an increase. For the orderbook from Figure 3b we have(IMBa,i t ,IMB b,i t )≈ (1, 7.4). As in the 11 Table 3: Comparison ofR2 values of classical orderbook imbalance and our proposed imbalance R2 classical R2 new bybit_BTC/USD 0.1176 0.1646 hbdm_BTC-USD 0.0893 0.13 thbdm_BTC-USDT 0.0957 0.1059 tbybit_BTC/USDT 0.0724 0.0818 bitmex_BTC/USD 0.0547 0.0786 binancecmfut_BTC/USD 0.0228 0.0645 hbdm_BTC_CQ 0.0179 0.0425 okex_BTC-USD-SWAP 0.0315 0.0358 okex_BTC-USDT-SWAP 0.0103 0.0275 ftx_BTC-PERP 0.0157 0.0273 huobipro_BTC/USDT 0.0135 0.0204 okex_BTC-USD-210326 0.0035 0.0159 deribit_BTC-PERPETUAL 0.0115 0.0155 binancefut_BTC/USDT 0.0 0.0061 previous case, the far largerIMBb,i t value suggests a much greater probability of a price decrease, which agrees with our intuition from observing the liquidity distribution in the orderbook, and which is in contrast to the classical orderbook imbalance value that pointed to a greater likelihood of a price increase. Moreover, our pair of features retains its high ﬁdelity during highly volatile times when liquidities on both sides of the book are sparse In such cases, the greater uncertainty in the distribution of futures returns is represented by valuesIMBa,i t and IMBb,i t which are both large. As further empirical evidence of the suitability of the features deﬁned in(4), we compare their explanatory power with that of the classical orderbook imbalance. Speciﬁcally, for each marketi = 1,..., 14, we ﬁt the following pair of univariate linear models frett =α +β ( IMBa,i t −IMBb,i t ) +ϵt, (5) frett =α′ +β′ (bi t−ai t bi t +ai t ) +ϵ′ t, (6) where ai t and bi t are the top ask and bid on marketi, respectively. The prediction targetfrett used here consists of 500ms future returns on the Bybit BTC perpetual. We ﬁxed this target market for the sake of concreteness; other markets give similar results. The above linear models are ﬁtted using OLS on training data spanning February 22nd until February 27th. See Table 3 for a comparison of the correspondingR2 values. With the new imbalance measure, we ﬁnd an average increase inR2 of 0.019 compared to the classical one. TheR2 value corresponding to the classical imbalance is only approximately 58% that of the new imbalance which, additionally, is higher in every single case. 3.1.2 Trade Imbalances Let us deﬁne the so-calledtrade ﬂow imbalanceindicators, for each marketi = 1,..., 14, computed over time horizons δ∈{ 100ms, 250ms, 500ms, 1000ms, 2000ms} TFI i,δ t :=Bi [t−δ,t]−Si [t−δ,t], (7) where Bi [t−δ,t] represents the total volume of buy orders on marketi in the time interval[t−δ,t ]. Similarly, the quantitySi [t−δ,t] represents the total volume of sell orders on marketi over the same time interval. This feature can be construed as the “aggressive" component (relating to taker ﬂow rather than submissions or cancellations of passive limit orders) of the order ﬂow imbalance indicator deﬁned by Cont et al. in [20] ofit = [buy ﬂow−sell ﬂow][t−δ,t] (8) = [(buy trades - sell trades)| {z } “aggressive" component +(bid submissions - ask submissions) + (ask cancels - bid cancels)][t−δ,t]. (9) 12 The order ﬂow imbalance indicator was demonstrated in [20] to have signiﬁcant explanatory power overcontempora- neous returns. In ongoing work by a subset of the authors, similar results are demonstrated for future returns, when employing a variation of the order ﬂow imbalance from [20], showcasing the usefulness of this family of indicators. The fragmented nature of the Bitcoin trading universe means that volumes are scattered across several venues. This implies an asynchronous information arrival: trade ﬂow typically arrives ﬁrst on one venue and then “trickles down" to other venues in the form of cancellations or taker orders. Following this logic, we would expect to also have explanatory power over future returns based on the cross-section of trade ﬂows. This motivates our inclusion of the trade ﬂow imbalance indicators (7) into our set of base features. Additional remarks are in order. • We believe that the aggressive component in(9) holds a fundamentally greater importance (more signal) than the remaining two “passive" terms. The underlying rationale is that passive ﬂow (submissions or cancellations) are almost exclusively the work of HFT market makers who are largely only reacting to the cross-section of aggressive ﬂow and orderbook imbalances. That is, passive ﬂow tends to bereactive in nature rather than contain genuine new information. A rigorous investigation of this topic is left for future work. • Notice that future returns are a dimensionless quantity measured in basis points, while the unit of trade ﬂow imbalance is USD. Based on this discrepancy of units, one might predict that future returns vary non-linearly on trade ﬂow imbalance. We will see later that this is indeed the case, and will devise a methodology for addressing this concern. • One might get the idea to consider a relative measure of the formB−S B+S, whereB and S denote buy and sell volume (respectively) instead of the trade ﬂow imbalance as we deﬁned it. However, this relative indicator suﬀers from some of the same drawbacks as does the classical orderbook imbalance, namely a far noisier predictive signal than its non-relative USD denominated analogue. For instance, if the sell volume is zero, a trivial buy volume of size1 USD gives rise to the same imbalance value as a signiﬁcant buy volume of size, say, 10 million USD. • The nature of our orderbook data (snapshots data) makes it impossible to precisely compute the remaining two “passive" terms that make up the order ﬂow quantity(9). A precise computation requires order-by-order feeds, and is left as future work, for the case of equity data, for which such feeds are available1. 3.1.3 Past returns Following a similar logic as above for the trade ﬂow imbalance, it is to be expected that a drastic price change on one market should cross-impact short-term future returns on another market. It is therefore natural to include past returns on each market in our feature set. We use the same time horizons here as for the trade ﬂow imbalances. Formally, for each marketi = 1,... 14 and time horizonδ∈{ 100ms, 250ms, 500ms, 1000ms, 2000ms}, we deﬁne the following indicator at each timet PRET i,δ t := ( pi t pi t−δ − 1 ) · 10000, (10) where pi t denotes the price on marketi at timet. This quantity in(10) computes the price change in basis points on marketi over the time interval[t−δ,t ]. It needs to be clariﬁed precisely what notion of price we are using inpi t, since there are many possible choices (mid price, last trade price, and so on). Our initial choice of last trade price gave rise to ambiguities in the case when a number of trades are executed simultaneously at multiple diﬀerent price levels. This happens for example for “sweeping" orders which consume multiple orderbook levels. To circumvent this concern, we compute the average price in these cases. More precisely, we will use the average price over a short lookback window of 50ms (which is the minimum time step in the preprocessing or our data). That is, we deﬁnepi t as pi t := 1 A ∑ (a,p)∈T i t a·p, (11) where Ti t is the set of all trades, i.e. pairs(a,p ) of amount and price, executed on marketi in the time period [t− 50ms,t ] and A =∑ (a,p)∈T i t a. Note that we include both buy and sell trades inTi t. 1To this end, intraday LOBSTER data could be employed, which provides detailed tick-by-tick limit order book data for NASDAQ stocks. LOBSTER contains all limit order submissions, cancellations and executions on each trading day. All events are time-stamped with millisecond precision [17], and are reconstructed from NASDAQ’s historical TotalView-ITCH data [23]. 13 3.1.4 Mean Divergence The instruments traded on the markets under consideration in this paper are closely related to one another, although not identical. The similarity stems from the fact that they are all either perpetuals or futures contracts on a Bitcoin underlying (a BTC/USDT or BTC/USDT index), or a BTC/USDT spot market. We would, of course, expect price diﬀerences to be mean reverting processes since if this were not the case there would supposedly be arbitrage opportunities. This furnishes the motivation for the inclusion in our set of base features of the price diﬀerences between pairs of markets, as indicators for future returns. One would expect, for instance, that if a particular market is cheap relative to some (or all) other markets (e.g. due to a price move up on the other markets) there should be a short-term price increase on the cheap market, as arbitrageurs and market makers rush to proﬁt from the arbitrage. However, there are several assumptions underlying this hypothesized market behaviour which do not hold in practice, and which therefore make the actual dynamics more complicated. We list some of these confounding factors below. 1. The presence of trading fees restricts the set of arbitrages. That is, price diﬀerences that would represent arbitrages in a world without trading fees are in fact not arbitrage opportunities. The consequence of this is that the price diﬀerence between a pair of markets can ﬂuctuate within a “no arbitrage band" whose size is given by the sum of the taker fees of the two markets. Only when the price diﬀerence is greater than the sum of the two taker fees does there exist an arbitrage that can be immediately proﬁted from with a pair of taker orders. 2. The futures premium of, say, quarterly futures contracts is (mostly) nonzero, so that the price diﬀerence between a futures contract and another market is, a-priori, not indicative of where the price will move in the near future. Rather, what matters is how far the price diﬀerence between the futures contract and the other market strays from its “equilibrium" level. This equilibrium is diﬃcult to get a handle of in practice, since it depends on future expected interest payments whose magnitude is uncertain. 3. The price diﬀerence between a BTC/USDT based market (e.g. a perpetual whose underlying is a basket of BTC/USDT spot markets) and a BTC/USD based market alone cannot be expected to be indicative of future returns since it depends on the USD/USDT rate, which is generally onlyapproximately 1, but can ﬂuctuate by several basis points, and in rare cases even percentage points. As we discussed before, such ﬂuctuations are usually related to varying investor conﬁdence in the peg between USD and USDT which can decrease the value of USDT (see [21]). On the other hand, the value of one USDT can temporarily exceed that of an actual USD during periods where investors are willing to pay a premium for the conveniences associated with transacting in USDT rather than USD (usually when sentiment is extremely bullish). Deviations of the USD/USDT rate from 1 usually cannot beimmediately arbitraged since the conversion typically takes several business days and involves a bank transfer. 4. The dominant trader demographics diﬀer from exchange to exchange. For instance, US citizens are completely prohibited from trading on Bitmex and must therefore resort to other exchanges. These types of restrictions can result in persistent price diﬀerences, say, between Bitmex and another exchange which is popular with US traders. One reason for this could be that prevailing investor sentiment and expectations of future returns diﬀer between distinct demographics, for example due to divergent macroeconomic backdrops. Other reasons for persistently large price divergences include diﬀerences in capital controls, ﬁnancial regulation, “know-your- customer" (KYC) requirements, etc. across diﬀerent countries and exchanges. A prominent example is the premium of the Bitcoin price on Korean exchanges relative to US exchanges, dubbed as theKimchi premium, which at various points in the past was notoriously large for extended periods of time. More details can be found in [7]. Altogether, these factors diminish the predictive signal of price diﬀerences alone. For visual evidence of this, consider 4a where we plot the price diﬀerence over an eight hour period between a pair of perpetuals where one uses BTC/USD as its underlying, while the other uses a BTC/USDT index. We propose to circumvent the concerns listed above by correcting for average price diﬀerences over a certain lookback window. That is, instead of computing “vanilla" price diﬀerences, we compute the deviation of the price diﬀerence from the mean price diﬀerence over a past time period ranging from several seconds to several minutes. The rationale for this is that persistent large price diﬀerences arising for some of the reasons mentioned above (nonzero futures premium, USD/USDT rate diﬀerent from1, or diﬀering investor outlook between distinct groups of traders) are usually unchanged over such short time horizons. For instance, barring the occurrence of an extreme outlier event, the repricing of a futures premium most often happens over the course of several hours or days as investors gradually adjust expectations of future interest payments. With our proposed new indicator, we are 14 therefore, in a sense, “purging" the price diﬀerence of such confounding longer time scale eﬀects. In Figure 4b we show the same price diﬀerence depicted in Figure 4a purged by its ﬁve minute rolling mean. Note the seemingly much stronger tendency for mean reversion. (a) Price diﬀerence between the Binance USDT perpetual and the Huobi BTC perpetual (b) Mean divergence feature for the Binance USDT perpetual and the Huobi BTC perpetual Figure 4: To avoid an excessively large number of samples (and hence to facilitate legibility), the data was resampled to a 2 minute frequency. This altogether motivates the deﬁnition of the following features for pairs of markets(i,j )∈{ 1,..., 14}2 and time horizons ∆∈{ 5s, 9s, 19s, 38s, 75s, 150s, 300s, 600s} DIV i,j,∆ t =d(pi t,pj t)− rolling∆ ( d(pi t,pj t) ) , (12) where d(p,q ) = ( p q− 1 ) · 10000 is the diﬀerence in basis points betweenp,q∈ (0,∞), and therolling∆(·) function returns the rolling mean of samples from its input over the past∆ seconds. We shall callDIV i,j,∆ t the mean divergence feature between marketsi and j. As further evidence of the superiority of this indicator compared to the vanilla price diﬀerence, we display in Table 4 a comparison ofR2 values corresponding to the univariate regression models frett =α +β ( d(pi0 t ,pj t) ) +ϵt, (13) and frett =α′ +β′ ( DIV i0,j,150ms t ) +ϵ′ t, (14) for eachj = 1,..., 14. For sake of concreteness, we ﬁx a reference marketi0, namely the Bybit BTC perpetual, whose future returns are used in the above models. That is, we are comparing the explanatory power over Bybit’s future returns of, one the one hand, the “plain" price diﬀerence between Bybit and other markets, and, on the other hand, the mean divergence feature of Bybit with other markets. On average, the explanatory power of our new indicator is larger than that of the previous one by0.074. This represents an average15-fold increase. Note that the improvement is particularly drastic for the two quarterly futures contracts hbdm_BTC_CQ and okex_BTC-USD-210326 where we see a more than 70-fold increase. 3.2 Eliminating Nonlinearities Our overarching objective in this paper is to train powerfullinear price prediction models using the features deﬁned above. The performance of a linear model is, however, limited by the extent to which the future returns varylinearly as a function of the feature variables. That is, if the relationship between variates and covariates is highly nonlinear, we cannot possibly expect to achieve good generalizability of our model. In this subsection, we will demonstrate the nonlinear nature of the dependence between future returns and some of our indicators. We will then devise a methodology that addresses these concerns. Our approach involves the construction of bespoke nonlinear transformations which will subsequently be applied to our features prior to their usage in linear models. To illustrate the presence of some of the aforementioned nonlinearities consider Figure 5a. This scatter plot exhibits the relationship between 500ms trade ﬂow imbalance of the Binance USDT perpetual and 500ms future returns of the Huobi BTC perpetual. Eachx-value in this plot corresponds to a trade ﬂow imbalance bucket Bn := [10000 USD· (n− 1), 10000 USD·n] 15 Table 4: Comparison ofR2 values of vanilla price diﬀerence (left column) with divergence from mean (right column) R2 diﬀ R2 div binancecmfut_BTC/USD 0.057 0.1426 binancefut_BTC/USDT 0.0252 0.1331 hbdm_BTC_CQ 0.0017 0.1224 okex_BTC-USD-210326 0.0015 0.119 okex_BTC-USD-SWAP 0.0337 0.1169 okex_BTC-USDT-SWAP 0.0175 0.1113 thbdm_BTC-USDT 0.0099 0.0961 hbdm_BTC-USD 0.0175 0.0778 ftx_BTC-PERP 0.031 0.0754 deribit_BTC-PERPETUAL 0.0149 0.0744 huobipro_BTC/USDT 0.0118 0.0661 tbybit_BTC/USDT 0.0032 0.0393 bitmex_BTC/USD 0.0038 0.016 (a) (Original) trade ﬂow imbalance (b) Transformed trade ﬂow imbalance Figure 5: 500ms future returns of the Huobi BTC perpetual as a function of Binance USDT perpetual 500ms original and transformed trade ﬂow imbalance. for n∈{− 100, 100}. They-value associated to the bucketBn was obtained by computing the mean 500ms future returns on the Huobi perpetual over all samples where the Binance trade ﬂow falls into the intervalBn. The functional form we observe in Figure 5a clearly resembles a sigmoid or hyperbolic tangent function more than it does a linear one (although samples for bucketsBn with large|n| are sparser, hence the data noisier). The sigmoid-like relationship between trade ﬂow imbalance and future returns agrees well with prior work, which noted the same empirical observation [27,28]. Why does the price impact decrease as trade ﬂow imbalance grows? One possible economic interpretation is that extreme trade ﬂow values (either very large or very small) could correlate negatively with trader sophistication and correlate positively with the “sloppiness" of execution. That is, an informed trader wishing to enter a large position will rarely do so by using, for example, one large market order or a large “meta order" executed over a time window as small as 500ms. It is perhaps more likely that extreme trade ﬂow values originate from uninformed traders, or, in the extreme case, are the result of forced liquidations where traders involuntarily liquidate their entire positions as a consequence of a margin call. If our hypothesis is correct, the relative lack of sophistication reﬂected by extreme trade ﬂow imbalances could be correctly recognized by other (more astute) market participants who would then only minimally adjust their estimation of the “fair price", and hence contribute towards a more limited price impact. Further below, we describe our methodology for mapping our (original) features to nonlinearly transformed ones. Before we proceed with this description, it is interesting to visually compare Figure 5a, which we already considered earlier, with Figure 5b where we plot the functional dependence of Huobi returns on thetransformed Binance trade ﬂow imbalance feature. Note the stronger degree of linearity in the dependence of future returns on the transformed feature. Methodology for feature transformation. The intuition behind our methodology is to deﬁne, for each feature, a sequence of transformations that starts with the identity map and ends with a function which yields a signiﬁcant boost in explanatory power when it is applied to the feature. This sequence is deﬁned through an iterative procedure where each step of the iteration achieves anR2 improvement. 16 Before specifying our general algorithm, it is instructive to see what happens in case of the trade ﬂow imbalance feature. To this end, let us preliminarily deﬁne, for a ﬁnite set of real numbersT, a mappingfT : R→ R as follows fT (x) := sgn(x) ∑ t∈T 1{|x|≥ t}, (15) where sgn(·) is the sign function, andx↦→ 1{|x|≥ t} denotes the indicator function which takes the value1 when |x|≥ t and 0 else. Now supposeX ={xt}t⊂ Z is the set of observations of the trade ﬂow imbalance on some ﬁxed market. Let us then setm := min(X),M := max(X) and T0 :={m,m + 1,...,M − 1,M}. Note that we can then write the identity function in a more complicated way as follows idX = ( x↦→ sgn(x) ∑ t∈T0 1{|x|≥ t} =fT0(x) ) . (16) This stems from the fact that, in the sum, we have precisely|x| many nonzero indicator functions. The next step of our procedure involves the elimination of one elementi∗ from the setT0, giving rise to an updated setT1 =T0\{i∗}, which in turn deﬁnes a new mapping ( x↦→ sgn(x) ∑ t∈T1 1{|x|≥ t} =fT1(x) ) , (17) representing a slight alteration of the identity mapping. How do we decide which elementi∗ to prune from the original setT0? We do so by trying all possibilities, and then ultimately choosing the element which provided the largest improvement in average explanatory power of future returns. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁt the following univariate linear models using OLS regression for every marketj = 1,... 14 and every elementi∈T0 fret 500ms,j t =α +βfT0\{i}(xt) +ϵt. (18) We denote the coeﬃcient of determination of the model speciﬁed in Eqn.(18) byR2 ij. That is,R2 ij is the explanatory power of the linear model that predicts future returns on marketj using the trade ﬂow imbalance feature of the ﬁxed market which has been transformed by the functionfT0\{i}. We then form an average across marketj, and select the transformation that resulted in the greatest average coeﬃcient of determination. That is, we set R2i := 1 14 14∑ j=1 R2 ij, (19) and ﬁnally deﬁnei∗ := argmaxi∈T0R2i. This yields the setT1 :=T0\{i∗} with corresponding transformationfT1. We then prune another element in the same manner as above, in order to obtain a next setT2 which deﬁnes a new mappingfT2, and so on. This process of successive elimination is terminated when none of the eliminations yields an improvement in average explanatory power. That is, we halt the process when the average explanatory power under a transformationfTk+1 is not greater than that corresponding to the previous transformationfTk. At this point, we have obtained our ﬁnal setT∗ :=Tk⊂T which deﬁnes the (nonlinear) feature transformationfT ∗ for the trade ﬂow imbalance feature we ﬁxed in the beginning. In practice, it is computationally infeasible to begin with the initial set T0 deﬁned above, whose cardinality is|M−m + 1|, which, for the trade ﬂow imbalance feature, is on the scale of tens of millions. We instead choose an initial setT0 of cardinality 100 representing an evenly spaced partition of the interval [m,M ]. Moreover, to mitigate the impact of outliers, we do not usem = min(X) and M = max(X), but instead deﬁne the two quantitiesm and M as a very small quantile and a very large quantile, respectively, of the set X of feature observations. The data used to calibrate the feature transformation spans February 21st 2021, the day prior to our one week training and test period. We now specify the general algorithm for obtaining the ﬁnal “optimal" feature transformation for a ﬁxed feature with observationsX ={xt}t. The initialization is as follows. First, we deﬁneR20 to be the average of theR2 values of the linear models fret 500ms,j t =α +βxt +ϵt, for j = 1,..., 14. Now letm and M denote theq-th and (1−q)-th quantiles ofX, respectively, and initializeT0 as an evenly-spaced partition with100 elements of the interval[m,M ]. In these calculations, we employedq = 0.0001 which was revealed as a sensible choice in preliminary experiments. The iterative step for obtainingTk+1 from Tk ={t1,...,t n} proceeds in the following manner. 17 1. Fit the linear modelfret 500ms,j t =α +βfTk\{ti}(xt) +ϵt for each marketj = 1,..., 14 and everyi = 1,...,n and denote the corresponding coeﬃcient of determination byR2 j,i,k. 2. With R2i,k := 1 14 ∑14 j=1R2 j,i,k we make the deﬁnitionsi∗ := argmaxi=1,...,nR2i,k and R2k+1 :=R2i∗,k 3. If R2k+1 >R2k we deﬁneS :={ti∗}, else we letS :=∅. 4. Finally, we setTk+1 :=Tk\S. Clearly, this iteration terminates eventually since eitherS becomes∅ or the setTk itself becomes empty. If the process has terminated afterK steps, we will further deﬁneT∗ :=TK and R2∗ :=R2K. Results. For each feature, we compute its optimal transformed feature according to the above method. A natural question to ask is for which features does the above transformation procedure result in a signiﬁcant improvement in explanatory power of future returns by a linear model? By far the biggest improvement was found for the trade ﬂow imbalance feature. In Figure 6 we plot the averageR2 values obtained using the (untransformed) 500ms trade ﬂow imbalance feature on the one hand, and its optimal transformed version on the other hand. More speciﬁcally, we compare the two quantitiesR20 and R2∗ (as deﬁned above) which capture the average explanatory power of the original and the transformed feature, respectively. The results are shown in Figure 6. The transformation yielded a signiﬁcant improvement for every market. The average improvement is by a factor of2.5. The improvement is largest on the Deribit perpetual contract, where we observe an increase by a factor of7.3. The smallest improvement occurs on Bybit’s perpetual contract, where we nevertheless note an increase of 20%. Figure 6: Trade ﬂow imbalance improvement of transformation versus original feature. The only other feature where we found, on average, a signiﬁcant improvement using our previously described transformation procedure is the past returns feature. See Figure 7 for a barplot of the results. On average, we note an improvement of 28%. This is far lower than the one attained for the trade ﬂow imbalance feature, but it is still signiﬁcant. On the FTX perpetual, the increase in average explanatory power was largest, with an increase by a factor of 2.11. The Bybit USDT-margined perpetual actually saw a decrease in explanatory power by around 33% (although it was quite low to begin with). This was the largest decrease of any markets. The two remaining features (orderbook imbalances and mean divergence) did not show a signiﬁcant average boost in explanatory power of the transformed feature over the original version. For the orderbook imbalance feature, we found an average increase of around 3%, while the mean divergence feature with lookback window 150s produced an average decrease of around 5% (with similar results holding true for other lookback windows). This lack ofR2 gain points towards an already linear relationship between the aforementioned features and future returns. In the remainder of this paper, we will use the transformed trade ﬂow imbalance feature instead of the original version. On markets where the transformation yielded an improvement for the past returns feature, we shall use the transformed version. Where a decrease was found, we will continue using the original version. For the orderbook imbalance and mean divergence features, where we did not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant improvement, we will simply continue using the untransformed features. 18 Figure 7: Past returns improvement of transformation versus original feature. 3.3 Optimal Time Horizon Selection With the exception of the orderbook imbalance features, all of our base features are deﬁned over multiple time horizons. From a standpoint of complexity reduction, however, it is desirable to select only one time horizon per base feature. This is because base features of a single feature category at diﬀerent time horizons share a high degree of collinearity. For instance, it is clear that 500ms past returns are highly correlated to 1s past returns (the values will often coincide). In this subsection, we set out to devise a methodology by which we select a single time horizon for any feature deﬁned over multiple time horizons. With an eye towards eventually training large composite models that employ the full feature set, this additional feature selection step will be useful in ameliorating concerns of overﬁtting (it is common knowledge that OLS regression is prone to overﬁtting when the number of covariates is large and the covariates exhibit high cross-correlations). Additionally, it is an interesting research question in and of itself to investigate which lookback windows for which features are most predictive of, say, 500ms future returns. Our methodology for selecting the “optimal" time horizon involves a simple process of computing an average predictability score based onR2 values for each time horizon, and then choosing the one with the highest score. Methodology for selection of optimal time horizon.Suppose we are trying to determine the optimal time horizon δk∗ corresponding to some set of featuresfδ1,...,f δn. We proceed in two steps. The ﬁrst step consists of using OLS regression to ﬁt the following model for every time horizonk∈{ 1,...,n } and target marketj = 1,..., 14 fret 500ms,j t =α +βfδk t +ϵt, (20) whose coeﬃcient of determination we denote byR2 k,j. For the second step, we compute the following averages for each time horizonk∈{ 1,...,n } R2k := 1 14 14∑ j=1 R2 k,j, (21) and then setk∗ := argmaxk ¯R2 k. In this case, we shall callδk∗ the optimal time horizonfor the featuref. In summary, a feature’s optimal time horizon is the one whose average explanatory power over 500ms future returns is largest. Empirical results. We now examine the empirical results of the procedure described above. (1) Let us ﬁrst consider thetrade ﬂow imbalance (TFI) indicators. Since we found that thetransformed TFI yielded a considerable improvement over the untransformed one, we will in fact use the transformed version, though we shall, for the sake of brevity, generally omit the qualiﬁer “transformed". In Figure 8 we illustrate for each market’s (transformed) TFI the quantitiesR21,... R24 corresponding to the ﬁve time horizons. We observe that the smallest and largest time horizons are not selected for any market, indicating a sensible choice of lower and upper bound for the size of the lookback windows with the optimal value falling somewhere in-between. Next, we note that the most commonly preferred horizon (eight cases) is 500ms, while the 250ms horizon and the 1000ms horizon are preferred in two and four cases, respectively. Finally, it is noteworthy that the ﬁve markets whose trade ﬂows have the most predictive power are all on either Binance or Huobi. Speciﬁcally, this set of markets is comprised of the two perpetual contracts (one of them being margined with USDT, the other one with 19 Figure 8: Average explanatory power of TFI features for each time horizon Bitcoin) on Binance and Huobi, as well as the Huobi quarterly futures contract. This furnishes our ﬁrst indication of the leading behaviour of Binance and Huobi, which is a theme we that will repeatedly reappear later in this work. (2) We now examine thepast returns indicators. For these features, we previously also found an improvement when using the transformed feature instead of the original one, so we shall again use the transformed version in the following analysis. In Figure 9, we show for each market the average explanatory powersR21,... R25 corresponding to the ﬁve time horizons. As was the case with the TFI indicators, we note that also for the past returns features, Figure 9: Average explanatory power of past returns features for each time horizon neither of the optimal time horizons is attained at the minimal or maximal time horizon, providing further validation for the choice of time windows. In four cases, the1000ms time window is preferred, while the250ms horizon is selected in two cases. The most commonly selected optimal horizon is500ms for six markets. It is noteworthy that the two markets where the smaller time horizon (250ms) is preferred are also among the markets where the smaller time horizon is preferred for the TFI feature. Furthermore, the markets which appeared to be leaders based on their comparatively largeR2 values for the TFI features, also have among the highest explanatory powers in terms of their past returns features. This lends additional conﬁdence to the previously conjectured leading behavior of the two Binance and Huobi perpetual contracts, as well as the Huobi quarterly futures market. (3) The third and ﬁnal feature whose deﬁnition relied on the choice of a time horizon is themean divergence feature, which we shall examine now. Here, the feature transformation did not yield an improvement, so we will simply use the original feature. The corresponding illustration of each market’s averageR2 values can be seen in Figure 10. Our smallest time horizon (5s) appears twice as the optimal choice. The time horizons 9s, 19s, and 38s 20 Figure 10: Average explanatory power of mean divergence features for each time horizon. were each selected as the optimal choice for exactly four markets. The previously noted pattern of leading markets persists in this feature class, as well with the Binance USDT-margined perpetual achieving the largest averageR2 value, followed by the Huobi futures contract and then the Binance BTC perpetual. 4 Network Eﬀects in Bitcoin Markets With our feature set in its ﬁnal form, we now turn to examining network eﬀects amongst the markets considered in this work. We begin by investigating the presence and strength oflead-lag relationshipsbetween pairs of markets. After performing this analysis, we will examine how it translates into the realities of trading. 4.1 Leader-Lagger Network What does it mean for a marketj to lead another marketi? Intuitively, one would say that a marketj leads a (lagging) marketi if future returns on the lagging marketi can reliably be anticipated based on information from marketj. In our case, this information consists of microstructural data encapsulated in the features we previously calculated. Let us make the previous formulation more precise. A marketi is said lag another marketj if a large portion of the total variation in future returns of marketi can be explained by features of the leading marketj. It is therefore natural to ﬁt the following linear models for each pair of markets(i,j )∈{ 1,..., 14} fretδ,i t =µij +βij,1IMBa,j j +βij,2IMBb,j t +βij,3TFI j t +βij,4PRET j t +βij,5DIV ij t +ϵij,t, (22) and inspect the resulting coeﬃcients of determination. We ﬁt these models using OLS regression using training data spanning the period from February 22-27, 2021. The data was normalized by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation. For the sake of readability, we have suppressed in our notation the time horizons over which those features are calculated, with the understanding that the optimal time horizon has been selected. Furthermore, for those features where the nonlinear transformation yielded an increase in linear explanatory power, we will let it be implicit in the notation that the transformed version is used. The models will be ﬁtted for both future returns lookahead windowsδ∈{ 500ms, 1000ms}, although the results turn out to be similar in both cases, and we will report results primarily based on the500ms horizon. Let us denote the coeﬃcient of determination of the above ﬁtted linear model byR2 ij. This is the total variation in future returns on marketi explained with features from marketj, and it will be our ﬁrst indicator of the lead-lag relationship between the two markets. We visualize the matrixR := ( R2 ij ) i,j=1,...,14 in Figure 11 as a pair of heatmaps, where the ﬁrst one uses an ordering by column sum, and the second uses an ordering by row sum. The largestR2 value, of about25.9%, is achieved when predicting FTX using features from the Binance USDT perpetual. The smallestR2 value is about 1% for predicting the Binance USDT perpetual using features of the Bybit USDT perpetual. Overall, we achieve an averageR2 of 9.6% and a median of 9%. The results are similar 21 Figure 11: Entries in the matrixR illustrating the lead-lag relationships between pairs of markets. when we useδ = 1000ms as our future returns time horizon, where we ﬁnd average and median values of10.4% and 9.2%, respectively. This is quite remarkable considering the fact that only information of a single market was used in these regression models. In other words, even information from just a single market can be quite eﬀective in explaining future returns. It demonstrates that it is possible and indeed quite feasible to anticipate future price moves in Bitcoin markets on sub-1s time scales, and it is a reassuring demonstration of the utility of our features. One can compare theR2 values we obtain here with those reported in [20] where the authors achieve values of around 60% using order ﬂow imbalance to explaincontemporaneousreturns. Our next set of observations pertains to the hierarchy of markets implied by our results. See Figure 12 for a visualization of the column averages and the row averages. A large column average shows that the market is easily predicted by others (hence a laggard), while a large row average shows that a market is particularly useful in predicting price action on other markets. Notably high are the column averages of the Bybit, FTX, and Bitmex perpetuals. Many of the markets that are especially useful in predicting Bybit and Bitmex are from the exchanges Binance and Huobi, as it can be seen in the above heatmaps when one searches, for instance, in the Bybit row, for the cells corresponding to the Binance USDT perpetual or the Huobi perpetual. Indeed, the top 5 markets in terms of row average are all from Binance and Huobi, providing strong evidence for the central role occupied by these exchanges in the price formation process. Note also that this agrees well with the ranking of markets in terms of volume: the Binance USDT perpetual has the largest average daily volume in the month of February by a sizable margin, as seen in Figure 1. Figure 12: The left bar plot shows row averages of the matrixR, while the right bar plot shows column averages. 22 4.2 Accounting for Trading Realities So far we have assessed the goodness-of-ﬁt of our models only by an in-sample measure, namely theirR2 values. This measure suﬀers from two complications. First, theR2 of a model is an inherently dimensionless quantity, and second, it is not clear how anR2 value translates to the realities of trading. Out-of-sample measures like RMSE or misclassiﬁcation error can give a more interpretable quantity having a dimension, but they too suﬀer from the latter complication mentioned above. It is unclear how, for example, an accuracy score maps to PnL. One can conceive of cases where a model has an extremely high accuracy score which maps to a large number of slightly proﬁtable trades, but where a single misclassiﬁcation results in a disastrous loss that wipes out any prior proﬁts and more. To address these concerns, we propose an alternative out-of-sample way of evaluating goodness-of-ﬁt which is more in line with trading realities. Our measure will be deﬁned as the PnL of a natural trading strategy associated with the model from Eqn.(22). This PnL value will be computed from a synthetic walk-forward on an out-of-sample data set, consisting of the two days following our training period. The training period spanned February 22-27 2021, and the test period includes February 28th and March 1st. Mapping a linear model to a trading strategy.We now describe how we map each model from Eqn.(22) to a trading strategy. The basic idea is very simple: we buy when the prediction is large (and positive), and sell when the prediction is small (and negative). More precisely, the starting point is the strategy which generates predictions on out-of-sample observations and places a hypothetical buy order at the top ask price when the model predicts a value> T. When the prediction is<−T, the strategy places a hypothetical sell order. Clearly, this strategy involves the choice of a thresholdT. However, there is a relatively canonical choice that we can make here: we setT as a quantile value of the set of predictions that the model produced on the training period. Let us introduce some notation to make this more precise. We denote byMij the model from Eqn.(22), and let us write predsin-sample(Mij) for the set of in-sample predictions produced byMij. Then we deﬁne Tij := 95-th percentile of the setpredsin-sample(Mij). (23) The strategy in its current state still suﬀers from (at least) two technical issues which we circumvent with a simple additional constraint on the strategy. The ﬁrst problem is that when we, for example, place a hypothetical buy order anytime the prediction is>T ij, we often obtain bursts of many buy orders over a period of time while the prediction remains large. However, of the trades belonging to such a burst of buy orders often only the ﬁrst one is actionable since it will impact the market and usually change the top ask price. The second issue is that the PnL calculation becomes more complicated and noisy when we have frequent bursts of buy or sell orders (compared with our alternative approach outlined below). For these reasons, we impose the additional constraint on the strategy that the hypothetical trader’s position shall never exceed “one unit". That is, in our sequence of hypothetical trades, a buy order may only be followed by a sell order (and a sell order only by a buy order). We can summarize the strategy associated toMij by the following set speciﬁcations 1. Initialize the trader’s position asp = 0. 2. If p≤ 0 and the prediction ofMij on an unseen observation is>T ij, we execute a hypothetical buy order at the top ask price and setp = 1. 3. If p≥ 0 and the prediction ofMij on an unseen observation is<−Tij, we execute a hypothetical sell order at the top bid price and setp =−1. By chronologically scanning over the out-of-sample period (February 28th and March 1st) in this manner, we obtain a sequence of hypothetical trade prices of the following form Sij = ( ...,p ij,buy k ,pij,sell k+1 ,pij,buy k+2 ,... ) . (24) Next, we will compute various measures of PnL from the above sequence. Results without execution fees.The ﬁrst PnL we calculate from the sequence(24) is the simplest one: we compute the trader’s total PnL over the test period without accounting for the exchange’s execution fees yet. Note that we already implicitly incorporated the spread component of transaction cost since the trader buys at the top ask price and sells at the top bid price. However, it is also important to observe that oftentimes the top quote (ask or bid) contains only a ﬂeetingly small amount of volume. Not infrequently, this volume is a sub 1000 USD amount and occasionally it is just pennies. This implies that the strategy in its current form is often not scalable. 23 With this caveat stated, we deﬁne our ﬁrst PnL measure by the following equation PnL1,ij := |Sij|∑ k=1 ( pij,sell k+1 pij,buy k − 1 ) · 10000, (25) which can be regarded as the diﬀerence in basis points between the average buy price and the average sell price over the sequenceSij, multiplied by the total number of trades. The resulting matrixPnL1 = (PnL1,ij)i,j=1...,14 is visualized as a pair of heatmaps in Figure 13, where the left heatmap is ordered by row sum and the right heatmap by column sum. Figure 13: Visualization of the matrixPnL1 with two orderings, one by row sum and the other by column sum. Row and column averages are provided in Figure 14. Immediately we are struck by the agreement of the results here with those found in the previous subsection, where our analysis was based onR2 which, reassuringly, provides evidence of the consistency of our approaches. Markets that yield among the largest PnL values are the Bybit at Bitmex perpetuals, which were previously identiﬁed as some of the most predictable ones. The most useful markets in producing high PnL values on other markets are the two Binance perpetuals and the Huobi quarterly futures contract, as well as the Huobi USDT perpetual. Figure 14: Row and column averages of the matrixPnL1. 24 The mean and median value of the matrixPnL1 are both approximately 11000. Note that this number is the total number of basis points “accumulated" by the strategy. This basically says that, on average, we accumulate 11000 basis points over the course of the two day test period, or, in other words, we achieve roughly a doubling of the initial capital. Of course, this is not realistic, at least not with any sizable amount of capital. How do these results change when we take execution fees into account? This is the question we will turn to next. Results with default execution fees.As previously noted, exchanges typically have tiered fee structures whereby highly active traders often pay a far lower execution fee than what the default fee is that novice traders are subject to. Another way of obtaining fee discounts on some exchanges can be by holding a large amount of the exchange’s native cryptocurrency. This applies in particular to Binance and FTX where steep discounts can be obtained this way. We refer the reader to Table 2 where, in our previous remarks on execution cost, we display the default and the lowest possible taker fee per market. For our second PnL measure, we will assume that the default execution fee applies to the trader on each executed trade. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne PnL2,ij := PnL1,ij−|Sij|fdefault i , (26) which is the ﬁrst PnL measure in(25), adjusted for the default execution fee. We are assuming each trade incurs a fee offdefault i , which is our notation for the default taker fee in basis points on marketi. The corresponding matrix will be denoted byPnL2 = (PnL2,ij)i,j=1,...,14 and it is illustrated in Figure 15 along with its column and row averages in Figure 16. The obtained results are more economically sensible. All PnL values are negative, as one would expect from such a simple model which incorporates information of only one market. The smallest loss is 2819 basis points, while the overall average loss is 18899 basis points. A striking observation is that markets which were formerly identiﬁed as the most predictive are now among those which yield the highest (although still negative) PnL values. The top ﬁve markets by row average are all either on Huobi or Binance, while the lowest row average is attained by the FTX perpetual which we formerly noted as one of the most predictable ones. Figure 15: Visualization of the matrixPnL2 with two orderings, one by row sum and the othre by column sum. Results with VIP execution fees.The third and ﬁnal PnL measure is similar to the second one, with the only diﬀerence that we use the lowest possible execution fee instead of the default fee. The lowest fee typically requires on the scale of around 500m USD monthly notional volume, and in some cases signiﬁcant holdings of the exchange’s native cryptocurrency in the trader’s exchange wallet. For these reasons, there are only a small number of wealthy individual traders or signiﬁcant trading ﬁrms that receive this fee. To this end, we deﬁne PnL3,ij := PnL1,ij−|Sij|fVIP i , (27) which is the ﬁrst PnL measure adjusted for the lowest possible execution feefVIP i on marketi. We denote the corresponding matrix byPnL3 = (PnL3,ij)i,j=1,...,14. A visualization can be found in Figure 17. The row and column averages can be seen in the bar plots in Figure 18. 25 Figure 16: Row and column averages of the matrixPnL2. The surprising implication of these results is that the most leading markets are the ones where the largest PnL can be achieved. For instance, the Binance USDT perpetual has the second largest row average. Conversely, many of the most lagging markets are the ones where the lowest PnL is achieved. An example of this would be the Bitmex perpetual which has the second lowest row average. The Huobi spot market seems to be an outlier, where even when averaged across markets, a positive PnL can be achieved. It should be noted that this market is one with often particularly small top of the book amounts which implies that the capital that can be deployed towards this strategy is particularly small (perhaps a single digit USD amount) since we are assuming execution at the top of the book price. Overall, in thePnL3 matrix, we see an average loss of 9621 basis points. The highest value is observed for trading on Huobi spot using information from Binance BTC perpetual, where the PnL is 11426 basis points. The largest loss (of size -42435 basis points) is incurred by the model trading on the Bybit USDT perpetual using features of the Huobi spot market. Figure 17: Visualization of the matrixPnL3 with two orderings, one by row sum and the other by column sum. Remarks on the Role of Exchange Fees.Exchange fees have been used in studies of price formation, e.g. by [25]. We identiﬁed a set of leading markets and a set of lagging markets using an approach based onR2 values of the modelsMij. In our ﬁrst comparison with the PnL results where we ignored execution fees, we found strong agreement with theR2 based lead-lag analysis. In line with basic intuition, we found that the most lagging markets 26 Figure 18: Row and column averages of the matrixPnL3. yielded the largest PnL values. With execution fees accounted for, however, we obtained a very diﬀerent picture. Some of the most leading markets attained the highest PnL values, while some of the most lagging markets attained among the lowest PnL values. What are some possible explanations of this phenomenon? We will argue that a market’s fee regime naturally predisposes it to either being a leader or a lagger (or something in between). This natural tendency in and of itself does not correspond to trading “alpha" (positive PnL). Only when a market exhibits “leadingness" in excess of its natural disposition to being a leader, can we extract alpha to produce positive PnLs on other markets. By the same token, a market’s “laggardness" in and of itself only implies alpha (positive PnL) if the lag eﬀect is greater than what is implied by the market’s fee regime. So how does the fee structure on a market correspond to a natural disposition to being a leader of laggard? To this end, let us consider the example of a pair of markets(1, 2) with diﬀering fee structures and reason about how these aﬀect the exchange’s lead-lag behaviour in each case. Let us assume that the diﬀerence between taker fee and maker rebate is the same on both exchanges. That is, there exists a scalarc such that fori∈{ 1, 2} feei− rebatei =c, (28) where feei denotes the taker fee on marketi and rebatei denotes the maker rebate on marketi. Note that the taker fee is the execution cost in basis points paid for a market order (or a marketable limit order). The maker rebate is the rebate, also in basis points, received by the market maker upon receiving a ﬁll for a passive limit order. The maker rebate can also be negative, in which case the market maker incurs a cost for getting a ﬁll. In practice, one ﬁnds a somewhat uniform diﬀerence fee− rebate≈ 5, (29) when one compares across exchanges (with VIP traders often enjoying a smaller diﬀerence, hence paying less net fees). Eqn. (28) of course does not impose any restrictions on the values offeei or rebatei themselves. Let us suppose thatc = 5 and that the ﬁrst market has fee structure(fee1, rebate1) = (10, 5) while the second one uses (fee1, rebate1) = (5, 0). An informed market taker (a trader contemplating the placement of a taker order) will rationally place a buy order on marketi if and only if they expect an upward price move of at leastfeei basis points over the course of their expected holding period. In other words, the trader sends a taker buy order if and only if the following condition is met E [(pt+h,i pt,i − 1 ) · 10000 ] > feei, (30) where pt,i is the price on marketi at timet, andh is the trader’s expected holding time. Sincefee1 > fee2, this implies that the trader requires a stronger signal to send a taker order on market1 and is therefore disincentivized from sending taker orders. From the perspective of the market maker, the larger rebaterebate1 on market 1 implies a disincentive to cancel passive orders, since a larger amount of adverse selection can be compensated for by the maker rebate on market1 relative to market2. The combination of these twin eﬀects implies a natural tendency of market 1 to be a laggard. In the limiting casefee1, rebate1→∞ , the orderbook would be completely static with 27 no transactions ever occurring as market makers can tolerate an arbitrary amount of adverse selection, and takers require an inﬁnitely strong price signal to overcome the taker fee. The conclusion therefore is that market2 is naturally disposed toward lagging behaviour when compared to market1 (which is consequently a leader in this comparison). This line of reasoning leads us to conclude that the extent to which a market is a leader or a lagger does not, in and of itself, have any implications regarding trading “alpha" that can be achieved for trading on said market or for utilizing its information to trade on other markets. The reality is more subtle due to potentially diﬀerent fee regimes (even when the diﬀerence between taker fee and maker rebate is uniform across exchanges). Only when a market exhibits lagging behaviourin excessof the laggardness to which it is naturally predisposed by its fee structure do we obtain trading “alpha" that can be exploited to generate positive PnL values on the market in question. For instance, counter-intuitively, the Binance USDT perpetual, while generally a strong leading market, is nevertheless suﬃciently predictable, owing to its fee structure, to give rise to positive PnL values. 5 Cross-Sectionally Combining Information Only by taking into account information from the full set of relevant markets, can one hope to reliably make accurate predictions on short term order ﬂow, and hence price action on any given market. Evidence in support of this assertion was provided in the previous subsection, where we observed that a single market’s features are insuﬃcient to produce “alpha" in excess of execution cost on another market (with rare exceptions for VIP traders that receive heavy fee discounts). The underlying explanation is that market makers, who are responsible for the bulk of liquidity in the orderbook, continuously adjust their quotes on the basis ofall available information sources which consistently bear relevance for price moves. For if this were not the case, they would be vulnerable to being picked oﬀ by quick arbitrageurs who are “on the prowl" for resting limit orders which are no longer in line with the rest of the market. For instance, suppose the price moved up substantially on all markets except one. The market participant who continues to post a passive sell order on the market where a price move up has not yet occurred is apparently ignorant to the new information dispersed among other markets, and will no doubt shortly incur a loss by having his order consumed by an arbitrageur. Hence the market makers that “survive" (the proﬁtable ones that do not consistently incur such losses), and therefore ultimately dictate the bulk of the liquidity in the orderbook and thus also the price, are precisely the ones that are capable of parsing all available relevant information so as to prevent being adversely selected. Therefore, if we keep in mind our objective of predicting order ﬂow and price change on sub-second time scales, we ought to search for ways to combine information across markets to achieve greater predictive power. One natural starting point is to simply ﬁt linear regression models (as before with OLS) using the full set of features from all markets instead of just a single market. This will be the starting point and a baseline for comparison of our analysis in this subsection. One concern with this approach is that the model might be overﬁtted due to a signiﬁcant number of irrelevant features and/or a strong degree of collinearity between features. We will therefore compare the baseline approach with the following two alternative approaches. The ﬁrst alternative approach is to deal with the large number of features by usingL1-regularization in the regression model. That is, instead of ﬁtting a simple OLS model on the full feature set, we will train a LASSO regression model which ends up selecting a subset of the features. The second alternative approach involves linearly combining features across the markets to form a set of “meta features" which are subsequently leveraged to generate parsimonious models for price prediction on each market. The linear combinations will be formed using coeﬃcients that are proportional to predictive power, as measured by R2. 5.1 Baseline Approach Model speciﬁcation.Our baseline model consists of a linear regression trained on the full feature set. Each market has 5 features and there are a total number of 14 markets, resulting in a total of 70 covariates. Formally, we use OLS regression to ﬁt the following linear models for alli∈{ 1,..., 14} and δ∈{ 500ms, 1000ms} fretδ,i t =µi + 14∑ j=1 ( βij,1IMBa,j t +βij,2IMBb,j t +βij,3TFI j t +βij,4PRET j t +βij,5DIV ij t ) +ϵi,t. (31) As usual, to keep notation simple, we let it be implicit that each feature is dependent on the choice of a time horizon, using the one that was previously deemed optimal for it. It is also implicit in the notation that we use the 28 Table 5: In-sample and out-of-sampleR2 values for baseline models R2 R2 oos 500ms 1000ms 500ms 1000ms ftx_BTC-PERP 0.364 0.342 0.273 0.264 bybit_BTC/USD 0.294 0.331 0.289 0.32 thbdm_BTC-USDT 0.273 0.231 0.25 0.215 hbdm_BTC-USD 0.229 0.262 0.214 0.243 huobipro_BTC/USDT 0.219 0.136 0.191 0.126 bitmex_BTC/USD 0.217 0.292 0.193 0.27 tbybit_BTC/USDT 0.214 0.279 0.219 0.28 binancecmfut_BTC/USD 0.209 0.193 0.187 0.177 deribit_BTC-PERPETUAL 0.187 0.212 0.178 0.214 hbdm_BTC_CQ 0.186 0.152 0.171 0.144 okex_BTC-USDT-SWAP 0.173 0.196 0.156 0.184 okex_BTC-USD-210326 0.17 0.164 0.158 0.155 okex_BTC-USD-SWAP 0.164 0.18 0.151 0.167 binancefut_BTC/USDT 0.106 0.071 0.094 0.069 transformed feature rather than its original version, whenever an improvement was found for the feature. Let us denote the model corresponding to Eqn. (31) byMbaseline i,δ . Results. We now examine the coeﬃcients of determination of the modelsMbaseline i,δ for i = 1,..., 14 and δ ∈ {500ms, 1000ms}. We compute this number both in-sample and out-of-sample. In other words, we report the portion of total variation in future returns explained by each model on the training period, as well as on the two-day test period following the training period. The results can be found in Table 5. Signiﬁcance values and p-values for all models are reported in Tables 19 and 20 in the Appendix. We observe that the diﬀerence between the two time horizons500ms and 1000ms is generally rather small. As one would expect, the 500ms time horizon is somewhat more easily predictable. On average, the in-sampleR2 values for this horizon are4.6% larger than their1000ms counterparts. When we perform the same computation on the out-of-sample values, we ﬁnd that theR2 on the 500ms horizon is, on average, greater than that the1000ms R2 by 1.4%. There are, however, some noteworthy outliers. Notably larger values on the 500ms horizon are found on the Binance USDT perpetual and the Huobi spot market, while the Bitmex and Bybit USDT perpetuals exhibit considerably largerR2 values for the1000ms horizons. What are some possible explanations of these phenomena? When a market’s1000ms R2 is much greater than the500ms R2 it means that the features at timet contain information that is not yet reﬂected in the price at timet + 500ms but is priced in att + 1000ms. This suggests the possibility that cross-sectional arbitrages can survive for more than500ms between a strong leading market and a strong lagging market. Note that this agrees well with our previous identiﬁcation of Bitmex and Bybit as lagging exchanges, and Binance and Huobi as leading exchanges. Conversely, when the500ms R2 is much larger than its1000ms counterpart on a given market, this indicates that this market is prone to the arrival of new information in the time windowt + 500ms tot + 1000ms which is not yet encapsulated in the feature values at timet. We would predict this to be the case for strongly leading markets, as indeed appears to be the case when we compare theR2 values with our previous ﬁndings on the leader-lagger network. Our next observation pertains to the comparison between in-sample and out-of-sample values. On average, we ﬁnd that on the500ms time horizon, the out-of-sampleR2 is around 91% of the in-sample one. The largest discrepancy, both in relative and absolute terms, can be seen for the FTX perpetual where the out-of-sampleR2 is 25% lower than the in-sampleR2. Overall, the small to moderate loss in accuracy as we pass from the in-sample to the out-of-sample values ameliorates concerns of overﬁtting to an extent. Next, we note that by using a market’s actual “leadingness" or “laggardness", as measured byR2, in conjunction with its fee structure, one can form a set of expectations about what PnL values could be obtained. See Figure 19 for a visual overview of each market’s lowest possible taker fee (usually accessible only to highly active traders). As we reasoned in the previous section, we would a-priori expect a market with a low taker fee to be a leading market, which should express itself in a lowR2 value. If we ﬁnd that a market which “should" be a leader based on its fee structure is in fact a lagger, we would predict a high PnL value for this market. When we compare Figure 19 with Table 5 we observe that, remarkably, the FTX perpetual has both the highestR2 (indicating that its returns can be 29 Figure 19: Lowest possible (across tiers) taker fee per market (in basis points). anticipated well) and the lowest taker fee. On this basis, one would predict a large PnL value for those VIP traders with access to this fee. The Bybit BTC perpetual is among the most lagging markets, although this is in agreement with the fact that it has the highest taker fee, so we would not necessarily foresee a high PnL value for this market, unless its lagging nature is so signiﬁcant that it outweighs the large fee. On the other end of the spectrum, the most leading market, the Binance USDT perpetual, also has one of the lowest taker fees, so it is not straightforward to predict what the PnL might be on this market. Whether a trader subject to the lowest fee is capable of producing a positive PnL boils down to the question of whether the general leading nature of this market can be overcome by its low taker fee. In Table 6 we display the PnL values produced by the trading strategies corresponding to the modelsMbaseline i,500ms for i = 1,..., 14. The values are computed by the same procedure we introduced in Subsection 4.2. That is, we map a model to a natural trading strategy and calculate the PnL of this strategy in a synthetic walk-forward over the out-of-sample period. As before, we compute the PnL in three diﬀerent ways: (1) ignoring execution fees, (2) adjusting for the default execution fee, (3) adjusting for the lowest possible (“VIP") execution fee. The PnL formulae are precise analogues of the ones from Equations(25), (26), and(27). Note that, as before, the PnL therefore tells us what the total number of accumulated basis points over the two day test period is. In line with the expectations we formed on the basis of predictability and fee regime, we ﬁnd that FTX gives the largest PnL3 value. Somewhat surprisingly, even the most leading market, the Binance USDT perpetual, exhibits a positive PnL3 value. This can be interpreted as a suggestion that the extremely low taker fee is suﬃcient to “overpower" the market’s relative lack in predictability. The lowest PnL is found on Deribit which has one of the highest taker fee and middlingR2 values. Similarly, Bitmex has slightly largerR2 values but also a larger taker fee, so it is not surprising to see it having the second smallestPnL3 value. Note that allPnL2 numbers are negative. This hints to “the rich get richer" phenomena in the crypto markets, whereby traders with access to the lowest taker fee have a much greater ability to turn proﬁts than novice traders. Since a trader’s fee regime is determined by trade volume, and in some cases, holdings in the exchange’s native cryptocurrency, the privilege of being in the best fee tier clearly correlates highly with the trader’s net worth. On the other hand, a more novice trader wishing to ascend to the best fee tier in order to boost proﬁts might have to “burn through" some losses in lower fee tiers until they have accumulated enough trading volume to be granted a better fee. 5.2 LASSO Regression Approach The models we trained in the preceding subsection used a total of 70 features from 14 diﬀerent markets. Many of these features exhibit high cross-correlations, as evidenced in Table 7 where we display the cross-correlations amongst the 500ms past returns features across markets. In this subsection, we will pursue an alternative methodology for ﬁtting the parameters of Eqn.(31) based on LASSO regression. The diﬀerence between an OLS ﬁt and a LASSO ﬁt resides in an additional regularization term 30 Table 6: PnLs of baseline models PnL1 PnL2 PnL3 ftx_BTC-PERP 19792.4 -27527.6 9652.4 huobipro_BTC/USDT 28844.0 -28251.0 5645.4 binancecmfut_BTC/USD 16519.1 -22010.9 2648.3 binancefut_BTC/USDT 12107.6 -17724.4 696.8 thbdm_BTC-USDT 20784.9 -10703.1 -469.5 hbdm_BTC-USD 17703.1 -8186.9 -1455.5 hbdm_BTC_CQ 16432.0 -23400.0 -3484.0 okex_BTC-USD-SWAP 18041.0 -19319.0 -4375.0 okex_BTC-USD-210326 17436.4 -27273.6 -4918.6 okex_BTC-USDT-SWAP 15012.4 -20097.6 -6053.6 bybit_BTC/USD 19811.2 -11508.8 -11508.8 tbybit_BTC/USDT 17036.4 -15828.6 -15828.6 bitmex_BTC/USD 17804.5 -16140.5 -16140.5 deribit_BTC-PERPETUAL 10401.1 -19738.9 -19738.9 Table 7: Correlation matrix of 500ms past returns. For brevity we used the market acronyms from Table 17. m1 m2 m3 m4 m5 m6 m7 m8 m9 m10 m11 m12 m13 m14 m1 1.0 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.6 0.6 m2 0.5 1.0 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.5 0.6 0.4 0.6 0.5 0.3 0.6 0.6 m3 0.4 0.3 1.0 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 m4 0.4 0.4 0.3 1.0 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.4 m5 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 1.0 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.4 m6 0.4 0.6 0.2 0.3 0.3 1.0 0.4 0.5 0.3 0.7 0.4 0.2 0.6 0.6 m7 0.5 0.5 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4 1.0 0.5 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.3 0.6 0.6 m8 0.5 0.6 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.0 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.3 0.6 0.6 m9 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.4 1.0 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.5 0.5 m10 0.5 0.6 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.7 0.5 0.5 0.4 1.0 0.4 0.2 0.6 0.6 m11 0.5 0.5 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4 1.0 0.3 0.5 0.5 m12 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.3 1.0 0.4 0.3 m13 0.6 0.6 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.6 0.5 0.4 1.0 0.7 m14 0.6 0.6 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.6 0.5 0.3 0.7 1.0 31 Table 8: Number of surviving coeﬃcients, as we vary theλ regularization coeﬃcient. 0.001 0.002 0.004 0.008 0.016 0.032 0.064 0.128 0.256 deribit_BTC-PERPETUAL 67 64 61 53 44 36 25 9 4 binancefut_BTC/USDT 67 65 62 54 43 26 16 6 1 ftx_BTC-PERP 67 64 57 50 45 40 26 14 6 huobipro_BTC/USDT 67 67 61 51 41 28 21 9 2 binancecmfut_BTC/USD 67 62 59 49 35 27 17 9 2 hbdm_BTC-USD 66 64 56 43 34 27 15 6 6 okex_BTC-USD-SWAP 66 62 53 43 38 33 20 10 5 okex_BTC-USDT-SWAP 66 64 58 47 41 35 21 9 4 thbdm_BTC-USDT 66 61 56 51 33 20 14 10 3 hbdm_BTC_CQ 65 63 58 52 32 26 22 6 3 okex_BTC-USD-210326 65 61 58 48 37 30 24 9 2 bitmex_BTC/USD 62 60 54 48 38 28 22 15 4 bybit_BTC/USD 62 60 55 33 28 23 17 9 5 tbybit_BTC/USDT 62 61 51 43 39 26 19 10 5 introduced in the objective function of the latter. Speciﬁcally, OLS regression minimizes the standard least-squares objective function, while LASSO regression minimizes the regularized objective function min w∈Rp ‖y− Xw‖2 2 +λ‖w‖1, (32) where X∈ Rn×p,y∈ Rn andλ∈ R>0 is the regularization parameter. The additional𝓁1 regularization term has the eﬀect of zeroing a subset of the parameters. This subset grows in size as the regularization parameterλ is increased. For a full discussion on LASSO regression, the reader is referred to [22]. We ﬁt the coeﬃcients in Eqn.(31) using a LASSO regression with regularization parameters from the set {0.001· 2k ⏐⏐⏐k = 0,..., 8}. The lower boundλ = 0.01 of this set was chosen since it was found to be the smallest (round) number which, when used as the regularization parameter in the LASSO regression, results in a positive number of zero coeﬃcients for each market’s model. Similarly, the upper boundλ = 0.256 = 0.01· 28 was selected since it was the largest doubling of the lower boundλ = 0.01 for which a positive number of nonzero coeﬃcients persist. For each market and each of the nine regularization parameters, we then examine the number of nonzero coeﬃcients, their in-sample and out-of-sample explanatory power over future returns, and the PnL values of their naturally associated trading strategies. Furthermore, we will also inspect exactly which coeﬃcients tend to survive as λ is increased. Comparisons of the results in this subsection with the results of baseline approach are deferred until we introduce our third alternative methodology for training powerful linear models to explain short-term future returns. Model Selection Results.First, we inspect the number of nonzero coeﬃcients of each of the LASSO ﬁts, as the regularization parameterλ is increased. The results can be seen in Table 8. Withλ = 0.001, the majority of the 70 coeﬃcients are found to be nonzero. In line with expectation, asλ is increased the number of surviving coeﬃcients decreases. With our largest choice ofλ = 0.256, we typically do not retain more than a handful of features in the model. Our next set of observations pertains to the explanatory power of each of the LASSO models. It would be reasonable to hypothesize that perhaps explanatory power (particularly out-of-sample) might increase as we discard superﬂuous features in a LASSO model, via a suitable regularization parameter. However, this turns out to be the case only very rarely, as evidenced in Tables 9 and 10, where we show in-sample and out-of-sample (respectively)R2 values for each model. In fact,R2 seems to generally be monotonically decreasing in the regularization parameter λ. That said, the decrease happens quite slowly, especially forλ≤ 0.032. For example, the LASSO models with λ = 0.016 retain on average97.2% of the out-of-sampleR2 compared to the LASSO models withλ = 0.001. When we compare theλ = 0.001 models with theλ = 0.032 ones, we still ﬁnd an average decrease in out-of-sampleR2 of only 5.9%. Since the number of features retained in the latter models ranges between 20 and 40, we can conclude therefore that only around half of the original 70 features are suﬃcient to retain the vast majority of explanatory power. When we increase the regularization parameter toλ = 0.064, 0, 128 and 0.256, we lose on average13.3%, 25.97%, and 39% of explanatory power relative to theλ = 0.001 models, respectively. Both of the aforementioned 32 Table 9: In-sample R2 values for LASSO models using500ms future return horizon, as we vary theλ regularization coeﬃcient. 0.001 0.002 0.004 0.008 0.016 0.032 0.064 0.128 0.256 ftx_BTC-PERP 0.364 0.364 0.363 0.362 0.36 0.354 0.335 0.291 0.237 bybit_BTC/USD 0.293 0.293 0.291 0.289 0.286 0.283 0.27 0.237 0.131 thbdm_BTC-USDT 0.273 0.273 0.272 0.269 0.262 0.252 0.234 0.203 0.107 hbdm_BTC-USD 0.229 0.229 0.227 0.224 0.221 0.212 0.202 0.177 0.092 huobipro_BTC/USDT 0.219 0.219 0.218 0.216 0.21 0.201 0.177 0.108 0.064 bitmex_BTC/USD 0.217 0.216 0.215 0.214 0.212 0.206 0.192 0.165 0.088 tbybit_BTC/USDT 0.214 0.214 0.213 0.212 0.21 0.205 0.191 0.168 0.1 binancecmfut_BTC/USD 0.209 0.209 0.208 0.206 0.202 0.193 0.171 0.141 0.076 deribit_BTC-PERPETUAL 0.187 0.187 0.186 0.184 0.182 0.177 0.163 0.121 0.069 hbdm_BTC_CQ 0.185 0.185 0.185 0.182 0.179 0.173 0.154 0.108 0.058 okex_BTC-USDT-SWAP 0.173 0.173 0.172 0.171 0.169 0.164 0.148 0.117 0.07 okex_BTC-USD-210326 0.17 0.17 0.17 0.168 0.165 0.161 0.144 0.1 0.059 okex_BTC-USD-SWAP 0.164 0.164 0.163 0.162 0.16 0.154 0.138 0.108 0.059 binancefut_BTC/USDT 0.106 0.106 0.105 0.103 0.096 0.083 0.058 0.036 0.002 Table 10: Out-of-sample R2 values for LASSO models using500ms future return horizon, as we vary theλ regularization coeﬃcient. 0.001 0.002 0.004 0.008 0.016 0.032 0.064 0.128 0.256 bybit_BTC/USD 0.289 0.289 0.287 0.283 0.281 0.279 0.272 0.263 0.236 ftx_BTC-PERP 0.273 0.272 0.272 0.271 0.269 0.265 0.25 0.211 0.193 thbdm_BTC-USDT 0.25 0.25 0.249 0.247 0.242 0.234 0.223 0.211 0.149 tbybit_BTC/USDT 0.219 0.219 0.218 0.217 0.216 0.212 0.202 0.194 0.167 hbdm_BTC-USD 0.213 0.213 0.212 0.21 0.206 0.198 0.193 0.188 0.176 bitmex_BTC/USD 0.193 0.193 0.192 0.192 0.191 0.188 0.181 0.171 0.141 huobipro_BTC/USDT 0.191 0.19 0.19 0.188 0.183 0.176 0.159 0.095 0.073 binancecmfut_BTC/USD 0.187 0.187 0.186 0.184 0.181 0.173 0.153 0.136 0.101 deribit_BTC-PERPETUAL 0.178 0.178 0.178 0.177 0.176 0.173 0.167 0.143 0.122 hbdm_BTC_CQ 0.171 0.171 0.17 0.168 0.164 0.16 0.146 0.107 0.082 okex_BTC-USD-210326 0.158 0.158 0.158 0.156 0.154 0.151 0.14 0.103 0.083 okex_BTC-USDT-SWAP 0.156 0.156 0.156 0.155 0.153 0.15 0.138 0.115 0.096 okex_BTC-USD-SWAP 0.151 0.151 0.15 0.149 0.148 0.144 0.131 0.111 0.09 binancefut_BTC/USDT 0.094 0.094 0.093 0.092 0.087 0.076 0.051 0.038 0.026 tables were created using the500ms future returns horizon. For the1000ms versions, we refer to Tables 21 and 22 in the Appendix. The results are very similar in both cases. Next, we examine the proﬁts and losses attained by the LASSO models. In Tables 23 and 24 of the Appendix, we show thePnL1 and PnL2 values (respectively) for each model. Most interesting are thePnL3 values which we display in Table 11. We note that in most cases the maximal PnL is achieved with eitherλ = 0.001 or λ = 0.002, although the diﬀerence between the maximum PnL and any other PnL withλ≤ 0.032 is marginal. This is in agreement with our prior observation that explanatory power is almost identical between all models withλ≤ 0.032. The only markets where the maximal PnL is not attained withλ∈{ 0.001, 0.002} are the Huobi spot market and the Binance USDT perpetual. The former achieves its maximum withλ = 0.128 and nine features while the latter does so withλ = 0.032 and 26 features. We have seen that the PnL and explanatory power of a market’s LASSO models is almost unchanged for any regularization parametersλ≤ 0.032. It is interesting to examine which of the 70 original features are retained in these models. In Figure 20a we provide an illustration of the number of markets whoseλ = 0.032 model uses the features listed on thex-axis. For ease of legibility, we include in this plot only those features which appear in the models of at least six markets. We are immediately struck in Figure 20b that the features used by any of theλ = 0.256 models areexclusively from a market on Binance or Huobi. This underlines the outsized role that these two exchanges play in price 33 Table 11: PnL3 values of LASSO models as regularization parameter varies 0.001 0.002 0.004 0.008 0.016 0.032 0.064 0.128 0.256 ftx_BTC-PERP 9576 9439 9371 9253 9444 9407 9370 8847 6987 huobipro_BTC/USDT 5738 5679 5654 5637 5610 6196 7264 8908 3598 binancecmfut_BTC/USD 2576 2497 2229 1802 1991 1855 1511 -179 -2188 binancefut_BTC/USDT 766 824 844 1274 1627 2335 2095 1340 1297 thbdm_BTC-USDT -502 -516 -732 -1013 -1246 -1756 -2527 -3722 -8110 hbdm_BTC-USD -1517 -1572 -1648 -1551 -1816 -2104 -2483 -3197 -4461 hbdm_BTC_CQ -3579 -3669 -3711 -4104 -4232 -4061 -4129 -5479 -9427 okex_BTC-USD-SWAP -4380 -4376 -4603 -4979 -5314 -5929 -6544 -7829 -12021 okex_BTC-USD-210326 -4951 -5006 -5327 -5784 -5966 -6776 -7439 -8122 -11823 okex_BTC-USDT-SWAP -6050 -6105 -6418 -6770 -6951 -7605 -7752 -8334 -11518 bybit_BTC/USD -11631 -11440 -11504 -11808 -11895 -12510 -13771 -15709 -19746 tbybit_BTC/USDT -15855 -15917 -16264 -16521 -16601 -17025 -17592 -19935 -25232 bitmex_BTC/USD -16209 -16091 -16341 -16386 -16311 -15813 -16328 -18577 -23969 deribit_BTC-PERPETUAL -19666 -19621 -19784 -20189 -20368 -20438 -20441 -20387 -25174 (a) Regularizationλ = 0.032. Only features with a count of at least seven are included for ease of legibility. (b) Regularizationλ = 0.256 Figure 20: Count of nonzero features discovery. Let us next inspect Figure 20a. Here we observe the same dominance of Binance and Huobi with notably large counts also occurring from Okex markets. We note that the most common type of feature is a (transformed) trade ﬂow imbalance feature. This suggests signed volume is the most powerful of our indicators. Of the orderbook imbalance features, the one corresponding to the Huobi BTC perpetual is the most commonly selected. The most frequentDIV feature comes from the Huobi quarterly futures contract, which indicates that the price diﬀerence with this market is particularly useful to predict price action. 5.3 Meta Features Approach In the previous subsection, we found that a much smaller subset retaining approximately 30 of the original 70 features used in the baseline model is suﬃcient to produce models whose explanatory power and PnL values are only marginally lower than those of the baseline models. In this subsection, we pursue an alternative methodology for drastically reducing dimensionality of our linear models. The procedure involves an additional feature processing step, which cuts down the number of features from 70 to ﬁve. The resulting models will turn out to achieve a greater average PnL than the baseline models, even though average explanatory power is diminished. We observed in Table 7 that past returns features exhibit large cross-correlations across exchanges. This is of course not surprising, since the markets we are considering are either Bitcoin spot markets themselves or derivative contracts whose underlying is an index composed of Bitcoin spot markets. Motivated by this consideration, we devise a methodology by which we form a single “meta" past returns feature from the set of all individual past 34 returns features. That is, we will deﬁne for each marketi∈{ 1,..., 14} a meta featuremPRETi using mPRET i t := 14∑ j=1 αPRET ij PRET j t, (33) where the coeﬃcientαPRET ij is chosen in proportion to the predictive power that the past returns feature of market j has over the future returns of marketi. Other meta features (orderbook imbalances, trade ﬂow imbalance, mean divergence) are computed analogously. More speciﬁcally, we deﬁne a set of so-calledmeta featuresfor each market i∈{ 1,..., 14} by the equations mIMBa,i t := 14∑ j=1 αIMB a ij IMBa,j jt , mIMB b,i t := 14∑ j=1 αIMB b ij IMBb,j t , mTFI i t := 14∑ j=1 αTFI ij TFI j t, mDIV i t := 14∑ j=1 αDIV ij DIV ij t , where the coeﬃcients are determined by the procedure described below. We will demonstrate this process on the example of the past returns feature. Let us ﬁxi∈{ 1,..., 14} and δ∈{ 500ms, 1000ms}. The steps are then as follows 1. For everyj∈{ 1,..., 14}, we train the univariate modelsfretδ,i t = µij +βijPRET j t +ϵij,t using an OLS regression. We denote its coeﬃcient of determination byR2 ij. 2. We setαPRET ij := R2 ij maxjR2 ij . The procedure is completely analogous for other features. Our normalization procedure involves division by a maximum value. Note that there are other possible weight normalizations, such as division by the∑ jR2 ij; we leave it for future work to compare these approaches. Now that we have deﬁned the set of meta features, we can deﬁne the following linear models for every market i∈{ 1,..., 14} and the two future returns time horizonsδ∈{ 500ms, 1000ms} fretδ,i t =µi +βi,1mIMBa,j t +βi,2mIMBb,j t +βi,3mTFI i t +βi,4mPRET i t +βi,5mDIV i t +ϵi,t (34) We ﬁt these models using an OLS regression and analyze their performance along the same axes we have previously considered (explanatory power and PnL). Results. One main beneﬁt of the meta feature models is their simplicity. Compared to the baseline models, we have cut down the number of covariates from 70 to ﬁve. In Table 12, we report t-statistics and p-values for each of the coeﬃcients in all of the 14 models we trained. We ﬁnd strong statistical signiﬁcance for all meta features in each of the models. The smallest absolute t-statistic corresponds to the meta past returns feature for the model predicting future returns on the Okex quarterly futures contract. It is perhaps not too surprising that we would see a comparably small t-statistic in this case, since the futures premium can ﬂuctuate somewhat freely in the sense that it is not linked by any strong arbitrage bounds to the price of its underlying. This argument applies more strongly the more distant the expiration of the futures contract is (note that in our case the expiration date lays approximately one month in the future). The coeﬃcients of determination for the meta models deﬁned by Eqn.(34) are given in Table 13, where we show the in-sample and out-of-sampleR2 values for the two time horizons under consideration. Here we ﬁnd that a similar set of observations holds true as in the baseline and LASSO models. First, the average diﬀerence between the500ms and 1000ms R2 values tends to be quite small. For example, in case of the in-sampleR2 values we observe that the500ms version is on average 7% larger than the1000ms one, in line with the expectation that shorter time horizons would be more easily predicted. Some outliers are the lagging markets Bybit USDT perpetual and Bitmex perpetual, where passing from the500ms to the1000ms future returns horizon yields an increasedR2 of 32.6% and 37%, respectively. On the other hand, markets that see a notably high decrease in accuracy in passing from the500ms to the1000ms horizon are leading markets such as the Binance USDT perpetual or the Huobi spot market, where we see decreases of39.7% and 40.5%, respectively. A similar phenomenon was noted for the baseline and LASSO models. Secondly, the in-sampleR2 is not signiﬁcantly larger than its out-of-sample counterpart, which provides evidence of the absence of signiﬁcant overﬁtting. We ﬁnd average decreases of10.7% for the500ms horizon and4.9% for the 1000ms horizon. In Table 14, we report PnL values for the meta models(34). As before, we compute three separate values:PnL1 which is the total number of basis points accumulated over the test period by the strategy associated with the respective meta model,PnL2 where we adjustPnL1 by the default fee, andPnL3 where we adjustPnL1 by the VIP 35 Table 12: T-statistics and p-values for meta models t-stat p-value mDIV mIMBa mIMBb mTFI mPRET mDIV mIMBa mIMBb mTFI mPRET hbdm_BTC-USD 28.85 53.29 -24.7 64.47 47.59 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 hbdm_BTC_CQ -9.37 44.81 -12.37 98.57 -16.33 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 bitmex_BTC/USD 44.19 37.24 -16.03 37.36 73.89 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 deribit_BTC-PERPETUAL 28.31 41.18 -12.16 50.14 51.19 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 bybit_BTC/USD 54.91 34.91 -31.58 50.55 74.97 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 binancefut_BTC/USDT 31.76 33.36 -6.21 104.06 -35.93 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 okex_BTC-USD-SWAP -6.72 48.1 -24.71 62.38 20.09 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 okex_BTC-USD-210326 -13.5 38.55 -13.5 79.51 2.11 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.04 ftx_BTC-PERP 53.45 40.31 -10.22 77.34 95.26 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 huobipro_BTC/USDT 47.64 27.6 -5.86 110.8 -30.58 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 okex_BTC-USDT-SWAP -12.02 46.86 -21.47 57.19 29.97 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 tbybit_BTC/USDT 28.17 34.46 -21.09 26.64 88.36 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 thbdm_BTC-USDT 29.99 57.25 -20.41 108.79 18.96 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 binancecmfut_BTC/USD 19.76 60.37 -22.4 89.62 15.52 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Table 13: In-sample and out-of-sampleR2 values for the meta models. R2 R2 oos 500ms 1000ms 500ms 1000ms ftx_BTC-PERP 0.306 0.288 0.213 0.212 bybit_BTC/USD 0.262 0.3 0.261 0.294 thbdm_BTC-USDT 0.215 0.18 0.202 0.173 hbdm_BTC-USD 0.201 0.229 0.19 0.217 bitmex_BTC/USD 0.192 0.263 0.174 0.249 tbybit_BTC/USDT 0.19 0.252 0.198 0.26 binancecmfut_BTC/USD 0.156 0.139 0.137 0.13 deribit_BTC-PERPETUAL 0.141 0.166 0.152 0.186 okex_BTC-USDT-SWAP 0.13 0.144 0.117 0.139 huobipro_BTC/USDT 0.126 0.075 0.106 0.069 okex_BTC-USD-SWAP 0.122 0.131 0.112 0.124 hbdm_BTC_CQ 0.116 0.091 0.104 0.09 okex_BTC-USD-210326 0.112 0.105 0.105 0.102 binancefut_BTC/USDT 0.068 0.041 0.055 0.041 Table 14: PnLs of meta models PnL1 PnL2 PnL3 huobipro_BTC/USDT 21220.4 -6377.1 10007.1 ftx_BTC-PERP 17140.6 -19357.4 9319.6 binancefut_BTC/USDT 10790.5 -12097.5 2035.8 binancecmfut_BTC/USD 10085.4 -13284.6 1672.2 thbdm_BTC-USDT 12393.6 -6910.4 -636.6 hbdm_BTC_CQ 8051.1 -10916.9 -1432.9 hbdm_BTC-USD 15057.7 -8112.3 -2088.1 okex_BTC-USD-210326 8739.4 -15220.6 -3240.6 okex_BTC-USD-SWAP 10398.4 -13091.6 -3695.6 okex_BTC-USDT-SWAP 9803.9 -13946.1 -4446.1 bybit_BTC/USD 19613.6 -14451.4 -14451.4 deribit_BTC-PERPETUAL 9116.7 -14623.3 -14623.3 bitmex_BTC/USD 17561.6 -17433.4 -17433.4 tbybit_BTC/USDT 17659.5 -18580.5 -18580.5 36 fee. As before with the other models, we ﬁnd particularly largePnL3 values for FTX where the fee structure implies that it “should be" a leader, but its largeR2 value points at lagging behaviour. We also note that the Binance USDT perpetual yields a positivePnL3 value despite the fact that it has (by quite a margin) the lowest predictability score (as measured byR2). An interpretation of this result could be that the extremely low VIP fee on this market is suﬃciently small to overcome its general leadingness behaviour. The Huobi spot market has one of the lowest VIP taker fees and its corresponding meta model has middlingR2 value. Based on these observations, we would predict a relatively largePnL3 value although we would not anticipate it having the highestPnL3, as it turns out to be the case. As mentioned before, this might be partially explained by the fact that this market tends to have extremely low top of the book liquidity, implying that the strategy whose PnL we are computing is not immediately scalable to the deployment of substantial amounts of trading capital. The additional cost of slippage could become an important consideration at that point. Surprisingly, the Binance BTC-margined perpetual, which has a similarly low taker fee as the USDT-margined one (see Figure 19), exhibits a lowerPnL3 when we compare the two (a relative diﬀerence of 18%), despite its considerably higherR2 values. At the other end of the spectrum, the four markets whosePnL3 is lowest are the precisely ones with the largest taker fees. This is a similar ﬁnding to what we noted for other models: the greater predictability is not suﬃcient to overcome the larger fee. 5.4 Comparisons of Models We pursued three alternative methodologies for ﬁtting linear models that anticipate price change on each market. The starting point were the baseline models that used all 70 features. Next, we introduced𝓁1 regularization to the baseline model with nine diﬀerent regularization parameters to obtain more parsimonious models with fewer non-zero coeﬃcients. Finally, we devised an alternative methodology for reducing the number of features down to only ﬁve using an additional feature processing step. In this subsection, we set out to draw comparisons between the respective explanatory powers and PnLs of each of the trained models. We begin by investigating how theR2 values of our models compare to one another. Figure 21 shows the out-of-sample R2 values of each model. The in-sample and1000ms versions of the same illustration were deferred to the Appendix since all of theR2-based plots strongly resemble one another. The interested reader can ﬁnd these in Figures 32, 31, and 33. In examining Figure 21, we ﬁrst note that the maximalR2 is attained by the baseline Figure 21: 500ms out-of-sampleR2 values. model in each case. LASSO models with small regularization parameterλ perform similarly. For example, the LASSO models withλ = 0.016 experience an average drop of only2.8% relative to the baseline model and the λ = 0.032 models experience an average decrease of5.9%. The average number of nonzero coeﬃcients retained is 38 forλ = 0.016, and 29 forλ = 0.032. As noted earlier, this suggests that of the 70 original features used by the baseline model, around 30-40 contribute very little to the model’s performance. Whenλ is increased beyond0.032, and as more and more coeﬃcients are thus set to zero, we ﬁnd progressively larger drops in explanatory power. 37 The meta model uses only ﬁve features and is by far the most parsimonious in terms of explanatory power per feature. To illustrate this point, we can compare the results of the meta model with those of theλ = 0.256 LASSO models which have a similar number of features (namely an average of four). Here we ﬁnd a lower averageR2 of 21.2% for the LASSO models. TheR2 values of the meta models are actually quite similar to those of theλ = 0.128 models which retain an average of nine features. The average diﬀerence inR2 values between the two is3.5%. When we compare the meta models to the baseline models, we note a substantial reduction in explanatory power. The average reduction is23.7%. Let us now compare thePnL3 values of each of the models shown in Figure 22. Remarkably, the meta models exhibit the largest averagePnL3 of−4114 bpts compared to−4666 bpts for the baseline models, which have the second largest average. These ﬁndings are unexpected in the sense that they do not agree with the earlier ﬁndings on explanatory power, which potentially hints at the power of the meta models and their simplicity for actual trading applications. With the exception of the meta models, the averagePnL3 is in fact monotonically decreasing in the number of coeﬃcients. That is, as the regularization parameter is increased, the averagePnL3 decreases. See Figure 23 for a visual overview of these average values across markets. Figure 22: PnL3 values for each model. Figure 23: PnL3 values averaged across markets for each type of model. The numeric values denote the LASSO regularization parameters. It is interesting to contrast these ﬁndings with the analogous results for the thePnL1 values of all models where execution cost is ignored, as shown in Figure 24. One is immediately struck by the fact that the meta models perform considerably worse than, say, the baseline model according toPnL1. As a matter of fact, the meta models 38 now have thesmallest average value of 13402 whereas the baseline model has an average of 17695. For the LASSO models, the averagePnL1 decreases monotonically in the regularization parameterλ, starting at 17602 forλ = 0.001 and ending with 15128 forλ = 0.256. How can we reconcile the fact that the meta models yielded the best results in terms ofPnL3, but yet delivered the worst results if we considerPnL1 as the metric? SincePnLi 3 = PnLi 1−feei·ni where feei is the taker fee on marketi and ni is the number of trades on marketi, we must have a smaller number of trades for the meta models compared with the baseline models. That is, the strategy associated with the baseline model trades more often than that associated with the meta model, hence accumulating basis points in proﬁt when fees are ignored, but accumulating losses when fees are accounted for. Figure 24: PnL1 values for each model. The diﬀerence in the number of trades per model is illustrated in Figure 25. The strategy we associate to the Figure 25: Number of trades for each model meta models trade an average of25.3% less often relative to its baseline model counterpart. The discrepancy is especially large on the Huobi spot market and quarterly futures contracts, where the number of trades is less than half that of the baseline models. 39 6 Market Making Experiments The strategies we associated to each of the previously trained linear models have beentaker strategies. That is, they rely on limit orders that would lead to immediate execution: buy orders use the top ask as their limit price, while sell orders use the top bid. We found positive PnL values even after taking execution cost into account, in a number of cases when the taker fee was particularly low. Some markets (such as the Bybit BTC perpetual) which have among the highest taker fees gave low PnL values, despite their strong tendency of being laggards. However, as we noted before, a large taker fee usually also implies a large maker rebate. This is because the net fee (the diﬀerence between taker fee and maker rebate) is largely uniform across markets, as one would expect in a competitive exchange environment, since a market with comparatively very large net fees would naturally ﬁnd it diﬃcult to attract traders. On the other hand, a market which undercuts competing exchanges with exceptionally low net fees would likely struggle to be proﬁtable. Let us consider more closely those markets which are laggards, have a high taker fee and consequently also a high maker rebate. The maker rebate on the Bybit BTC perpetual, for instance, is 2.5 bpts, which is the maximum among our set of14 markets. It is natural to wonder whether we can leverage the large maker rebate on Bybit in conjunction with its lagging nature to instead devise amaker strategy which achieves positive PnL values. In contrast with taker strategies, maker strategies employpassive limit orders (also called maker orders). That is, for a sell order, the limit price is strictly greater than the top bid price, while for a buy order, the limit price is strictly smaller than the top ask price. The order thus submitted rests “passively" in the orderbook, can be observed by others, and consumed by others with a taker order (an exception is the iceberg order type supported by some exchanges which allows one to submit passive orders that are not visible to other market participants). Execution of the maker order hinges on the arrival of a taker order which consumes it. It is therefore uncertain at what point in time a passive order will be executed, if at all. The compensation for this uncertainty is that a maker order submitted at timet necessarily achieves a better price (if it is executed) than a taker order submitted at timet would. In addition, maker orders incur less (in some cases negative) execution fees relative to taker orders. The trade-oﬀ between passive and aggressive orders can be concisely summarized as one of immediacy on one hand, versus “goodness" of execution price on the other hand. What is required of a successful maker strategy? Since the execution of a maker order relies on the arrival of a taker order in the opposite direction, the maker order is naturally subject to a certain adverse price move. If we use the notion of microprice deﬁned below, then it is true by deﬁnition that at the precise time of the ﬁll, there is an adverse price move against the maker order. We deﬁne the microprice as pm := p·a +p′·a′ a +a′ where p and p′ are the top bid and ask prices, respectively, whilea and a′ are the top bid and ask amounts, respectively. The goal of a maker strategy therefore must be to minimize the magnitude of the adverse price move following a ﬁll event. In order to achieve this goal, the trader must constantly monitor market conditions for the potential future arrival of a signiﬁcant adverse price move. When such a price move is imminent, the trader should cancel their passive order (and possibly resubmit at a diﬀerent price level). In this section, we set out to devise a maker strategy that builds on the previously trained meta models. These strategies will then be rigorously tested which, due to the diﬃculties in backtesting maker strategies, will involve a series of real world trading experiments on Bybit where the maker rebate is largest. Finally, we draw comparisons between the results of our maker strategy with those of a naive benchmark strategy, in order to showcase the eﬃcacy of the trading alpha provided by the meta models. 6.1 Strategy Speciﬁcation This subsection is devoted to constructing a maker strategy that builds on the meta models. The reason we use the meta models as the foundation is two-fold. First, the meta models are far simpler than for instance the baseline models if we gauge model complexity by the number of covariates. Second, while the meta models had lower explanatory power than some of the other models, their eﬃciency in the sense ofR2 per feature was by far the largest, and they achieved the largest PnL values when fees were taken into account. What is the simplest, most natural maker strategy one can deﬁne? Let us ﬁrst consider what data is required in order to fully specify a maker strategy. For the sake of concreteness, let us consider in the following the case of a single passive sell order. It is straightforward to dualize this discussion to the case of a passive buy order. The speciﬁcation of a strategy requires 40 1. a criterion for when to post a new order, 2. a limit pricep> top bid and an amounta∈ N for the posted order, and 3. a criterion for when to cancel the ask order. In order to reduce the problem to its most plain form, we shall utilize the following simpliﬁcations • p := top bid+tick size, • a := 2000 USD, and • Post a new order:⇐⇒ cancel criterion returns “do not cancel" and we currently do not have an ask order posted. Here thetick size refers to the minimum price movement of the market in question. That is, we use a ﬁxed price, namely the lowest possible ask level and a ﬁxed (somewhat arbitrarily chosen) small order amount for the sake of testing. It is left for future work to investigate the scalability to larger order amounts. With these simpliﬁcations in mind, we need only to specify a condition for when to cancel an order posted at the top ask. From this, we will then obtain a full maker strategy. The cancel criterion for a passive order at the top ask level should be capable of anticipating when an adverse price move in excess of the maker rebate is imminent, and in that case return a “cancel"decision in time to successfully pull the order. As mentioned earlier, adverse selection is unavoidable - the question is just how much of it our ﬁlls are subject to it. If this is less than the maker rebate received per ﬁll, we achieve proﬁtability. How can we leverage the meta models to deﬁne a natural cancel criterion? Let us ﬁx a marketi∈{ 1,..., 14} on which to trade. In fact, as previously noted, we will conduct our experiments on the Bybit BTC perpetual. The meta model for marketi is the ﬁtted linear model fretδ,i t =µi +βi,1mIMBa,j t +βi,2mIMBb,j t +βi,3mTFI i t +βi,4mPRET i t +βi,5mDIV i t +ϵi,t, (35) and we shall ﬁx a future returns horizonδ = 1000 ms for the remainder of this section. Let Fi : R5→ R, (36) denote the market-speciﬁc function that maps an observation of meta features to the prediction of the ﬁtted meta model according to Eqn.(35). Suppose we observe a new samplext∈ R5 at a timet, where we have a sell order posted on the top ask level. We can then deﬁne the following cancel criterion parametrized by a constantT0 cancel top ask order:⇐⇒ Fi(xt)>T 0. (37) That is, when the meta model predicts a rise price of a certain magnitude (parametrized byT) based on the most recent feature observation, we shall cancel an order posted at the top ask if indeed we have one posted there at the time. We are now left with the choice of the thresholdT. If we select a value which is too large, we will end up cancelling very rarely and hence experiencing a lot of adverse selection. In the limit caseT =∞, we in fact never cancel (which will serve as our benchmark for comparison, as we will describe later). On the other hand, if we select a valueT which is too close to zero, we will cancel extremely often and thus receive very little ﬁlls (and consequently collect very few maker rebates). As a matter of fact, if we were to chooseT =−∞ the cancel condition would always return “cancel" and we would receive no ﬁlls whatsoever, since we would never post a new order to begin with. Given the trade-oﬀs highlighted by the limiting cases, how can we arrive at a sensible parameter value where we maximize the number of ﬁlls we receive, while simultaneously minimizing the amount of adverse selection our ﬁlls are subject to? Our approach is to come up with an approximate answer to this question by learning from cancellation behaviour of other market participants. That is, we will attempt to characterize, by means of meta model predictions, times at which a signiﬁcant amount of cancellations from the top ask level is imminent. More speciﬁcally, we search for meta feature observations in the union of training and test set (spanning Feburary 22 – March 1) where, at timest the following conditions holds • at >M , • pt+δ =pt and at+δ <m for someδ∈ (0, 500ms). 41 Here at and pt denote the top ask liquidity and price at timet, respectively. The constantM > 0 represents an at least moderately large amount of liquidity, while the scalarm >0 represents a small amount of liquidity. Experimentation has revealed deﬁnitions ofm and M as the ﬁrst and second quartile (respectively) to be sensible ones. The quartiles are computed over all observations of the top ask liquidity in the training and test sets combined. Let us denote the subset of meta feature samples deﬁned by the above two condition byF. The intuition behind our approach is to scan our data set for examples where we pass from a moderate-high liquidity regime (on the top ask level) to a low liquidity regime. These are cases representing the cutoﬀ point at which the market (i.e. most market participants) agree that it is no longer proﬁtable to post an order at the top ask level. We want to understand such cases by means of our meta models. To this end, consider Figure 26a where we display a histogram of values from the set P :={Fi(x) :x∈F} . (38) That is, we show the distribution of predictions made by the meta model on samples from the setF deﬁned by the two conditions above. More precisely, we uniformly select a random subset of size20, 000 from these predictions in order to avoid many successive samples and to keep the histogram more legible. The average and median predictions are 2.04 and 1.83 respectively, while the standard deviation is5.14. We compare this with the histogram shown in Figure 26b, where we display a uniformly random size20, 000 subset of{Fi(x) :x is any training or test sample}. Here we ﬁnd an average prediction value of0.47, a median of0.44 and a standard deviation of7.88. (a) Random subset of size20, 000 from the setF (b) Any random set of20, 000 meta feature samples Figure 26: Distribution of meta model predictions. From the preceding analysis, we might extractT := 1.83, the median prediction on the setF, as a reasonable candidate for the deﬁnition of our cancel criterion and hence the full speciﬁcation of the maker strategy. In the following, we will examine this choice from another perspective and draw comparisons with other possible values for T. Next, we would like to measure the expected adverse selected when the prediction exceedsT. To this end, let us consider Figure 27 where we computed the average price (top ask) increase (in basis points) afterδ seconds, for δ≤ 500s, conditioned on a meta model prediction greater thanTq for q∈{ 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7}. The quantityTq is deﬁned as theq-th quantile of the setP from Equation 38. Note thatT0.5 = 1.83 is our candidate threshold. We Figure 27: Average top ask price returns afterδ second conditioned on meta model prediction greater thanTq observe in Figure 27 that our candidate threshold (corresponding toq = 0.5) exactly attains the2.5 bpts mark after 42 a few seconds, which is precisely the breakeven point of tolerable adverse selection, since the maker rebate is2.5 bpts. This provides us with further evidence of the suitability of theT = 1.83 threshold. Impossibility of backtesting. At this point, we have a candidate maker strategy (or a set of candidate strategies) that we would like to test, in order to determine whether it is capable of achieving positive PnL. But how exactly can we test performance of a maker strategy? It turns out that there are a number of diﬃculties associated with this, making it essentially impossible to do so with any reasonable degree of precision. Let us contrast this with the case of backtesting a taker strategy on historical data. The situation is straightforward in the taker case due to the immediacy of execution for taker orders: when a candidate strategy provides a buy signal, we assume execution at the top ask pricepa or, in more elaborate versions, at a pricep > pa that takes (i.e. sweeps) liquidity from a number of ask levels into account. Similarly, when a sell signal occurs, we assume execution at a price less or equal to the top bid price. As we scan over a historical test set in this manner (computing buy and sell signals at each point), we obtain a sequence of hypothetical buy and sell orders, which can be used as the foundation for subsequent PnL calculations. While this analysis neglects some market micro-structural eﬀects such as market impact and latency concerns, it nevertheless provides a good approximation of the actual PnL of the strategy. Moreover, there are also fairly natural ways of mitigating some of the aforementioned concerns. For instance, latency concerns largely relate to uncertainty of execution, and can be addressed by assuming that hypothetical orders fail with some nonzero probability, which could, for example, be calibrated from historical execution data. Market impact can be accounted for by using an impact model from the large body of literature on this generally well understood topic. How does this compare to the case when we would like to backtest a maker strategy? The underlying diﬃculty is the fact that the execution of a posted maker order is uncertain. It is not known when it will occur, or if it will occur at all. Execution hinges on the arrival of a taker order in the opposite direction of the posted maker order. This means that if a candidate strategy which is being tested posts a hypothetical maker order at some orderbook level, we must henceforth keep track of the queue position of our hypothetical maker order. While this hypothetical order remains posted in the orderbook (i.e. it has not been cancelled in the meantime), we must monitor all opposite-side taker orders and evaluate, based on the size of the taker order and our inferred queue position, whether it would have taken (i.e ﬁlled) our maker order. There are a number of factors that present challenges to doing this accurately, whose severity ranges from mild to critical. On the mild side of the spectrum, we are facing a similar pair of problems as in the taker case: • The submission of a passive order has an impact on the market. One would expect that the presence of a large maker order discourages aggressive orders that take from the orderbook level at which the maker order is posted. Hence, when we keep track of historical taker orders and attempt to infer whether they ﬁlled a hypothetical maker order of ours, we must account for this by assuming a nonzero probability that the taker order in fact does not arrive or that its size would have been less than the one observed historically. This sort of market impact of passive orders is far less well-understood and understudied relative to the impact of taker orders. Nevertheless, we rate this concern as only mild in severity. • There are latency issues similar to those that one must contend with when backtesting a taker strategy. For instance, at timet our maker strategy outputs a decision to cancel a posted order and at timet′≈t a large taker order arrives that would certainly have consumed our passive order. It can be diﬃcult to know with certainty whether the cancellation would have been processed ﬁrst by the exchange’s matching engine, or whether the taker order would in fact have consumed our passive order. To address this concern, we must associate a probability of failure to our cancellation that we could, for instance, calibrate from historical cancellation data and which depends on the time diﬀerencet′−t. We rate this concern as mild. A much greater challenge, which is essentially detrimental to the ability to backtest maker strategies, is related to the fact that we must keep track of ourqueue positionin the orderbook, in order to gauge whether any particular opposite-side taker order consumed our passive order. This turns out to be virtually impossible with the data we have at our disposal in this study, and more broadly, in the crypto space, given the lack of Lever 3 (order-by-order) data in this ecosystem. This is best understood by an example. Consider Figure 28 and suppose that the orderbooks displayed there are subsequent snapshots received from the exchange. Let us denote the arrival times of the respective orderbook snapshots byt1,t 2 and t3. Consider an example where our maker strategy behaves in the following manner. 1. At timet1, the maker strategy posts a new hypothetical ask order at the top ask. Hence there is386194≈ 368k USD in liquidity in front of this order, in the queue on this level. 43 2. At timet2, the maker strategy keeps its order on the top ask level. In light of the large amount of new submissions to the top ask, there is now presumably still∼ 368k USD of liquidity in front of our hypothetical maker order and additionally∼ 2122k USD behind our order in the top ask queue. 3. Suppose at timet3 our maker strategy decides to remain posted on the top ask level. There was a signiﬁcant amount of cancellations from the top ask, with roughly2165k USD removed. We do not know whether these cancellations correspond to the orders that were originallyin frontof our hypothetical order orbehind it in the top ask queue. Hence, at this point our queue position is completely unknown. Our hypothetical maker order could now well be the ﬁrst liquidity on the top ask level or the last. 4. Suppose at a timet3 +ϵ the exchange informs us about the arrival of a taker buy order of size100k USD, while the most recent orderbook we received remains the one from timet3. We now have no way of assessing whether the taker order consumed our posted ask order or not. This depends entirely on our queue position which, as noted above, is not known. Modeling the queue position is a very interesting problem in itself, and a high impact topic of independent interest, which merits its own study. While the topic is relatively unexplored in the literature, the interested reader can ﬁnd more information on this subject in, for instance, [26]. Figure 28: Consecutive orderbook snapshots, highlighting a scenario when it is virtually impossible to backtest a maker strategy, mainly to issues arising from the lack of knowledge of the queue position. This example sheds light on the diﬃculty in keeping track of queue position of a hypothetical maker order. Similar examples can be easily constructed. They are the norm, not the exception. Generally speaking, the longer a hypothetical order remains posted, the more diﬃcult it becomes to know its queue position exactly. The core issue which makes it impossible to precisely track queue position is related to the nature of the data we receive from the exchange, namely orderbook snapshot data as opposed to, for instance, order-by-order data. If we instead 44 received order-by-order data that included unique identiﬁers for each order, we would know exactly which orders were cancelled and what their queue positions were. From this data, we could then infer our exact queue position and hence whether or not a hypothetical passive order of ours would have ﬁlled. Alas, this data is not available in crypto markets, so we must accept the impossibility of precise backtesting of candidate maker strategies. We will circumvent this issue by conducting a series of real world trading experiments, to test performance and compute PnL of maker strategies. 6.2 Methodology and Experimental Setup While backtesting of maker strategies with any reasonable degree of precision is not possible in crypto markets according to our remarks in the previous subsection, it is relatively simple for individuals to trade in an automated fashion on crypto markets due to the ease of creating exchange accounts, and accessing market data and trade infrastructure through public API endpoints. This is in contrast to traditional ﬁnancial markets with a high barrier to entry, where one must usually interface with brokers, undergo a number of elaborate veriﬁcation procedures, set up a prohibitively elaborate trading infrastructure to interface with relevant markets, and so on. We leverage the comparatively easy access to crypto markets in order to test, in the real world, the performance of our previously deﬁned candidate maker strategy. In this subsection, we describe the framework and scope of our trading experiments, alog with details of how they are conducted. Some practical matters. Let us begin by describing a number of practical circumstances involving the real-time data collection and feature calculation process. The data feeds we use here are the same ones used to gather historical data, and thus the descriptions given in Section 2 apply equally here. That is, we use websocket API feeds for each of the 14 markets whose data we require. This is generally the quickest way of obtaining real-time data in crypto markets, since the exchange automatically pushes orderbook or trades updates to the subscriber without them having to explicitly prompt the exchange for the most recent market data (which is the case for the alternative type of data feed, the so-called REST API requests). Orderbook and trades data are received via diﬀerent websocket feeds. We are mining this real-time data in a server cloud-colocated to the server of the exchange on which we are trading, which is Bybit. To explain the term “cloud-colocated", we ﬁrst remark that Bybit, as most other crypto exchanges, are hosted in a cloud computing facility. In the case of Bybit this is AWS, and speciﬁcally the Singapore region. Colocation can then be easily achieved by renting server space in the same AWS region where the exchange is located. In doing so, we achieve a sub-1ms latency with Bybit. The market data we receive is processed in real time to ﬁrst compute values of the features (or transformed features, when applicable), then the meta features, and ﬁnally the output of the meta model and the corresponding output decision. This entire computation pipeline takes between zero and two milliseconds. The main bottlenecks are the computations of the average pricespi a,t(Ni) and pi b,t(Ni) that appear in the deﬁnition of the orderbook imbalance (4). This is due to the fact that their computation can involve iterations over many orderbook levels. We trigger a new feature calculation (on the latest market data) and decision output roughly every 5-10ms, depending on market volatility. Experimental setup. We now describe the setup of our experiment, whose goal is to evaluate the PnL of the strategy devised in the previous subsection. To this end, let us ﬁrst recall the speciﬁcation of the strategy. For a sell order, it is deﬁned by the following set of rules: (a) The sell post price at timet is pb,t + ∆, wherepb,t is the top bid price on the Bybit BTC perpetual at timet and ∆ represents the tick size. (b) The order amount is ﬁxed at2000 USD. (c) Cancel a top ask order:⇐⇒ Fi(xt)>T := 1.83 where Fi(xt) is the prediction of Bybit’s meta model on the latest meta feature observationxt (d) Post a new top ask order:⇐⇒ Fi(xt)≤T. However, due to rate limit constraints imposed by the exchange, we have found it necessary in practice to further restrict condition (d). Speciﬁcally, the exchange allows only for a limited number of API requests (order placements or cancellations) per minute. When the limit is exceeded, any subsequent requests fail for some period of time. Luckily, the exchange provides information about the number of remaining API requests. We incorporate this information by additionally requiring that there be at least two remaining API requests. That is, if we letrrlt denote the remaining rate limit at timet, we restrict (d) by additionally imposing the conditionrrlt > 1 (we need at least two requests so we can cancel after posting an order). 45 Even with this additional restriction, however, we ran into some issues. WheneverFi(xt)≈T, there are often many up- and down-crossings ofT in a short time window[t,t +δ]. This results in rapid depletion of the number of permitted API requests. The consequence is that we must subsequently pause for roughly one minute until a new order can be submitted. The eﬀect is a signiﬁcant portion of inactivity periods. We have addressed this problem by further restricting condition (d). Speciﬁcally, we additionally require certain trade ﬂow imbalance in favor of the potential sell order. More explicitly, this condition takes the form mTFI i t <T ′, for some thresholdT′. This type of condition was chosen not for any strong theoretical reason, but because it works well in practice. The thresholdT′ was selected on the basis of intuition, but also trial and error. We leave further calibration and a more rigorous approach to future work. In the meantime, the net result of our restriction measures is that we have reduced the number of new submissions and mitigated extended inactivity periods due to quickly depleted rate limits. The updated condition (d) now takes the form Post a new top ask order:⇐⇒ Fi(xt)≤T ∧ mTFI i t <T ′ ∧ rrlt > 1. Certainly, we want to not only post sell orders but also buy orders. We have decided to avoid subsequent same-side ﬁlls to simplify post-analysis of the results. To elaborate on why this simpliﬁes matters, consider a case when we do not impose this restriction and we receive many subsequent sell ﬁlls with no buy ﬁlls in the intervening period. The result will be a signiﬁcant short inventory. If there then happens to be a drastic price jump up, the net results will amount to an extremely high PnL loss. On the other hand, a signiﬁcant price decrease will result in potentially large proﬁts that are not indicative of long term performance. This is assuming that we use the comparison between average buy and average sell price over the sample of all ﬁlls as an evaluation metric, which indeed we do, as we shall discuss further below when we examine results. This issue is not diﬃcult to address, however. We do so by additionally tracking a variablePt which tells us the net position (or inventory) at timet. If the inventory is negative (that is, we are short), we rule out submissions of new sell orders. By the same token, if we have long inventory, we do not permit the posting of a new buy order. With this new restriction, the ﬁnal form of condition (d) from above is as follows Post a new top ask order:⇐⇒ Fi(xt)≤T ∧ mTFI i t <T ′ ∧ rrlt > 1 ∧ Pt > 0. We deﬁne a makerbuy strategy completely analogously by the following set of rules (a) The buy post price at timet is pa,t− ∆ where pa,t is the top ask price on the Bybit BTC perpetual at timet and ∆ represents the tick size. (b) The order amount is ﬁxed at2000 USD. (c) Cancel a top bid order:⇐⇒ Fi(xt)<−T (d) Post a new top bid order:⇐⇒ Fi(xt)≤T ∧ mTFI i t <T ′ ∧ rrlt > 1 ∧ Pt > 0. Now we have fully speciﬁed our maker buy and sell strategies in their ﬁnal form. For each of these, we launch an independent “bot" that operates according to the above speciﬁed rules. That is, we launch asell bot with access to real time data (including the remaining rate limitrrlt and net positionPt) which acts according to the set of rules for the sell strategy. Likewise, we launch abuy botwhich uses the same data feeds, trades on the same exchange, and acts according to the rules of the buy strategy. Note that the data feedsrrlt and Pt are shared. This means, for instance, that if the buy bot is barred from posting a new buy order due toPt > 0 (see condition (d) above) and the sell bot receives a ﬁll at timet +δ resulting inPt+δ < 0, then the buy bot will receive the updated valuePt+δ and become active again. Both bots operate in perpetuity according to these guidelines. We initialize the position by P0 := 1. In order to be able to better interpret results and draw comparisons, we launch another pair of buy and sell bots operating the same way as we outlined above, with the exception that they useT =∞ and ﬁxed order amount a := 100 (we reduced the amount since this strategy is expected to be extremely unproﬁtable). The modiﬁcation of the thresholdT has large ramiﬁcations: the resulting pair of bots never cancel after posting an order, hence have no capability of avoiding adverse selection. We shall call this thenaive benchmarkor justbenchmark strategy. It will also be useful to have a name for the other pair of bots (the non-benchmark ones), which we will refer to as the metaMM bots or strategy. 46 6.3 Results and Comparison with Benchmark In the preceding two subsections we deﬁned a maker strategy associated to the meta model on the Bybit BTC perpetual, and we outlined our methodology for conducting a real-world market making experiment on the aforementioned market. This subsection is devoted to the examination of the results. The total ﬁlled amount for the metaMM strategy is 1.537 million USD. The bots were active from2021-07-08 13:44:02 until 2021-07-13 23:54:02+00:00 . This implies an hourly ﬁll volume of 11.810k USD, which corresponds to approximately six “units" since the order size is ﬁxed at 2,000 USD. Over the entire sample, the diﬀerence between the average sell and buy price is−4.4749 bpts. More speciﬁcally, let us deﬁne the average sell price by ps := 1 A ∑ (p,a)∈G(s) p·a, where G(s) is the set of all sell ﬁlls over the sample period, andA :=∑ (p,a)∈G(s)a. In the same manner, we deﬁne the average buy price pb := 1 A ∑ (p,a)∈G(b) p·a. Then it holds that bptsmetaMM := (ps pb − 1 ) · 10000 =−4.4749, over the setG(b) of buy ﬁlls. In other words, a roundtrip trade loses on average−4.4749 bpts. However, recall that each leg (buy or sell) of the trade receives a2.5 bpts maker rebate so that a roundtrip trade nets a total of5 bpts in rebates. This implies an average proﬁt per roundtrip trade of5− 4.4749 = 0.5251 bpts. The median interarrival time between opposite-side ﬁlls is 328 seconds. Note that the trading period of the metaMM strategies is more than four months after the training and test periods that were used to calibrate the models underlying metaMM. We expect that better results could be achieved if we repeat the experiment using more recent data for the model calibration. Indeed, we performed similar real-world trading experiments at the end of February and March which exhibited slightly better performance than the one shown in this paper. These experiments were conducted over a longer period of time and used larger order sizes (up to 20k USD). In total, the notional USD turnover in this initial live trading experiment was more than 100 million USD. The methodological approach was slightly diﬀerent, however, and does not match well with the narrative of the present work, thus we decided to redesign the experiment to a more ﬁtting approach. For the benchmark strategy we employed the 20-fold smaller order amounta = 100. The total ﬁlled amount was 153.26k USD representing 1532 units. The activity period of the benchmark bots was from2021-07-17 12:11:27 until 2021-07-18 06:59:26 , hence considerably shorter than for the metaMM strategy This amounts to 8.152k USD in ﬁll volume per hour. The benchmark strategy achieved the average value (deﬁned similarly to the metaMM case) bptsbenchmark =−6.8184, on a roundtrip trade which, in line with our expectation, did not yield a proﬁt despite the 5 bpts maker rebate per roundtrip trade. However, the median interarrival time between opposite-side ﬁlls is far lower for the benchmark bots, namely only 27 seconds, which is less than 10% of the corresponding metaMM value. This is sensible, since the metaMM strategy cancels much more often after it posts, and therefore accumulates ﬁlls much more slowly. In Figures 29a and 29b we show histograms, one for the metaMM strategy and one for the benchmark bots, of the diﬀerences in basis points between pairs of sell and subsequent buy orders. It is interesting to note here that the benchmark strategy appears to have a much smaller proportion of roundtrip trades with positive basis point diﬀerence. In Figure 30a, we show PnL over time for the metaMM bots, as well as an overlayed Bitcoin price chart, which we included to give an indication of price volatility over the sample period. We suspect that the strategy’s expected performance is worse during periods of high volatility - a potentially interesting subject of investigation for future work. Furthermore, we hypothesize that the variation in the strategy’s PnL is far greater during highly volatile times. This is made plausible by the observation that high volatility implies more frequent price jumps and hence larger PnL jumps due to inventory held during a large price rise or fall (even if the inventory is small). The plot 30a includes both realized and unrealized PnL. To elaborate on what exactly this means, let us introduce some notation. If at timet the set of (buy and sell) ﬁlls isGt, the inventory isx⁄= 0 and the last ﬁll price isp, we deﬁne the set G′ t :=Gt∪{ (−x,p )}. The realized and unrealized PnL computed is then the PnL computed over the setG′ t, while 47 (a) metaMM strategy (b) naive benchmark Figure 29: Distribution of the basis point diﬀerence between buy and subsequent sell ﬁll. (a) MetaMM strategy. (b) Naive benchmark strategy. Figure 30: Cumulative PnL in USD, across time. the PnL computed over the setGt is just the realized PnL. If we denote the output of this calculation byPnLt, then the pairt, PnLt) represents a point on the “rpnl + upnl" graph shown in Figure 30a. That is, the quantity PnLt takes into account the “PnL potential" stemming from the fact that the inventory can be nonzero. Note that by design of our experiment, we have|x|≤ 2000 so the “unrealized" component is generally quite small (it never exceeds 30 USD). For comparison, we show a similar plot for the benchmark strategy in Figure 30b. It is striking how steadily the PnL decreases in this case. The contrast between the two PnL graphs provides clear visual evidence of the additional “alpha" that the meta model provides for this maker strategy. For our last performance evaluation metric, we sought a measure for the adverse selection that our ﬁlls were subject to. Intuitively, this means that we want to compare the ﬁll price with another price some time into the future. In order to rigorously deﬁne the notion of “adverse selection", one needs to deﬁne a time horizon and a notion of price. For our comparisons, we used the last traded price on the Bybit BTC perpetual as the reference price and employed a number of diﬀerent time horizons, namelyδ∈{ 0.5s, 5s, 10s, 30s, 60s, 150s, 300s, 600s, 1200s, 2400s, 4800s}. For each of these time windows, we measure how much the price moved against our ﬁll price on average, what the median adverse price move is, the 25th and 75th percentle, and the minimum and maximum. We additionally show the standard deviation in adverse price move. The results are shown in Table 15 for the metaMM bots, and in Table 16 for the naive benchmark. When comparing the adverse selection that the benchmark ﬁlls are subject to with that of the metaMM ﬁlls, we Table 15: Adverse selection over diﬀerent time horizons for metaMM strategy 0.5s 5s 10s 30s 60s 150s 300s 600s 1200s 2400s 4800s avg -0.51 -0.97 -1.24 -1.69 -1.99 -2.27 -2.44 -2.19 -2.88 -2.91 -1.73 std 1.61 2.74 3.57 5.41 7.54 12.52 16.21 23.12 30.04 40.94 57.06 min -12.66 -24.18 -31.75 -23.75 -37.99 -53.18 -69.18 -139.03 -129.19 -215.28 -217.02 25% -0.15 -1.07 -1.94 -3.74 -5.71 -9.48 -12.45 -15.26 -20.32 -25.09 -34.52 50% 0.00 0.00 -0.15 -0.74 -1.22 -2.32 -2.56 -3.14 -3.69 -1.64 -1.80 75% 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.15 0.30 4.73 6.82 11.52 14.24 18.27 33.22 max 3.87 13.72 17.41 28.14 30.46 42.77 61.28 110.43 108.80 192.34 199.02 48 Table 16: Adverse selection over diﬀerent time horizons for naive benchmark strategy. 0.5s 5s 10s 30s 60s 150s 300s 600s 1200s 2400s 4800s avg -0.49 -1.65 -2.28 -2.78 -2.94 -3.32 -3.26 -3.00 -3.16 -3.24 -3.06 std 1.25 2.96 4.12 7.10 10.40 16.33 23.63 30.26 38.49 51.81 89.72 min -12.05 -19.97 -26.90 -38.16 -61.74 -91.39 -122.95 -164.41 -164.73 -184.83 -368.74 25% -0.34 -2.78 -4.15 -6.31 -8.58 -13.23 -17.64 -22.91 -28.00 -36.19 -45.80 50% -0.00 -0.43 -1.19 -2.16 -2.41 -3.47 -3.08 -2.99 -3.33 -3.31 -3.64 75% 0.08 0.00 0.00 0.09 2.04 6.51 11.70 16.21 21.17 30.10 40.48 max 3.53 16.77 31.85 54.40 50.37 73.54 119.77 132.37 159.60 182.54 365.70 note that after a “settling period" or around 10s, the diﬀerence between the two stabilizes at around one basis point. That is, the benchmark ﬁlls experience an average adverse price move which is one basis point worse than that experienced by the metaMM ﬁlls. While a mere basis point may not sound particularly substantial, we see in the PnL graphs what ramiﬁcations this has. The500ms time horizon is anomalous in the sense that the benchmark sees less adverse selection over this time period. The standard deviation in adverse selection is smaller for the metaMM strategy, with exception of the500ms time window. The diﬀerence becomes more pronounced the larger the time horizon. 7 Conclusion This study used a granular data set comprised of market data from the most liquid Bitcoin markets, in order to closely examine the Bitcoin price formation process on a micro scale. To this end, we deﬁned a set of features that encapsulate microstructural information on each market, which we subsequently leveraged to generate a leader-lagger network illuminating the cross-impact relationships inherent in our set of markets. Perpetual swaps and quarterly futures on Binance and Huobi were found to be particularly strong leading markets, while the Bybit and FTX perpetuals were found to be strong laggards. The generated features were subsequently utilized further for the development of linear price prediction models. We compared three methodologies of training such linear models. The ﬁrst was based on a simple OLS regression using the full set of70 features, the second employed a LASSO regression instead with a number of diﬀerent regularization parameters, and the third inserted an additional dimensionality reduction step before applying an OLS regression. The largest explanatory powers over future returns were achieved with the ﬁrst approach, though LASSO models with only around half of the features surviving (that is, having nonzero coeﬃcient) yielded similar R2 values. On the most lagging markets, we were able to achieveR2 values as high as 36% for the task of predicting 500ms future returns. Even the most leading market still yielded anR2 value larger than 10%. In a next step, we deﬁned a natural trading strategy associated to each model, in order to assess how well predictability (as measured byR2) translates to trading proﬁt. These strategies employ taker orders, in contrast with another strategy we deﬁne later based on maker orders. One would expect largeR2 to correspond to high PnL values, but this turned out not to be the case. We noted that a market’s propensity to either lead or lag is intimately tied to its fee structure. A high fee regime consisting of a large taker fee and a large maker rebate predispose a market to lagging behaviour. Conversely, a low fee regime, where both taker fee and maker rebate are small, implies a predisposition to leading behaviour. Only when a market’s actual laggingness exceeded the one implied by its fee structure, did our strategy yield large (and positive) PnL values therein. A notable example was the FTX perpetual, which was among the most predictable markets despite having an extremely low taker fee. Finally, we constructed a simple maker strategy associated to our linear models in order to address the question of whether the large maker rebates can be converted into proﬁt on exchanges where we found highly negative PnLs with the previously tested taker strategy. Due to the diﬃculties involved in testing maker strategies on historical data, we devised a live trading experiment on Bybit, where we implemented and deployed real capital to the strategy in the real world. It was found to yield approximately one basis point of “alpha" compared to a naive benchmark strategy, which was suﬃcient to produce positive PnL over a sample period of roughly ﬁve days. Future work.Our framework opens up a variety of avenues for future research. For one, a natural extension would be to incorporate alternative cryptocurrencies, such as Ethereum, into our analysis. Nowadays, daily Ethereum trade volumes routinely represent around half of the Bitcoin ones (and occasionally even exceeding them). Given the high correlation between these two assets, we would certainly expect signiﬁcant cross-impact to take place, even on small time scales and potentially as a useful predictive signal. Similarly, one could also explore the interplay 49 between equities and Bitcoin markets, particularly around times of market open and close where equities trade volumes tend to be largest. A second avenue for potential future work is to consider extensions of the taker and maker strategies we presented in this paper. One could, for instance, allow for greater inventory risk in the maker strategy, and possibly vary the post (i.e. submission) price depending on the size of the inventory, thus trading oﬀ the strength of the alpha with the inventory risk. For the taker strategy, one could explore how proﬁtability is aﬀected by diﬀerent execution styles, which go beyond the simple top-of-the-book execution that we assume. Further related to the market making strategy, it would be interesting to investigate its scalability to larger order amounts, along with the interplay of its proﬁtability with volatility conditions. Building models for estimating queue position and incorporating this into the trading behaviour would likely lead to more realistic backtesting, and potential additional proﬁtability when deployed in a live market experiment. Lastly, at a more foundational level, our feature set can certainly be reﬁned and extended in a number of ways, or simply processed diﬀerently. For instance, instead of applying our nonlinear feature transform to the base features, one might experiment with utilizing nonlinear methods, such as tree ensembles or neural networks, applied directly on the set of base features. References [1] Bitmex perpetual guide. Available athttps://www.bitmex.com/app/perpetualContractsGuide. [2] Bitwise volume report. Available at https://static.bitwiseinvestments.com/Research/ Bitwise-Asset-Management-Analysis-of-Real-Bitcoin-Trade-Volume.pdf . [3] Bybit websocket api documentation. Available at https://bybit-exchange.github.io/docs/linear/ #t-websocket. [4] Coin metrics market manipulation report. Available at https://coinmetrics.substack.com/p/ coin-metrics-state-of-the-network . [5] Cryptocompare spot vs derivatives volumes. Available athttps://www.cryptocompare.com/media/37746011/ cryptocompare_exchange_review_2021_01.pdf. [6] Deribit index documentation. Available athttps://test.deribit.com/pages/docs/general. [7] Kimchi premium investopedia. Available athttps://www.investopedia.com/terms/k/kimchi-premium.asp. [8] Pandas resample function. Available athttps://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/ pandas.core.resample.Resampler.last.html. [9] Spot vs leveraged trading. Available athttps://www.binance.com/en/support/faq/360033162052. [10] Volume monitor. Available athttps://ftx.com/volume-monitor. [11] Volume report. Available athttps://ftx.com/volume-report-paper.pdf. [12] Websocket wikipedia article. Available athttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WebSocket. [13] Saketh Aleti and Bruce Mizrach. Bitcoin spot and futures market microstructure.Journal of Futures Markets, 41(2):194–225, Oct 2020. [14] Carol Alexander, Jaehyuk Choi, Heungju Park, and Sungbin Sohn. Bitmex bitcoin derivatives: Price discovery, informational eﬃciency, and hedging eﬀectiveness.Journal of Futures Markets, 40(1):23–43, Sep 2019. [15] Carol Alexander and Daniel F. Heck. Price discovery in bitcoin: The impact of unregulated markets.Journal of Financial Stability, 50:100776, 2020. [16] Aurélien Alfonsi, Antje Fruth, and Alexander Schied. Optimal execution strategies in limit order books with general shape functions.Quantitative Finance, 10(2):143–157, Jun 2009. [17] Markus Bibinger, Nikolaus Hautsch, Peter Malec, and Markus Reiss. Estimating the Spot Covariation of Asset Prices - Statistical Theory and Empirical Evidence.Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 37(3):419–435, 2019. 50 [18] Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, J. Farmer, and F. Lillo. How markets slowly digest changes in supply and demand. Capital Markets: Market Microstructure, 2008. [19] Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, Marc Mézard, and Marc Potters. Statistical properties of stock order books: empirical results and models.Quantitative Finance, 2(4):251–256, Aug 2002. [20] Rama Cont, Arseniy Kukanov, and Sasha Stoikov. The price impact of order book events.Journal of ﬁnancial econometrics, 12(1):47–88, 2014. [21] John M. Griﬃn and Amin Shams. Is Bitcoin Really Untethered?The Journal of Finance, 75(4):1913–1964, Jun 2020. [22] Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman.The Elements of Statistical Learning. Springer Series in Statistics. Springer New York Inc., New York, NY, USA, 2001. [23] R. Huang and T. Polak. LOBSTER: Limit order book reconstruction system.Tech. rep., 2011. [24] Jui-Cheng Hung, Hung-Chun Liu, and J. Jimmy Yang. Trading activity and price discovery in bitcoin futures markets. Journal of Empirical Finance, 62:107–120, 2021. [25] Katya Malinova and Andreas Park. Subsidizing liquidity: The impact of make/take fees on market quality.The Journal of Finance, 70(2):509–536, Mar 2015. [26] C. Moallemi and Kai Yuan. A model for queue position valuation in a limit order book.Columbia Business School Research Paper No. 17-70, 2017. Available at SSRNhttps://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm? abstract_id=2996221. [27] Vasiliki Plerou, Parameswaran Gopikrishnan, Xavier Gabaix, and H. Eugene Stanley. Quantifying stock-price response to demand ﬂuctuations.Physical Review E, 66(2), Aug 2002. [28] Marc Potters and Jean-Philippe Bouchaud. More statistical properties of order books and price impact. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 324(1):133–140, 2003. Proceedings of the International Econophysics Conference. [29] Kyle Soska, Jin-Dong Dong, Alex Khodaverdian, Ariel Zetlin-Jones, Bryan Routledge, and Nicolas Christin. Towards understanding cryptocurrency derivatives:a case study of bitmex.Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021, Apr 2021. [30] Daniel Tkacik. Crypto derivatives markets are booming. Available at https://engineering.cmu.edu/ news-events/news/2021/04/19-bitmex.html. [31] Ke Xu, Martin D. Gould, and Sam D. Howison. Multi-level order-ﬂow imbalance in a limit order book.Market Microstructure and Liquidity, 04(03n04):1950011, 2018. 51 Appendix In this appendix, we will occasionally abbreviate the names of markets according to the acronyms in Table 17, when it is necessary to save space. Table 17: Market acronyms Acronym hbdm_BTC-USD m1 hbdm_BTC_CQ m2 bitmex_BTC/USD m3 deribit_BTC-PERPETUAL m4 bybit_BTC/USD m5 binancefut_BTC/USDT m6 okex_BTC-USD-SWAP m7 okex_BTC-USD-210326 m8 ftx_BTC-PERP m9 huobipro_BTC/USDT m10 okex_BTC-USDT-SWAP m11 tbybit_BTC/USDT m12 thbdm_BTC-USDT m13 binancecmfut_BTC/USD m14 Table 18: Summary statistics for all modelsMij from Eqn.(22). IMB_a IMB_b TFI PRET DIV IMB_a IMB_b TFI PRET DIV t-stat t-stat t-stat t-stat t-stat p-value p-value p-value p-value p-value i=m1, j=m1 88.26 -79.91 82.37 14.41 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m1, j=m2 52.70 -41.83 42.66 85.17 75.42 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m1, j=m3 56.80 -56.04 51.03 59.07 2.78 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.01 i=m1, j=m4 39.28 -24.55 60.34 64.63 48.47 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m1, j=m5 73.35 -74.25 18.61 80.13 -8.36 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m1, j=m6 7.95 -0.96 36.20 100.94 79.07 0.00 0.33 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m1, j=m7 48.24 -40.49 57.14 86.57 81.40 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m1, j=m8 21.00 -16.93 51.09 91.29 87.88 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m1, j=m9 41.75 -35.50 53.47 67.65 59.71 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m1, j=m10 -17.19 25.78 34.24 127.55 50.09 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m1, j=m11 21.28 -17.90 58.17 90.34 80.62 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m1, j=m12 76.07 -78.25 24.34 62.43 37.05 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m1, j=m13 77.26 -75.75 25.86 90.92 41.14 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m1, j=m14 42.49 -38.15 47.26 100.55 77.12 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m2, j=m1 37.61 -35.15 50.91 1.87 -19.89 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.06 0.00 i=m2, j=m2 85.37 -69.81 104.80 -26.87 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m2, j=m3 10.76 -11.84 33.19 13.24 -48.58 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m2, j=m4 13.99 -18.62 44.35 20.65 -40.22 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m2, j=m5 21.97 -25.45 18.45 14.33 -46.30 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m2, j=m6 9.32 -1.37 32.47 111.78 3.19 0.00 0.17 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m2, j=m7 44.84 -41.26 70.91 28.80 0.62 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.54 i=m2, j=m8 28.03 -23.57 69.01 49.49 16.17 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m2, j=m9 29.55 -22.24 51.49 25.40 -28.85 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m2, j=m10 -4.30 8.60 40.00 76.10 -27.34 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m2, j=m11 15.16 -10.83 72.36 35.82 -20.08 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m2, j=m12 27.13 -24.14 14.10 12.56 -36.38 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 Continued on next page 52 Table 18: Summary statistics for all modelsMij IMB_a IMB_b TFI PRET DIV IMB_a IMB_b TFI PRET DIV t-stat t-stat t-stat t-stat t-stat p-value p-value p-value p-value p-value i=m2, j=m13 69.57 -71.47 38.85 13.90 -8.92 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m2, j=m14 56.42 -53.35 74.29 38.65 -3.34 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m3, j=m1 64.45 -54.84 39.90 82.26 55.99 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m3, j=m2 46.27 -35.89 31.48 82.22 87.82 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m3, j=m3 73.99 -67.93 84.21 2.07 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.04 0.00 i=m3, j=m4 34.72 -17.89 55.36 67.19 76.50 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m3, j=m5 73.68 -72.74 16.22 97.16 29.60 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m3, j=m6 11.46 -0.57 30.37 83.37 99.94 0.00 0.57 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m3, j=m7 40.49 -34.86 42.77 89.66 96.25 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m3, j=m8 18.42 -15.41 40.26 86.91 102.18 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m3, j=m9 41.86 -32.18 39.38 71.57 80.84 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m3, j=m10 -12.00 22.15 33.21 115.94 73.95 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m3, j=m11 27.98 -20.74 43.89 89.08 99.09 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m3, j=m12 72.20 -71.00 23.56 71.70 67.39 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m3, j=m13 60.33 -59.21 14.22 98.58 59.94 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m3, j=m14 36.98 -29.29 29.47 99.31 89.66 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m4, j=m1 57.53 -56.50 46.79 56.16 23.50 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m4, j=m2 49.07 -43.12 37.93 77.41 53.73 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m4, j=m3 36.77 -37.23 38.85 46.20 -16.28 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m4, j=m4 37.33 -33.19 77.87 -28.07 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m4, j=m5 50.75 -51.59 13.31 69.64 -13.72 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m4, j=m6 12.16 -2.35 32.06 92.58 50.72 0.00 0.02 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m4, j=m7 42.41 -39.77 49.56 77.27 54.55 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m4, j=m8 21.77 -18.18 48.24 82.04 60.00 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m4, j=m9 34.83 -31.26 44.75 68.55 28.09 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m4, j=m10 -13.34 21.91 32.00 111.09 20.94 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m4, j=m11 23.71 -21.14 54.33 81.29 48.08 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m4, j=m12 62.06 -61.22 16.97 54.76 23.62 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m4, j=m13 58.27 -67.46 26.12 78.89 29.11 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m4, j=m14 43.19 -37.29 42.94 91.44 47.29 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m5, j=m1 66.52 -60.26 51.99 91.85 87.10 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m5, j=m2 48.96 -40.24 39.77 89.47 118.13 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m5, j=m3 63.94 -60.74 61.04 65.10 64.23 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m5, j=m4 42.40 -21.37 59.36 72.19 108.71 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m5, j=m5 117.57 -125.39 30.34 61.82 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m5, j=m6 9.56 2.85 43.67 99.09 129.11 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m5, j=m7 44.98 -39.81 61.14 96.36 125.83 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m5, j=m8 20.17 -19.93 55.49 93.43 130.25 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m5, j=m9 45.77 -38.75 50.48 65.06 111.28 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m5, j=m10 -12.11 23.18 39.89 134.52 101.42 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m5, j=m11 31.18 -27.80 61.12 95.21 130.99 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m5, j=m12 82.44 -83.85 32.84 63.61 100.33 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m5, j=m13 66.47 -66.21 20.14 106.64 86.22 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m5, j=m14 33.58 -30.17 43.67 108.06 123.22 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m6, j=m1 32.04 -30.35 41.30 5.14 22.69 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m6, j=m2 47.86 -40.95 54.45 13.57 45.86 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m6, j=m3 6.30 -9.68 29.56 14.21 -12.39 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m6, j=m4 14.70 -12.60 36.17 19.96 3.16 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m6, j=m5 19.93 -23.56 18.17 16.29 -6.27 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m6, j=m6 20.81 -5.67 48.00 6.62 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 Continued on next page 53 Table 18: Summary statistics for all modelsMij IMB_a IMB_b TFI PRET DIV IMB_a IMB_b TFI PRET DIV t-stat t-stat t-stat t-stat t-stat p-value p-value p-value p-value p-value i=m6, j=m7 38.02 -35.32 56.83 16.33 36.78 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m6, j=m8 25.72 -23.81 56.15 25.47 38.47 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m6, j=m9 23.96 -20.31 41.55 15.91 0.90 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.37 i=m6, j=m10 -0.49 2.77 42.22 40.29 -1.55 0.62 0.01 0.0 0.00 0.12 i=m6, j=m11 14.43 -14.94 57.31 21.64 14.51 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m6, j=m12 -13.67 7.58 14.43 12.08 -34.29 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m6, j=m13 48.42 -48.42 32.91 9.01 30.49 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m6, j=m14 49.72 -49.17 60.20 17.76 47.31 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m7, j=m1 52.08 -48.19 47.58 24.20 -8.51 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m7, j=m2 60.38 -48.03 45.19 70.30 43.21 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m7, j=m3 22.74 -23.94 32.89 30.21 -44.53 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m7, j=m4 18.83 -21.50 48.79 36.45 -32.33 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m7, j=m5 27.52 -29.92 14.59 33.53 -49.59 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m7, j=m6 9.98 0.60 23.81 113.68 22.22 0.00 0.55 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m7, j=m7 54.59 -48.99 80.34 0.53 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.59 0.00 i=m7, j=m8 25.29 -20.75 52.16 74.04 41.80 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m7, j=m9 33.87 -27.28 49.10 51.39 -8.33 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m7, j=m10 -12.94 17.70 28.54 99.38 -10.86 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m7, j=m11 15.87 -9.37 62.20 64.75 8.91 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m7, j=m12 42.65 -40.13 13.86 34.22 -20.61 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m7, j=m13 70.78 -74.36 31.11 52.82 6.15 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m7, j=m14 52.30 -49.30 55.02 77.63 17.58 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m8, j=m1 39.71 -36.55 47.16 12.50 -20.02 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m8, j=m2 65.15 -52.37 60.34 54.44 29.54 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m8, j=m3 11.25 -12.92 31.91 18.63 -53.56 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m8, j=m4 12.71 -15.82 43.95 26.93 -49.11 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m8, j=m5 23.09 -24.49 13.60 24.85 -50.42 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m8, j=m6 9.55 -0.49 26.58 115.65 -1.39 0.00 0.62 0.0 0.00 0.17 i=m8, j=m7 44.71 -40.97 64.67 38.31 -0.61 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.54 i=m8, j=m8 30.30 -25.96 92.09 -6.80 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m8, j=m9 28.51 -21.38 49.36 35.22 -32.42 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m8, j=m10 -10.21 13.18 32.03 85.19 -30.78 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m8, j=m11 11.23 -6.83 66.04 49.58 -26.65 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m8, j=m12 28.02 -24.95 13.92 20.73 -37.71 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m8, j=m13 67.32 -69.01 34.42 32.14 -7.83 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m8, j=m14 51.53 -49.42 64.52 56.45 -4.87 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m9, j=m1 72.29 -69.82 75.31 78.52 46.49 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m9, j=m2 73.68 -59.21 68.32 136.46 72.25 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m9, j=m3 30.03 -33.36 62.32 59.26 -13.39 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m9, j=m4 27.69 -21.18 85.65 74.60 13.96 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m9, j=m5 63.10 -63.29 4.44 99.21 0.24 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.81 i=m9, j=m6 15.90 -2.66 36.14 172.97 66.79 0.00 0.01 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m9, j=m7 66.16 -61.36 86.23 112.67 83.41 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m9, j=m8 32.39 -32.48 84.31 131.57 83.55 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m9, j=m9 89.97 -81.26 85.67 -2.31 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.02 0.00 i=m9, j=m10 -6.30 10.48 49.30 202.94 16.60 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m9, j=m11 39.89 -33.77 93.05 113.62 70.25 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m9, j=m12 100.15 -99.86 20.85 66.37 70.86 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m9, j=m13 95.04 -98.92 42.32 124.99 45.21 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m9, j=m14 77.05 -71.58 73.04 144.50 65.13 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 Continued on next page 54 Table 18: Summary statistics for all modelsMij IMB_a IMB_b TFI PRET DIV IMB_a IMB_b TFI PRET DIV t-stat t-stat t-stat t-stat t-stat p-value p-value p-value p-value p-value i=m10, j=m1 46.17 -44.72 55.00 -4.99 52.76 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m10, j=m2 64.70 -51.88 70.44 10.13 66.93 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m10, j=m3 21.53 -22.87 39.75 9.27 20.75 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m10, j=m4 23.76 -19.52 46.56 16.56 41.29 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m10, j=m5 38.57 -41.35 15.39 15.61 24.68 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m10, j=m6 13.03 -3.49 45.38 78.00 47.11 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m10, j=m7 52.39 -49.02 63.57 7.02 68.23 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m10, j=m8 32.73 -30.26 69.92 19.55 70.47 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m10, j=m9 43.96 -39.45 51.72 10.32 44.46 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m10, j=m10 20.60 -17.15 90.06 -1.45 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.15 0.00 i=m10, j=m11 27.22 -28.10 69.45 13.35 54.65 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m10, j=m12 48.98 -49.03 12.64 5.91 46.48 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m10, j=m13 74.58 -74.60 42.30 0.17 59.66 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.87 0.00 i=m10, j=m14 63.04 -60.89 74.73 12.85 67.88 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m11, j=m1 52.19 -47.47 43.83 32.46 -15.01 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m11, j=m2 60.49 -47.34 47.22 78.16 35.05 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m11, j=m3 21.46 -22.08 35.35 37.61 -51.44 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m11, j=m4 18.53 -20.75 50.71 41.82 -39.12 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m11, j=m5 33.78 -33.68 11.71 46.28 -50.16 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m11, j=m6 8.29 0.31 20.05 122.20 16.30 0.00 0.75 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m11, j=m7 53.38 -47.53 57.53 63.11 27.61 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m11, j=m8 25.31 -22.04 52.63 81.15 36.05 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m11, j=m9 36.19 -27.84 48.25 59.43 -15.48 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m11, j=m10 -15.43 22.08 25.77 106.89 -17.18 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m11, j=m11 19.58 -12.26 85.45 4.52 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m11, j=m12 41.94 -39.37 15.12 39.24 -24.49 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m11, j=m13 72.43 -73.27 28.31 61.26 -1.96 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.05 i=m11, j=m14 52.14 -46.91 53.09 85.66 9.06 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m12, j=m1 64.16 -57.76 36.18 94.82 31.26 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m12, j=m2 46.02 -38.32 27.83 92.17 69.56 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m12, j=m3 48.79 -47.94 47.14 72.47 2.02 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.04 i=m12, j=m4 35.84 -21.42 59.82 72.28 47.65 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m12, j=m5 65.40 -67.54 13.70 103.30 -2.43 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.02 i=m12, j=m6 7.99 1.27 31.81 91.95 84.47 0.00 0.21 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m12, j=m7 40.31 -35.24 46.01 98.68 76.23 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m12, j=m8 18.81 -16.99 41.83 94.65 81.72 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m12, j=m9 41.13 -33.24 41.07 80.64 59.69 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m12, j=m10 -18.82 25.04 27.53 128.04 51.71 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m12, j=m11 28.67 -25.59 45.72 97.68 80.03 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m12, j=m12 77.74 -78.01 39.34 21.21 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m12, j=m13 60.61 -62.81 15.22 109.50 39.05 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m12, j=m14 32.74 -28.48 28.44 112.38 73.16 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m13, j=m1 69.25 -66.57 71.54 32.25 14.26 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m13, j=m2 67.44 -54.84 71.21 88.19 59.52 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m13, j=m3 34.97 -36.87 51.63 38.93 -24.66 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m13, j=m4 31.24 -23.90 69.65 48.90 6.05 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m13, j=m5 53.36 -56.24 17.99 55.10 -24.92 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m13, j=m6 11.72 -1.77 38.10 140.88 55.37 0.00 0.08 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m13, j=m7 57.00 -50.90 83.18 71.25 57.67 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m13, j=m8 28.26 -24.43 75.86 92.48 68.06 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 Continued on next page 55 Table 18: Summary statistics for all modelsMij IMB_a IMB_b TFI PRET DIV IMB_a IMB_b TFI PRET DIV t-stat t-stat t-stat t-stat t-stat p-value p-value p-value p-value p-value i=m13, j=m9 51.58 -43.95 62.17 57.57 21.25 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m13, j=m10 -7.24 14.07 47.38 141.30 17.98 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m13, j=m11 27.34 -20.04 86.77 75.04 51.32 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m13, j=m12 65.38 -64.74 19.48 42.64 9.33 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m13, j=m13 133.64 -138.28 71.83 6.18 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m13, j=m14 70.25 -65.71 80.37 91.94 45.25 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m14, j=m1 59.81 -57.90 53.67 22.00 4.81 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m14, j=m2 66.62 -53.92 63.20 71.24 48.42 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m14, j=m3 22.79 -25.24 39.63 33.64 -39.43 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m14, j=m4 24.74 -22.06 59.63 41.53 -13.87 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m14, j=m5 38.04 -40.29 15.62 42.00 -36.49 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m14, j=m6 10.51 -0.97 26.96 123.55 49.13 0.00 0.33 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m14, j=m7 59.51 -50.94 69.46 56.91 48.20 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m14, j=m8 30.23 -24.23 65.08 77.02 55.03 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m14, j=m9 44.10 -37.08 60.74 55.99 5.04 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m14, j=m10 -10.04 13.88 38.59 118.39 3.25 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m14, j=m11 20.05 -14.62 74.17 65.55 30.41 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m14, j=m12 49.01 -45.76 17.84 36.11 -8.45 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m14, j=m13 88.00 -90.83 39.63 48.04 15.42 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 i=m14, j=m14 84.18 -77.87 97.41 20.98 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.0 0.00 0.00 Table 19: T-statistics for all baseline models m1 m2 m3 m4 m5 m6 m7 m8 m9 m10 m11 m12 m13 m14 IMBa m1 32.3 10.7 7.7 15.2 8.1 13.1 15.2 12.2 14.1 11.0 14.2 13.7 15.9 15.2 m2 3.3 32.8 2.8 4.5 5.0 17.9 9.9 17.2 10.4 24.3 9.4 2.1 10.1 9.4 m3 -3.6 -6.5 21.0 -1.2 -8.1 -11.5 -1.5 -4.2 -10.7 -8.1 -2.6 -3.7 -9.3 -7.1 m4 -4.8 -5.2 -7.5 3.8 -4.6 -1.6 -3.3 -3.5 -5.5 -5.3 -3.4 -0.7 -6.3 -3.1 m5 9.7 0.2 6.8 6.2 49.8 2.4 1.3 2.6 3.6 2.7 4.5 8.5 2.9 4.9 m6 1.4 3.8 5.6 7.0 2.6 12.0 4.8 4.8 8.4 7.9 3.1 3.8 3.5 4.0 m7 1.9 7.7 2.7 1.3 4.3 11.4 9.8 8.1 3.1 10.8 8.4 1.2 1.6 7.3 m8 0.2 0.8 -0.0 2.2 -0.9 6.5 -1.1 5.0 0.2 4.9 -0.7 0.0 -1.6 0.8 m9 5.0 8.2 6.4 1.8 3.7 14.3 7.9 9.0 23.6 10.9 9.4 4.2 8.1 9.8 m10 -4.2 1.7 -3.8 -0.9 -5.5 0.6 0.3 -0.2 -2.0 13.6 -1.0 -8.2 -1.7 -2.1 m11 -7.3 -5.6 -0.7 -2.5 -0.8 -4.1 -6.8 -8.0 -0.4 -4.3 -7.8 1.3 -3.8 -9.7 m12 -11.0 -17.4 -7.5 -9.3 -6.9 -32.4 -9.3 -14.8 -8.8 -27.0 -9.3 5.7 -19.7 -16.6 m13 14.1 20.4 4.3 4.7 5.6 15.6 16.2 20.3 15.5 20.2 17.7 6.3 58.9 23.4 m14 7.0 18.8 7.5 9.6 6.3 20.4 11.6 15.7 18.7 21.3 12.4 3.7 19.1 29.2 IMBb m1 -29.5 -10.3 -5.4 -13.4 -4.1 -10.8 -13.6 -11.9 -13.2 -11.4 -13.9 -9.9 -18.5 -18.4 m2 -6.9 -31.2 -6.6 -8.5 -8.4 -22.0 -11.6 -18.4 -10.7 -24.6 -10.7 -5.0 -14.7 -14.2 m3 -3.5 0.7 -22.4 0.5 4.9 5.5 -2.3 -0.5 5.9 3.4 -2.2 -0.4 3.8 0.9 m4 6.1 2.1 8.2 -8.3 6.9 4.1 1.4 2.7 4.8 2.9 1.2 2.2 8.3 6.2 m5 -12.5 -6.9 -8.1 -8.1 -58.4 -6.6 -4.1 -6.1 -5.8 -6.8 -6.7 -12.2 -7.3 -9.2 m6 0.3 0.0 -0.2 -1.5 3.7 -3.9 1.0 0.5 -1.4 -1.1 0.7 1.0 0.1 -0.6 m7 2.0 -3.9 -2.5 -0.2 -3.0 -7.0 -6.9 -5.1 -2.1 -7.7 -6.0 0.9 2.0 -0.2 m8 1.2 -1.8 -0.1 0.1 -1.1 -7.4 2.1 -5.1 -3.0 -6.0 -0.7 0.5 2.8 2.4 m9 -4.2 -6.1 -2.5 -4.4 0.0 -11.5 -6.2 -6.1 -24.3 -10.4 -7.3 -0.1 -5.6 -9.0 m10 6.2 -0.2 7.0 6.2 8.4 -2.5 2.5 2.2 1.8 -17.9 5.5 8.1 4.4 0.9 m11 6.6 6.5 3.3 3.4 1.5 1.1 11.1 8.3 5.9 2.4 10.2 -0.9 11.6 11.4 Continued on next page 56 Table 19: T-statistics for all baseline models m1 m2 m3 m4 m5 m6 m7 m8 m9 m10 m11 m12 m13 m14 m12 11.2 19.3 10.2 11.5 10.5 32.2 11.3 16.9 7.1 27.4 11.0 -5.2 21.0 18.9 m13 -6.7 -16.5 -5.5 -11.6 -5.3 -10.2 -15.9 -16.5 -15.6 -13.8 -15.6 -7.1 -59.3 -20.6 m14 -9.5 -19.8 -6.3 -5.1 -7.5 -23.4 -14.4 -17.7 -15.0 -20.6 -12.1 -3.4 -15.1 -27.4 TFI m1 40.9 15.5 8.0 14.0 11.0 14.6 13.8 11.5 11.5 16.9 8.5 2.3 21.6 14.7 m2 5.9 45.8 4.7 5.8 2.2 28.8 8.1 19.3 9.6 34.0 8.9 -2.3 15.2 16.7 m3 8.6 5.6 41.9 5.6 10.4 8.6 3.2 3.8 5.7 9.0 3.6 3.4 8.4 5.7 m4 -3.3 0.8 1.7 9.3 -2.8 4.0 -2.5 -0.2 4.1 4.4 -2.0 2.2 -0.8 -0.4 m5 7.4 6.8 6.8 4.6 22.5 9.5 4.5 3.4 -2.3 7.0 2.2 5.1 6.8 6.4 m6 14.4 10.9 12.6 13.9 19.4 24.0 7.7 7.4 11.6 23.4 4.6 15.9 11.7 6.2 m7 13.3 20.6 6.3 10.0 15.3 23.5 22.3 17.7 14.7 22.9 13.4 9.3 18.6 17.8 m8 8.0 18.8 5.0 9.8 9.4 24.8 9.0 28.7 15.5 26.2 7.5 4.3 14.2 13.1 m9 5.2 11.2 -0.9 3.1 2.2 17.1 5.8 9.9 11.1 16.9 5.5 -1.1 4.1 12.0 m10 4.3 12.4 7.4 6.2 5.3 21.5 5.0 7.8 6.3 41.6 2.7 2.1 8.6 8.0 m11 8.5 18.1 4.6 8.8 11.2 21.9 11.8 14.2 12.8 23.2 21.2 4.6 16.4 15.1 m12 -0.6 -3.1 1.2 -2.2 4.4 -2.1 -2.9 -3.0 -2.6 -0.8 -3.5 11.8 -3.6 -2.6 m13 1.5 9.9 0.1 4.9 -0.3 13.4 5.8 7.5 7.6 13.9 4.2 0.4 36.7 12.0 m14 11.1 30.4 2.6 11.0 7.0 34.4 18.4 24.5 22.3 36.5 16.4 2.1 26.0 42.9 PRET m1 -49.8 -5.8 22.5 16.3 30.6 -3.2 1.0 -4.9 8.5 -6.0 1.3 28.5 3.1 -1.3 m2 -4.7 -97.5 -2.7 -1.8 -6.8 -9.1 4.1 5.9 8.1 -3.8 5.5 -5.8 2.3 3.0 m3 11.7 -3.4 -55.2 10.4 14.9 0.0 1.5 -2.6 12.2 -3.6 6.2 20.0 1.8 3.9 m4 9.4 -0.7 13.4 -99.3 13.7 3.4 -0.3 1.0 6.4 2.4 -0.5 9.6 1.7 3.9 m5 17.8 -7.9 26.4 12.8 -22.7 -3.0 -2.5 -3.3 14.5 -7.3 2.8 28.7 1.8 -1.0 m6 24.9 41.6 14.6 19.0 26.7 -63.2 28.3 34.2 50.0 66.0 28.6 22.0 43.4 44.6 m7 12.1 -1.5 13.3 11.7 17.3 -4.4 -78.5 -1.1 10.7 -4.4 7.0 14.1 4.5 3.7 m8 7.7 5.6 6.4 7.6 6.4 -3.2 8.1 -97.2 13.0 -2.5 6.9 3.9 9.4 7.1 m9 3.0 2.4 10.9 15.6 0.7 2.4 6.5 4.9 -119.6 3.7 11.5 12.4 7.6 13.7 m10 -5.9 6.1 -4.9 -5.3 -4.4 6.2 -0.9 6.5 15.9 -134.0 1.7 -3.7 1.7 6.1 m11 15.1 2.3 14.4 12.1 18.4 -3.1 10.7 8.8 12.2 -5.4 -84.1 15.7 6.8 6.6 m12 9.6 -6.2 20.5 8.7 10.7 -5.6 0.8 -3.5 14.1 -7.2 1.1 -59.5 1.5 -2.1 m13 4.2 -11.8 7.7 5.3 4.8 -7.9 2.5 -4.2 20.5 -8.2 4.7 11.6 -79.6 3.8 m14 18.1 5.5 10.8 14.1 16.5 -1.4 14.2 10.2 24.2 4.7 12.3 12.6 14.8 -77.5 DIV m1 -21.8 -0.6 9.3 8.1 18.2 6.6 -0.6 -0.1 3.6 5.1 -1.8 6.7 1.9 -0.2 m2 17.8 20.5 6.7 15.3 17.7 18.3 21.0 23.5 15.4 20.6 18.4 11.7 26.4 21.8 m3 -3.2 -0.4 -4.3 -13.2 -5.5 -5.1 -1.7 -0.8 -10.9 -0.4 -4.3 -12.5 -4.5 -4.6 m4 -0.6 0.4 -5.0 -8.7 -0.5 8.6 -1.6 -3.0 -5.5 5.2 -3.2 -0.6 0.4 4.4 m5 -11.9 -1.0 -8.1 -8.7 -0.4 0.7 -11.8 -2.4 -3.8 3.9 -6.2 -13.4 -2.1 -3.2 m6 -3.5 10.3 4.9 8.4 2.0 -12.4 7.8 11.6 27.0 17.3 9.7 2.5 6.8 11.3 m7 -9.7 -3.1 -2.9 -6.5 -11.4 4.0 -4.1 -2.5 -0.5 -0.6 -0.5 -7.3 -8.7 -4.7 m8 -6.1 -6.4 -1.1 -3.3 -9.6 -1.5 -6.8 -12.1 -1.5 -4.8 -4.9 -5.2 -9.5 -7.1 m9 6.5 5.4 -0.8 -3.0 0.9 6.0 4.7 4.8 -26.7 2.1 2.9 -2.9 2.0 5.4 m10 -7.1 -9.7 -9.2 -6.6 -10.6 -10.9 -3.7 -7.0 -6.6 -7.7 -4.9 -6.3 -12.1 -8.1 m11 -8.0 -9.8 -5.3 -6.1 -5.5 -10.2 -9.5 -11.4 -7.4 -13.7 -0.4 -3.7 -9.6 -8.7 m12 -16.7 -22.0 -13.5 -15.8 -9.6 -34.6 -16.4 -20.5 -15.6 -29.2 -16.3 -0.4 -24.6 -21.8 m13 12.4 2.9 6.1 9.5 8.1 11.9 4.5 1.6 -1.3 7.6 2.7 2.6 -7.3 5.4 m14 21.6 9.7 18.4 17.7 24.3 24.4 13.8 8.3 12.7 17.4 12.0 20.4 19.0 0.0 57 Table 20: p-values for all baseline models m1 m2 m3 m4 m5 m6 m7 m8 m9 m10 m11 m12 m13 m14 IMBa m1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.04 0.0 0.0 m3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.23 0.0 0.0 0.12 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.01 0.0 0.0 0.0 m4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.12 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.49 0.0 0.0 m5 0.0 0.87 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.02 0.19 0.01 0.0 0.01 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m6 0.15 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.01 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m7 0.06 0.0 0.01 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.23 0.1 0.0 m8 0.86 0.42 0.99 0.03 0.36 0.0 0.26 0.0 0.84 0.0 0.5 0.99 0.12 0.42 m9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.07 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m10 0.0 0.08 0.0 0.39 0.0 0.52 0.79 0.85 0.05 0.0 0.32 0.0 0.09 0.03 m11 0.0 0.0 0.47 0.01 0.43 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.66 0.0 0.0 0.21 0.0 0.0 m12 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m13 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m14 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 IMBb m1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m3 0.0 0.48 0.0 0.61 0.0 0.0 0.02 0.63 0.0 0.0 0.03 0.66 0.0 0.35 m4 0.0 0.04 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.17 0.01 0.0 0.0 0.23 0.03 0.0 0.0 m5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m6 0.74 0.99 0.83 0.13 0.0 0.0 0.33 0.65 0.15 0.28 0.51 0.33 0.95 0.56 m7 0.05 0.0 0.01 0.85 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.03 0.0 0.0 0.37 0.05 0.86 m8 0.22 0.07 0.92 0.92 0.27 0.0 0.03 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.46 0.62 0.0 0.02 m9 0.0 0.0 0.01 0.0 0.96 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.92 0.0 0.0 m10 0.0 0.86 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.07 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.38 m11 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.13 0.28 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.02 0.0 0.39 0.0 0.0 m12 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m13 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m14 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 TFI m1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.02 0.0 0.0 m2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.03 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.02 0.0 0.0 m3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m4 0.0 0.41 0.09 0.0 0.01 0.0 0.01 0.81 0.0 0.0 0.05 0.03 0.41 0.65 m5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.02 0.0 0.03 0.0 0.0 0.0 m6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m9 0.0 0.0 0.39 0.0 0.03 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.26 0.0 0.0 m10 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.01 0.03 0.0 0.0 m11 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m12 0.54 0.0 0.24 0.03 0.0 0.04 0.0 0.0 0.01 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.01 m13 0.14 0.0 0.96 0.0 0.75 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.71 0.0 0.0 m14 0.0 0.0 0.01 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.04 0.0 0.0 PRET m1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.34 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.18 m2 0.0 0.0 0.01 0.07 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.02 0.0 m3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.99 0.12 0.01 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.07 0.0 m4 0.0 0.47 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.8 0.3 0.0 0.02 0.59 0.0 0.09 0.0 m5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.01 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.01 0.0 0.08 0.34 m6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m7 0.0 0.14 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.28 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.01 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m9 0.0 0.02 0.0 0.0 0.51 0.02 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Continued on next page 58 Table 21: In-sample R2 values for LASSO models, for the1000ms future return horizon, as theλ regularization parameter varies. 0.001 0.002 0.004 0.008 0.016 0.032 0.064 0.128 0.256 ftx_BTC-PERP 0.342 0.341 0.341 0.34 0.338 0.335 0.324 0.293 0.254 bybit_BTC/USD 0.331 0.331 0.33 0.328 0.325 0.324 0.317 0.298 0.25 bitmex_BTC/USD 0.292 0.292 0.291 0.29 0.288 0.285 0.275 0.259 0.212 tbybit_BTC/USDT 0.279 0.279 0.279 0.278 0.276 0.273 0.263 0.246 0.207 hbdm_BTC-USD 0.262 0.262 0.261 0.259 0.256 0.251 0.243 0.228 0.19 thbdm_BTC-USDT 0.231 0.231 0.23 0.229 0.225 0.22 0.207 0.19 0.144 deribit_BTC-PERPETUAL 0.212 0.212 0.212 0.211 0.21 0.206 0.197 0.173 0.131 okex_BTC-USDT-SWAP 0.195 0.195 0.195 0.194 0.193 0.19 0.182 0.153 0.117 binancecmfut_BTC/USD 0.193 0.193 0.193 0.191 0.189 0.185 0.171 0.152 0.106 okex_BTC-USD-SWAP 0.18 0.18 0.18 0.179 0.177 0.174 0.166 0.137 0.103 okex_BTC-USD-210326 0.164 0.164 0.163 0.163 0.16 0.157 0.148 0.121 0.078 hbdm_BTC_CQ 0.152 0.152 0.151 0.15 0.147 0.144 0.135 0.103 0.065 huobipro_BTC/USDT 0.136 0.136 0.136 0.135 0.131 0.125 0.113 0.074 0.04 binancefut_BTC/USDT 0.071 0.071 0.07 0.069 0.066 0.058 0.045 0.026 0.006 Table 20: p-values for all baseline models m1 m2 m3 m4 m5 m6 m7 m8 m9 m10 m11 m12 m13 m14 m10 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.34 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.09 0.0 0.09 0.0 m11 0.0 0.02 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m12 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.28 0.0 0.14 0.04 m13 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.01 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m14 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.17 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 DIV m1 0.0 0.56 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.58 0.92 0.0 0.0 0.07 0.0 0.05 0.84 m2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m3 0.0 0.69 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.45 0.0 0.66 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m4 0.58 0.67 0.0 0.0 0.63 0.0 0.11 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.52 0.68 0.0 m5 0.0 0.32 0.0 0.0 0.68 0.51 0.0 0.02 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.04 0.0 m6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.04 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.01 0.0 0.0 m7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.01 0.63 0.58 0.61 0.0 0.0 0.0 m8 0.0 0.0 0.26 0.0 0.0 0.14 0.0 0.0 0.13 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m9 0.0 0.0 0.45 0.0 0.36 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.04 0.0 0.0 0.05 0.0 m10 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 m11 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.72 0.0 0.0 0.0 m12 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.66 0.0 0.0 m13 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.11 0.18 0.0 0.01 0.01 0.0 0.0 m14 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 59 Table 22: Out-of-sample R2 values for LASSO models, for the 1000ms future return horizon, as the λ regularization parameter varies. 0.001 0.002 0.004 0.008 0.016 0.032 0.064 0.128 0.256 bybit_BTC/USD 0.319 0.319 0.319 0.316 0.313 0.312 0.308 0.299 0.292 tbybit_BTC/USDT 0.28 0.28 0.28 0.279 0.278 0.276 0.27 0.259 0.248 bitmex_BTC/USD 0.27 0.27 0.27 0.269 0.268 0.266 0.26 0.253 0.24 ftx_BTC-PERP 0.264 0.264 0.263 0.263 0.261 0.259 0.25 0.219 0.2 hbdm_BTC-USD 0.243 0.243 0.243 0.241 0.239 0.234 0.228 0.222 0.216 deribit_BTC-PERPETUAL 0.215 0.215 0.215 0.214 0.214 0.213 0.207 0.195 0.175 thbdm_BTC-USDT 0.215 0.215 0.215 0.214 0.212 0.208 0.198 0.189 0.175 okex_BTC-USDT-SWAP 0.184 0.184 0.184 0.183 0.183 0.181 0.175 0.153 0.131 binancecmfut_BTC/USD 0.177 0.177 0.177 0.176 0.173 0.17 0.158 0.146 0.121 okex_BTC-USD-SWAP 0.167 0.167 0.167 0.167 0.166 0.164 0.158 0.135 0.119 okex_BTC-USD-210326 0.155 0.155 0.154 0.154 0.151 0.15 0.144 0.125 0.094 hbdm_BTC_CQ 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.143 0.14 0.137 0.132 0.106 0.087 huobipro_BTC/USDT 0.126 0.126 0.126 0.125 0.123 0.119 0.112 0.077 0.051 binancefut_BTC/USDT 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.069 0.068 0.062 0.051 0.032 0.019 Table 23: PnL1 values of LASSO models, as theλ regularization parameter varies. 0.001 0.002 0.004 0.008 0.016 0.032 0.064 0.128 0.256 huobipro_BTC/USDT 28867 28774 28551 28276 27874 27723 27336 24912 22400 thbdm_BTC-USDT 20621 20522 20084 19501 19073 17759 16663 17153 18144 bybit_BTC/USD 19718 19654 19590 19736 19604 19934 20098 20410 20468 ftx_BTC-PERP 19689 19519 19406 19306 19533 19556 19627 19245 18516 okex_BTC-USD-SWAP 17891 17757 17446 17046 16627 16036 14545 13236 15272 bitmex_BTC/USD 17720 17613 17603 17663 17663 17726 17676 17692 17490 hbdm_BTC-USD 17663 17601 17451 17340 17098 16810 17800 18314 18316 okex_BTC-USD-210326 17268 17073 16602 15645 15248 14603 13585 11602 12871 tbybit_BTC/USDT 17069 17037 17050 17078 17073 17099 17222 17669 17277 binancecmfut_BTC/USD 16328 16188 15841 15201 15301 15067 14331 13712 15573 hbdm_BTC_CQ 16232 16038 15712 14931 14183 13818 12942 10924 9728 okex_BTC-USDT-SWAP 14961 14894 14527 14241 14222 14120 13463 12647 14095 binancefut_BTC/USDT 12085 12057 11876 11898 11559 11408 10672 10325 2793 deribit_BTC-PERPETUAL 10313 10218 9995 9730 9691 9641 9638 8762 8845 Table 24: PnL2 values of LASSO models, as theλ regularization parameter varies. 0.001 0.002 0.004 0.008 0.016 0.032 0.064 0.128 0.256 hbdm_BTC-USD -8256 -8308 -8358 -8189 -8461 -8749 -9609 -10755 -12463 thbdm_BTC-USDT -10674 -10645 -10755 -10890 -11030 -11152 -11768 -13774 -20751 bybit_BTC/USD -11631 -11440 -11504 -11808 -11895 -12510 -13771 -15709 -19746 tbybit_BTC/USDT -15855 -15917 -16264 -16521 -16601 -17025 -17592 -19935 -25232 bitmex_BTC/USD -16209 -16091 -16341 -16386 -16311 -15813 -16328 -18577 -23969 binancefut_BTC/USDT -17506 -17310 -16963 -15877 -14408 -12311 -11751 -13162 -1118 okex_BTC-USD-SWAP -19228 -19132 -19303 -19663 -19942 -20573 -20604 -21873 -30217 deribit_BTC-PERPETUAL -19666 -19621 -19784 -20189 -20368 -20438 -20441 -20387 -25174 okex_BTC-USDT-SWAP -20058 -20105 -20382 -20778 -21067 -22089 -21896 -22322 -28594 binancecmfut_BTC/USD -21871 -21841 -21968 -22018 -21668 -21632 -21278 -24877 -33766 hbdm_BTC_CQ -23391 -23377 -23135 -23140 -22648 -21941 -21201 -21883 -28583 okex_BTC-USD-210326 -27171 -27086 -27257 -27214 -27181 -28156 -28464 -27847 -36518 ftx_BTC-PERP -27504 -27520 -27423 -27607 -27548 -27805 -28238 -29278 -35285 huobipro_BTC/USDT -28056 -28064 -27802 -27441 -26921 -25258 -22063 -14474 -23873 60 Figure 31: 500ms in-sampleR2 values Figure 32: 1000ms out-of-sampleR2 values. Figure 33: 1000ms in-sampleR2 values. 61 Figure 34: PnL2 values for each model. 62