Simulation and estimation of an agent-based market-model with a matching engine Ivan Jericevicha, Patrick Changa,b, Tim Gebbie a aDepartment of Statistical Sciences, University of Cape Town, Rondebosch 7700, South Africa bDepartment of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PJ, United Kingdom Abstract An agent-based model with interacting low frequency liquidity takers inter-mediated by high-frequency liquidity providers acting collectively as market makers can be used to provide realistic simulated price impact curves. This is possible when agent-based model interactions occur asynchronously via order matching using a matching engine in event time to replace sequential calendar time market clearing. Here the matching engine infrastructure has been modiﬁed to provide a continuous feed of order conﬁrmations and updates as message streams in order to conform more closely to live trading environments. The resulting trade and quote message data from the simulations are then aggregated, calibrated and visualised. Various stylised facts are presented along with event visualisations and price impact curves. We argue that additional realism in modelling can be achieved with a small set of agent parameters and simple interaction rules once interactions are reactive, asynchronous and in event time. We argue that the reactive nature of market agents may be a fundamental property of ﬁnancial markets and when accounted for can allow for parsimonious modelling without recourse to additional sources of noise. Keywords: market matching-engine, agent-based model, simulation, estimation, calibration, price-impact Contents 1 Introduction 1 1.1 Towards actor/event-based reactive systems 2 1.2 Intraday agent-based modelling . . . . . . . 3 1.3 Market making . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2 Agent speciﬁcations 4 2.1 Liquidity takers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 2.2 Liquidity providers . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 3 System implementation 6 3.1 Matching engine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 3.2 Market-data listener . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 3.3 Agent decision rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 3.4 Compute times and hardware . . . . . . . . 8 3.5 Miscellaneous considerations . . . . . . . . . 8 3.6 Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 4 Sensitivity analysis 8 5 Calibration 11 6 Exploratory Data Analysis 12 6.1 Stylised facts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 6.2 Price response and impact . . . . . . . . . 14 Email addresses: jrciva001@myuct.ac.za (Ivan Jericevich), patrick.chang@eng.ox.ac.uk (Patrick Chang), tim.gebbie@uct.ac.za (Tim Gebbie) 7 Discussion 16 7.1 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 7.2 Future extensions and reactive agents . . . 16 8 Conclusion 17 Appendix A Market data and messaging 20 Appendix B Simulation State-Flow 21 Appendix C Expected stylised facts 23 Appendix D Sensitivity analysis results 25 Appendix E Heuristic optimisation 29 1. Introduction The pairing of agent-based models with a matching en- gine in an artiﬁcial stock market framework that mimics the real-world work-ﬂow and system implementation oﬀers a controlled environment for exploring market complexity without forcing the market structure and constraints into the domain speciﬁcation of agent interaction rules. Financial Agent-Based Models (ABM’s) are charac- terised by a bottom-up approach to modelling complex systems by attributing market dynamics and emergent phenomena to relatively simple interactions of trader agents without the need to explicitly program or mech- anistically deﬁne a vast web of complex generative models to capture all the nuances of real ﬁnancial markets. These 1 arXiv:2108.07806v2 [q-fin.TR] 20 Aug 2021 models are appealing for, among other things, being able to produce reasonably realistic ﬁnancial time series that can be used to inform market regulation decisions, explain market phenomena, and to provide test-beds for testing trading strategies in an artiﬁcial exchange. ABM’s successfully link the micro-level rules of investor interactions with the macro-behaviour of asset prices in real markets. However, not all complex behaviour in mar- kets can be replicated using this bottom-up approach. There appears to be a hierarchy in the levels of abstrac- tions which lead to diﬀerent nuances in overall behaviour [51, 62] when observed from diﬀerent averaging scales and from diﬀerent market participants. For example, the con- cerns of an equity risk trader are not the same as those of a commodity trader, or a mutual fund manager or a ﬁxed income manager, or that of a central bank market regula- tor and economic policy makers. Nonetheless, ABM’s are interesting as a tool for replicating complex behaviour. 1 Here we replicate real equity markets at the level of the model components’ design as well as at the model’s out- put level. The recovery of the market orders’ price im- pact being a crucial component [18, 44]. Farmer et al. [18] argued that with the zero-intelligence approach one may be able to ﬁnd macroscopic averaged laws, not dis- similar to those used in thermodynamics, that can cap- ture universal relationships between various macroscopic averaged quantities derived from microscopic interactions, such as the average diﬀusion rates, spreads and so on. Al- though a zero-intelligence approach is desirable, there is some motivation for considering perfectly rational or at least boundedly rational interacting agents, as in this case. Here microscopic rules are directly related to macroscopic properties via simulating a large number of agent interac- tions. The motivation is that some empirical features may not be straightforward to achieve without agent intelli- gence or strategic behaviour, or at least without detailed external assumptions about empirical facts and the distri- butional assumptions that may be needed to encode the macroscopic results from strategic agent interactions. In the ﬁnancial ABM literature, signiﬁcant attention has been devoted to the calibration of models involving closed- form solutions where markets are cleared at each iteration and prices are determined by a weighted average of trader expectations, i.e., models with sequential market clearing which are analogous to closing auction trading sessions at the end of each day. This simpliﬁcation is appropriate for mimicking the volume maximising mechanism typically used by an exchange. In contrast, intraday models such as those of [36, 55] focus on recreating the double-auction dy- namics, but with prices that are still formed sequentially in calendar time. We deviate here by introducing a frame- work for semi-asynchronous order submission and match- ing by pairing an ABM with a matching engine. We con- sider this an important step towards embracing the event 1For extensive reviews of heterogeneous agent models and com- putational agent models refer to [4, 9, 12, 16, 28, 37, 39, 61]. time realities of ﬁnancial markets at the level of the model design. At the present, there are several agent-based artiﬁcial exchanges, with varying functionalities and architectures, addressing diﬀerent problems [6, 35, 38, 57]. Most of the present artiﬁcial market platforms suﬀer from a lack of ﬂexibility and must be viewed as software frameworks and tool libraries rather than Advanced Programming Inter- faces (API’s). This is because they are mainly imple- mented for solving a speciﬁc problem conﬁned to a partic- ular choice of programming tools, and (most of the time) cannot easily be used to explore a wide range of ﬁnancial issues that more closely mimic how software systems are designed and used for real trading and investment manage- ment [6]. Most similar to our implementation, Brandouy et al. [6] present the ArTiﬁcial Open Market Java API (ATOM) through which one can build a variety of experi- ments on order-driven markets and discuss various design and architecture issues related to artiﬁcial exchanges. The diﬀerence here is that the implementation in this paper fo- cuses on building agent-based models around well deﬁned market mechanics. We ﬁrst focus on deﬁning the market rules and mechanics, and then allowing interaction via the rules and market mechanics. We believe that our imple- mentation of separating the Model Management System (MMS) from the order matching system, the Matching Engine (ME), oﬀers the desired ﬂexibility for exploring diﬀerent issues in ﬁnancial markets without constraining the nature of the agent-based model (see Figure 1). This is because the order matching is then entirely decoupled from what agents do, and agent interactions do not take place in some globally synchronised calendar time. 2 This paper uses the CoinTossX matching engine soft- ware [30, 31, 59, 60] for the purpose of data generation and agent-based modelling in an artiﬁcial exchange. This soft- ware has now been extensively tested using simple point- processes [31, 59] as well as more complex multi-order type self-exciting point process test cases [30]. CoinTossX is in- teresting for, among other things, being able to closely replicate the mechanics of a real commercial exchanges which include diﬀerent trading sessions (closing, opening, intraday and volatility auctions), diﬀerent order-type and time-in-force combinations, and multiple securities and clients. It does all of this whilst maintaining low-latency, high-throughput and modularity of its components [31]. The matching engine places no constraints on the choice of time used by the agent-based model nor how the agents wish to interact with the market place — merely that order messages be sent to the matching engine. 1.1. Towards actor/event-based reactive systems The foundation of actor-based reactive systems is a set of individual components called actors or processes. These 2A discussion on the nature of time in the trading environment can be found in [11]. 2 run autonomously in parallel and explicitly interact ac- cording to their local behaviour and reaction rules. The main fundamental diﬀerences between ABMs and reactive systems are [14]: (i) a diﬀerent management of time, and (ii) a fully decentralised decision control-logic. Both have signiﬁcant eﬀects on simulation dynamics. An agent-based model is typically iterated over stochastic or deterministic calendar time steps with aspects of the agents updated at each time step, whereas actors autonomously run in paral- lel and occasionally interact by exchanging messages. The sending of a message can be thought of as a signal that an event has occurred so that the receiver can react by mod- ifying its behaviour and responding with another message [26, 27]. Actors communicate asynchronously and may be “blocked” from further action until a reply or trigger- ing event occurs. This asynchronicity is particularly well suited for ﬁnancial markets and it can have signiﬁcant ef- fects on the model output. For agent-based models we ar- gue that this may bring about a greater degree of realism, heterogeneity and computational eﬃciency. It also has the advantage of allowing modellers to simplify the mod- els that specify how agents interact, i.e., allow for models with fewer parameters that are still able to achieve high levels of realism. This may be also be an important step towards realising hierarchical causality within simulations of ﬁnancial market systems [62] so that both top-down and bottom-up sources of causality can be included within the agent-based modelling design. 1.2. Intraday agent-based modelling While building our model, our thinking was informed by a number of diﬀerent traditional intraday ABM ap- proaches. We had to adapt them for an asynchronous continuous double auction implementation because of our departure from sequential market clearing. In the Leal et al. [36] model, low frequency agents adopt trading rules based on chronological or calendar time, and can switch between fundamentalist and chartist strategies. High Frequency (HF) trader activation is event-driven, in the sense of a stochastic time, and depends on price ﬂuctuations. These traders use directional strategies to exploit market information produced by Low-Frequency (LF) traders. The Leal et al. [36] model is our reference model and provides the basis for the ABM formulation in this paper — not only because it is a simple model with relatively realistic properties, but because we have a well understood model calibration that is useful for our use case [51]. However, this model presents a number of challenges for integration with a matching engine. It uses sequen- tial market clearing and thus it is not an asynchronous market. Second, the limit price placements follows more closely to a random walk setup. On the other hand, this is a useful speciﬁcation because the model does not require a single market maker providing liquidity, rather the nu- merous high-frequency agents act as a proxy to achieve a similar eﬀect. A general problem with market making that we carefully avoid is the need to repeatedly optimise and solve control problems to ﬁnd optimal order place- ments; solving these type of problems generally only give placement for one level of the book. With the same model, Raman et al. [57] develop an ar- tiﬁcial exchange for data generation at scale. This het- erogeneous model setup takes a traditional agent-based approach by specifying the same three agent types and parameters as provided by Leal et al. [36]. However, as an alternative to this, their software provides a library of models addressing speciﬁc use cases to produce realis- tic transaction price dynamics and trading scenarios. The four models in this library are: a heterogeneous model (the Leal et al. [36] model), a semi synthetic model, an asset in- teraction model and a bond pricing model. In these cases the synthetic market matches orders posted, publishing the bid, ask, execution prices and the volumes at all levels of the Limit-Order Book (LOB) at consecutive (but syn- chronous) time steps. Agents in the semi-synthetic model can either be “real” which is the case where order time, side and quantity are the same as that of historical data but the price is relative to prevailing market prices, or “synthetic” where the orders are completely deﬁned by stochastic decision rules. The asset interaction model con- siders trading in multiple assets to induce correlated price dynamics where order prices follow a random walk and the sides and quantities are determined by a weighted combi- nation of expected returns. Our approach is similar to that of the heterogeneous model but with asynchronous order submission times in a continuous double auction. In constructing an asynchronous continuous double auction ABM we draw from a number of noteworthy sources. Raman and Leidner [56] apply deep learning methods to determine the directional bet. However, their limit order placement remains similar to a random walk. Their model allows for volume sizes to also partially depend on the strength of the directional signal predicted by the deep learning method. In this case the issue of implementation is the lack of a continuous double auction. However, some care is prudent when using machine learning methods in the presence of strategic agents as feature selection can induce feed-backs that change the target function(s). Preis et al. [55] provide a limit order placement strategy that retains some of the ideas from Farmer et al. [18] and also encapsulates the feedback dynamics from the market into the agents decisions. The calibration of this model has been explored in the literature [52]. We draw inspira- tion from their ideas to the limit order placement for our HF agents. In their model, liquidity-provider-agents sub- mit limit orders, and liquidity-taker-agents submit mar- ket orders only, but to the same LOB through a series of Monte-Carlo steps. During each Monte-Carlo step liquid- ity providers ﬁrst submit limit orders based on the cur- rent state of the LOB, after which liquidity takers submit market orders. During each Monte-Carlo step liquidity- providers may also cancel previously placed orders based on uniform sampling and a probability parameter. Limit prices are set to be a certain amount of ticks away from 3 the best on the contra side, the size of the tick is depen- dent on state variables and comes from a random variable. This point ensures that our HF agents will place LO’s at diﬀerent levels in the LOB while incorporating feedback dynamics. The additional modiﬁcation required is that we need to have diﬀerent volumes sizes. Mande¸ s [44] is one of the few ABM setups that com- putes the resulting market impact arising from trading and order-book activity. Their setup requires some optimisa- tion for decision making but is diﬀerent from traditional optimal control and focuses on the appropriate market be- haviour based on states of the LOB. Their work highlights the importance of agent decisions needing to depend on the state of the LOB to be realistic. In summary: The size of market orders should have some dependency on the spread, order-imbalance and depth of the LOB, and an overall supply-demand imbalance drives traders to price their orders more aggressively when their side of the book is crowded in order to increase their order execution prob- ability (competition eﬀect). Conversely, traders become less aggressive when the opposite side is thicker, forecast- ing a favourable short-term order ﬂow (strategic eﬀect). The question that remains is how do we determine vol- ume size? Mande¸ s [44] uses an independent log-normal distribution for the volume size. If we do something simi- lar then we need to provide additional rules or constraints to ensure liquidity takers can remove suﬃcient liquidity because the current Leal et al. [36] model will not remove liquidity fast enough to maintain stability. Here we strive to avoid additional trading rules and constraints to force empirical realism, e.g., by forcing HF agents to have entry thresholds as an additional parameter to be tuned to force empirical realism. 1.3. Market making One key characteristic of the simulation environment that makes decision rules like order price setting challeng- ing is that the market does not sequentially clear and agent decisions are made asynchronously. This, when coupled with the fact that agent decisions depend on the LOB and the LOB depends on agent decisions (there is a feedback loop) means that we require a mechanism to maintain mar- ket liquidity whilst at the same time maintaining a realistic spread, imbalance, etc. In other words, we need a market maker. Kumar et al. [35] implement an agent-based artiﬁcial exchange using the extended Glosten and Milgrom [22] model of Das [15]. This implementation cannot be consid- ered truly reactive and bundles order matching with the model management in a sequential system thereby exhibit- ing high coupling, low concurrency but high cohesion. The Glosten and Milgrom [22] model is a widely used and well understood market making model. However, we require a distribution for the true value of the stock while hav- ing a proportion of informed traders and a proportion of uninformed traders. The idea is that the market maker wants to know how to place the bids and asks based on the order ﬂow from the traders. The model can then only work for toy cases where one can maintain the probabil- ity density estimate over the true value of the stock, thus allowing expectation to be taken. This is not possible in our simulation setting. Das [15] extends the Glosten–Milgrom model by using an online algorithm that does not require tracking the true value of the stock. Rather, it applies Bayesian non- parametric methods to place Limit Orders (LOs) appro- priately into the LOB. There is still a problem with the Glosten–Milgrom model, because it is a model with only one market maker that only provides liquidity at one level, and there is no method in determining the volume it should place. This needs to be written in by hand. Chakraborty and Kearns [10] provide an insightful derivation on the proﬁtability of market making. This is central to the decision making made by any market maker. The setup is simple: at each time point the mar- ket maker places bids and asks around the mid-price up to a depth of Ct at each time point t. The work provides an intuition on how market making can be proﬁtable and thus self-sustaining. They show that when the local price movements is larger than the volatility from the change in opening and closing prices then market making can be proﬁtable, i.e., market making is proﬁtable when there is a large amount of local price movement, but only a small net change in the price. They are quite clear in artic- ulating the important diﬀerence between market making and statistical arbitrage. Market making places no direc- tional bets and tries to minimises directional risk. This is a fundamental point that should not be lost when building ﬁnancial market agent-based models. Avellaneda and Stoikov [1] provide a stochastic control setup for market making. They make strong assumptions about the mid-price dynamics and utility function. The problem is their model only places orders with a volume size of one and it will only place limit prices on one level. This later example provides a natural conceptual split be- tween the building of models for a single market making agent when designing trading algorithms to interact with a given market and its existing participants, as opposed to providing a minimalist speciﬁcation of a market maker like interaction that can provide reasonably stable and re- alistic collective market dynamics. Here we are concerned with the later. 2. Agent speciﬁcations There are several problems to overcome when shifting from sequential market clearing to a truly continuous dou- ble auction implementation. First, the agent rules can no longer depend on clearing prices from homogeneous time steps. The rules must be changed to an asynchronous framework where the agents decisions should depend on variables at any given time t. Second, there needs to be suﬃcient liquidity present, or at least interaction mech- anisms in place to provide orders on both sides of the 4 limit order book at any given time for the market to func- tion. This is not required when applying sequential market clearing, but it is a necessary requirement in a continuous double auction. Market makers usually fulﬁl the role of providing liq- uidity. The hallmark of market making is that they do not deliberately place directional bets but rather aim to proﬁt oﬀ the spread while minimising directional risk [10]. The problem with market making models such as the Glosten–Milgrom model [22] or more recent formulations into stochastic control problems [1, 7] is that the focus is only on the optimal placement of limit orders. These for- mulations do not guide the choice of the size of the order, nor do they cater for the placement of orders at multiple levels. Additionally, the formulation in a stochastic con- trol problem setting does not ﬁt easily within an agent- based model framework. Therefore, we avoid using mar- ket maker algorithms and follow Leal et al. [36] who used multiple high-frequency agents to mimic the behaviour of market makers in collective. Concretely, our agent design largely follows Leal et al. [36] with several modiﬁcations to account for our continu- ous double auction setup. We also incorporate ideas from Preis et al. [55] and Mande¸ s [44] to create more realistic agent behaviours. The market consists of NLT Liquidity Takers (LT) that only submit market orders andNLP Liq- uidity Providers (LP) that only submit limit orders. The ratio of liquidity providers to liquidity takers is N: N = NLP NLT . (1) The volume of each agent’s order will be sampled according to a power law distribution with a density function given as: f(x) = {αxα m xα+1 if x≥xm 0 if x<x m. (2) Here the parameters xm and α will depend on the state of the LOB and activation rules. Mande¸ s [44] samples the volume size according to an independent log-normal. How- ever, from an empirical perspective, the unconditional dis- tribution of the order size follows a power-law behaviour [8]. For the power law distribution, xm is the minimum size of the volume order and a small α generates larger samples while a larger α generates smaller samples. These properties will become important when we couple the pa- rameters to the state of the LOB and activation rules to achieve our desired agent behaviour. 2.1. Liquidity takers We have two types of LT agents: “fundamentalists” and “chartists” (or trend-following agents) with a population of i = 1,...,N f LT and i = 1,...,N c LT respectively where the total population of liquidity takers is: NLT =Nf LT +Nc LT . Each agent makes a decision to either buy or sell according to a random inter-arrival time governed by a truncated exponential distribution with mean intensityλT where the intensity is bounded between λT min and λT max with time measured in seconds. Each fundamentalist agents decision to buy (or sell) is given as Df it = { sell if fi <m t buy if fi >m t. (3) Here, mt is the mid-price at time t, fi is the fundamental value for the ith agent. The fundamental value for each of the fundamentalist is unique and ﬁxed for the given trading day, speciﬁcally for that day’s trading session. It is computed as fi =m0exi where xi∼N ( 0,σ 2) . (4) This is diﬀerent from Leal et al. [36] where all agents have the same fundamental value at timet and the fundamental value ﬂuctuates between trading sessions. Each chartist agents decision to buy (or sell) is given by: Dc it = { sell if mt < ¯mit buy if mt > ¯mit, (5) where ¯mit is the exponential moving average (EMA) of the mid-price for the ith agent at time t. The EMA for each chartist is unique to themselves and is computed each time they make a decision. The moving average is updated according to ¯mit = ¯mit′ +λ (mt− ¯mit′) where t′ is the time point where the ith agent made their last decision and λ = 1−e−∆t/τ. Here ∆ t = t−t′ is the inter-arrival of the ith agent’s current decision and previous decision and τ is the time constant for the ith agent computed as the mean inter-arrival of the agent’s decision time. This allows our agents to base their decisions on variables at time t. To create the market orders for LF agents to submit, we need to know both the direction of the order and the quantity of the order. The direction of the order is deter- mined by eqs. (3) and (5), and the quantity of the order is sampled according to eq. (2) with parameters determined according the magnitude of the activation rule and the state of the order book. The lower bound xm of the volume size is determined by the deviation between the agent’s valuation or trading strategy relative to the current mid-price. We set xm = { 20 if |fit−mt|≤ δmt 50 if |fit−mt|>δm t, (6) for fundamentalists, and xm = { 20 if |mt− ¯mit|≤ δmt 50 if |mt− ¯mit|>δm t, (7) for chartists. Here the cutoﬀ is a δ percentage of the cur- rent mid-price. This setup increases the aggression of the 5 agent depending on how favourable the current price is relative to their valuation or trading strategy. The second factor that determines the size of an agent’s volume is the order book imbalance: ρt = vb t−va t vb t +va t , where vb t and va t are the total bid and ask side volume of the LOB at time t. The shape parameter α is then: α = { 1−ρt/ν for sell MO 1 +ρt/ν for buy MO, (8) where ν >1 to ensure that α is never equal to zero. The setup achieves two eﬀects. First, if the contra side of the order book is thicker then an agent will submit larger or- ders to take advantage of the available liquidity. Second, if the same side of the order book is thicker then they will submit a smaller order to avoid excessive price impact. 2.2. Liquidity providers Each LP agent makes a decision to place either a bid or ask limit order according to an random inter-arrival time governed by a truncated exponential distribution with mean intensityλP that is bounded betweenλP min and λP max seconds. At each decision point the agent places ei- ther a bid or ask depending on the current order book imbalance ρt at time t. An agent has a probability θ of placing an ask, and probability of 1−θ for the placing of a bid whereθ = 1 2(ρt +1). This design ensures that liquidity providers will on average provide liquidity to the side with less liquidity and thus stabilise the order book. Once an agent has made the decision on which side of the order book to place the limit order, the placement of the limit order is given as: pt = { pb t + 1 +⌊η⌋ for asks pa t− 1−⌊η⌋ for bids, where pb t and pa t is the best bid and best ask at time t respectively. Here η is a random sample from a gamma distribution with a density given as f(x) = βk Γ(k)xk−1e−βx, where k is the shape parameter and β is the rate param- eter. The shape parameter k is set to be the spread st at time t,3 whereas the rate parameter is set as β = { e−ρt/κ for asks eρt/κ for bids, 3The spread is the diﬀerence between the best ask and the best bid, i.e., st =pa t−pb t. at timet. This means the size ofη at timet will on average be ¯η =k/β = { steρt/κ for asks ste−ρt/κ for bids. (9) The above equation achieves several eﬀects. First, when the order book is relatively balanced, the order placement will on average be near the best bid or ask. Second, when the order book is thicker on the contra side of the order book then the limit price placement will be more passive and will on average be placed further away from the best bid price to capture the strategic eﬀect [44]. Lastly, when the order book is thicker on the same side of the order book then the limit price placement will be more aggressive and will on average be placed between the spread to capture the competition eﬀect [44]. Here κ> 0 is a parameter that intensiﬁes or relaxes the strategic or competition eﬀect. When κ is small the eﬀects are inten- siﬁed and when κ is large the eﬀects are relaxed. All limit orders have a time in force of γ seconds. Remark 1. Initially we sampled η from an exponential distribution following Preis et al. [55] but with a mean of ¯η from eq. (9). However, we found that the exponen- tial distribution resulted in the spread closing too quickly even though the sample will on average be placed at the best bid/ask (provided ρt≈ 0). This is because the ex- ponential distribution has more mass below the mean so that the limit price placement is more likely to be between the spread. This will reduce the spread for the next limit price placement and results in a feedback loop that closes the spread. The gamma distribution slows down the col- lapse which gives liquidity takers a chance to push back the spread. The volume of each limit order is sampled according to eq. (2) with the lower bound of the volume size asxn = 10 and the shape parameter as α = { 1−ρt/ν for asks 1 +ρt/ν for bids. (10) This setup achieves two eﬀects. First, when the order book is thicker on the contra side of the order then the volume of the limit order will be large. Second, when the order book is thicker on the same side as the order then the volume of the limit order will be small. The motivation behind this choice was to ensure that imbalances are swiftly addressed to ensure that we have a stable order book. 3. System implementation Figure 1 outlines how the various components of the model ﬁt together. The Matching Engine (ME) is its own independent piece of software which is coupled to the Model Management System (MMS) by the data feed and submission of orders. The model management system 6 CoinTossX Market Data Listener Update LOB States Agent Decision Rules feed orders MMS Figure 1: Schematic representation of the separation of the Model Management System (MMS) which replaces the functionality of the Execution Management Systems (EMS) and the Order Management System (OMS) in a conventional trading environment. The Match- ing Engine (ME) is implemented using CoinTossX [59]. The ME is loosely coupled to the MMS. The MMS accesses messages from the data feed by listening to a port using a socket. Orders are injected as message strings and pushed to a port. consists of the market data listener and the agent deci- sion rules. Here the market data listener builds its own LOB by listening to the data feed from the matching en- gine and updating the LOB whenever a message comes through. The updated LOB can be accessed by all the agents which then make a decision and submit their order to the matching engine. 3.1. Matching engine To achieve low-coupling and high-cohesion between the Matching Engine (ME) and our agent-based model we re- quired further development of the matching engine code and the order management and model management frame- work.4 In our previous work we had a high-coupling be- tween the matching engine and our simulation. This was because the state of the LOB was observed by requesting snapshots using a back-end functionality from the match- ing engine [30]. The back-end functionality was designed to help debug the matching engine when it was being built and tested; it was not intended to be used as part of the simulation workﬂow functionality. The system has now been separated with order submis- sions/conﬁrmations and executions being forwarded in real time over a network via UDP from the matching engine, i.e., we have a continuous data feed.5 These messages are then continuously captured and managed by a dedicated order management shim on the modelling framework side. 4Here cohesion refers to the degree to which a part of a code base forms a logically single, atomic unit. Here coupling refers to the degree to which a single unit is independent from others, i.e., it is related to the number of connections between two or more units. 5User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is a lightweight, connectionless (unreliable) but fast protocol where data is transmitted irrespective of whether there is a listener to receive the message or not. For the continuous data feed we encode and decode mes- sages in a binary format such that transmission of mes- sages over the network remains fast. This is currently a prototype for more advancements to be made in the ﬂexi- bility of CoinTossX’s API with regards to other program- ming languages. 3.2. Market-data listener The market data listener is focused on listening for mes- sages on the data feed from CoinTossX and processing these messages to build a separate LOB for the agents that is independent of the matching engine. This mirrors the workﬂow of real market participants who collate and manage their own representations of the limit order book for decision making. Sample messages received from Coin- TossX are illustrated in Appendix A. The LOB is created from the messages using separate dictionaries for the ask side and bid side. Each order is stored as key-value pairs where the keys are given by the order IDs assigned from CoinTossX while the value for the key contains the limit price and volume. With this setup, updating the LOB is simply a matter of adding new orders and removing or cancelling orders by cross- referencing order IDs given in transactions or cancellations (see pseudocode 1 for maintaining the LOB). Note that the LOB built in the MMS can only keep track of the price priority and not the time priority. The full price-time priority is maintained in the matching engine. Therefore, the order ID is the most important component to help maintain the LOB in the MMS. This reﬂects what happens in real ﬁnancial markets. Once the LOB has been updated we extract some im- portant quantities upon which our agent decisions depend on, such as: the best bid pb t and ask pa t , the mid-price mt, the spread st and the order book imbalance ρt. It should be noted that when the bid side of the LOB is empty, the best bid price pb t retains the price of the previous best bid before the bid side was emptied as a reference price. When the ask side of the LOB is empty, pa t retains the price of the previous best ask before the ask side emptied as its reference price. The spread st is computed as pa t−pb t and the mid-price mt as pa t +pb t 2 , even if the best bid or ask are merely indica- tive (from the last existing reference price). The imbalance can always be computed even if one side is empty as it will simply take on 1 for an empty ask side or−1 for an empty bid side. The same logic is applied when both sides of the LOB are empty, except that ρt will be set to 0 in this particular case. This “fail-safe” setup for an empty LOB scenario makes it easy to initialise the simulation because the simulation can begin with just an indicative best bid and ask. This can avoid unnecessary volatility auctions which are currently not accounted for by our agent speci- ﬁcations. 7 3.3. Agent decision rules The order sent by the agent is determined by the deci- sion rules discussed in Section 2. Since agent actions de- pend on state variables of the LOB at timet, all the agents have access to the same LOB constructed from the mar- ket data listener but maintained in the model management system that mimics the role of order management system in the traditional trader workﬂow. The arrival of decision times for all agents follow a trun- cated exponential. Therefore, we can simulate and sort all the decision time points in chronological order before start- ing the simulation. This means we can login to CoinTossX with a single client to manage and submit the orders for all the agents. At each decision point we identify the type and the speciﬁc agent and create the order for the agent according to the appropriate rules using the current state of the LOB. This is again a model design convenience spe- ciﬁc to our particular model as managed from the MMS. The simulation does not have to occur in real time and can be signiﬁcantly sped up because we know all the de- cision times beforehand and we do not have any reactive agents.6 The appropriate event times can be appended to the trade and quote data after the simulation. The only requirement to achieve this is the appropriate order- ing of events so that the price-time priority of orders can be maintained within the matching engine. 3.4. Compute times and hardware The Microsoft Azure [45] hardware conﬁguration used and indicative times for each of the key steps of the sim- ulation framework are given in Table 1. All times men- tioned in Table 1 are dependent on the number of orders submitted and therefore the number of trader agents. Hardware Speciﬁcation Virtual Machine Standard A4m V2 Azure VM [46] Operating System 64-bit Linux Ubuntu 18.04-LTS RAM 32GB CPU 4 × Intel Xeon CPU E5-2673 v3 @ 2.4GHz (32 threads) Computation Run-time 1-hour of Trading 41.179s Sensitivity Ana. 35.746hrs Calibration 10.880hrs Table 1: Hardware conﬁguration and indicative computation times. The average hour of trading for a single stock results in between a total of 4800 and 6600 orders. This includes, on average, between 2200 and 3100 limit orders, between 2000 and 2800 cancellations and between 350 and 450 trades. 6By reactive agents we mean agents who act on events,i.e., agents listen for events and then act on them to deﬁne an event time. 3.5. Miscellaneous considerations In the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) a volatility auction call session can be triggered during a continuous double auction when an instrument’s circuit breaker toler- ance has been breached [32]. This means that if the execu- tion price is larger than a 10% deviation from the dynamic reference price then a volatility auction will be triggered. The execution price is the price of the best bid or ask that is crossed when a market order arrives while the dynamic reference price is the deepest price level executed from the last transaction [59]. Our agent speciﬁcation does not account for the appro- priate agent behaviour during an auction. Therefore, we impose a restriction on all liquidity takers where they will not submit their market order if the order will lead to an execution price with a deviation larger than 10% of the current dynamic reference price in order to avoid trigger- ing a volatility auction. Lastly, liquidity takers will not submit their market or- der if the contra side of their order is empty. We do this to simplify the data cleaning process. This is because when a market order is submitted to an empty order book the data feed returns a string but with no orders executed. This means that sending or not sending the order will lead to the same result. 3.6. Simulation To initialise all simulations we ﬁx the number of liquid- ity takers with Nf LT = 1 and Nc LT = 1 and only vary the number of liquidity takers during calibration and sensi- tivity analysis. The LOB state of the best ask, best bid, spread, imbalance (at,bt,st,ρt) is arbitrarily set as (9950, 10050, 100, 0) and we start with an empty LOB. Simulations carried out on calibrated parameters had the most consistent behaviour compared to ideal parame- ters found through sensitivity analysis. That is, parame- ters selected based on qualitative evaluations of moments of simulated price time-series, produced simulations with little to no liquidity taker activation’s. This resulted in almost no price movement for longer simulations. 7 Figure 2 provides the simulated price time-series obtained from calibrated parameters for a 30 second interval. 4. Sensitivity analysis We conduct a sensitivity analysis on the moments of both simulated mid-price and micro-price. This serves to demonstrate the eﬀect of diﬀerent price time-series on the estimates of simulated moments. Our choice of moments and statistics corresponds to those recommended by Gilli and Winker [21] which are robust enough to reﬂect the 7Due to the long simulation times with the Julia-Java wrapper, memory usage and speed became important. This meant JVM argu- ments for garbage collection and memory allocation were required. 8 Figure 2: Half a minute of simulated price time-series from calibrated parameters. Orders placed at all levels of the LOB are visualised with markers for limit, market and cancellations of buy and sell orders. The progression of returns, spread and LOB volume imbalance are also visualised over the same time period. properties of ﬁnancial data and ﬂexible enough to dis- criminate between parameter conﬁgurations [63]. There- fore, we adopt the following moments and statistics for being the most representative measures of the stylised facts of ﬁnancial data: mean, standard deviation, kurto- sis, Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) statistics, Geweke-Porter- Hudak estimator (GPD), augmented Dicky-Fuller (ADF), a combination of GARCH(1,1) parameters, and a Hill es- timator.8 These are given in Table 2. Overall, this results in a combination of 9 moments and statistics being used to characterise the statistical proper- ties of the simulations. To visualise the impact of pairs of parameters on the statistical properties of the simulated mid and micro price, we consider combinations of a range of reasonable param- eter values. That is, we iteratively ﬁx each parameter and vary the others in their ranges such that we obtain mo- ment surfaces for all combinations of parameter values. We 8The modiﬁed Hill estimator is computed by numerically solving 1 l−r+1 ∑l j=r ln (Xj) = 1 α + ln (Xl)X−α l −ln (Xr)X−α r X−α l −X−α r where Xl and Xr are the minimum and maximum return values respectively [48]. considered a range of ﬁve diﬀerent values for each parame- ter, resulting in 3125 diﬀerent combinations. Each unique parameter value thus has 625 replications over which to aggregate moments. Given the large number of possible parameter conﬁg- urations and that the model management system is not coupled to the matching engine system, some care must be taken to ensure that separate back-to-back order sub- mission periods are eﬃcient, independent and do not result in unexpected behaviour (both at a software level and sim- ulation output level). For example, we require that each simulation begins with an empty limit order book such that orders from previous simulations don’t carry over. One way to achieve this would be to initiate new continu- ous trading sessions at set time intervals. Simulation time, however, is not ﬁxed and this could cause orders to be sub- mitted in the wrong trading session. For this reason we manually clear the oﬀ-heap storage and LOB each time the client logs out. Figures D.11, D.12 and D.13 in Appendix D provide high-level summaries of the individual eﬀects of parameter values on the moments of simulated log-return time-series. Kurtosis was found to be the least reliable moment 9 Targeted Empirical Feature Estimators and Motivation Distribution shape The mean µ, standard deviation σ, kurtosis µ4, and Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) statistic of log-returns are chosen to represent the overall shape of the data distri- bution. The KS statistic compares the empirical distribution of the actual returns, to that of the simulated or bootstrapped returns obtained from the model. The actual returns obtain a KS statistic of 0 as they are identically distributed to themselves. In the context of both the calibration and the sensitivity analysis, the KS statistic was computed relative to the empirical distribution. Long-range dependence The Geweke and Porter-Hudak (GPH) estimator: Geweke and Porter-Hudak [20], and Lillo and Farmer [41] provide a measure of the long-range dependence of the absolute log returns by estimating the memory parameter d∈ [−0.5, 0.5] of the log-periodogram. Serial auto-correlation Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) statistic: ADF measures of the extent of the random walk property of log returns by testing the null hypothesis that a unit root is present in the time series. A large negative test statistic is more evidence against the null hypothesis. Long-memory The empirical Hurst exponent (H): The Hurst exponent relates to the auto- correlations of the time series, and its rate of decay for increasing lags. A value in the range 0.5 and 1 indicates a time series with long-term positive auto-correlation (momentum) while a value in the range 0 and 0.5 is indicative of long-term negative auto-correlation (mean reversion). This is indicative of long-memory eﬀects. Short-range dependence The sum of the two GARCH(1,1) parameters is used as a measure of short-range dependence. The reason for taking the sum is that this value is much more robust than using either one of the two parameters in the GARCH model alone. Power-law tail An “improved” Hill estimator (HE): Nuyts [48] argue for the estimation of the tail index of a power-law distribution as an additional measure of the power behaviour and tailedness of the distribution over and above kurtosis. The use of this modiﬁed estimator is in response to the known issues and ineﬃciencies of the standard estimator. Table 2: Estimators and moment parameters used for the calibration and sensitivity analysis along with the properties they are targeting. See sections 4 and 5. The moments are used in the Nelder-Mead (NM) method with Simulated Minimum Distance (SMD) for the indicative calibration because of the methods simplicity, speed and reliability. since extreme price changes during the initialisation pe- riod would have resulted in a large kurtosis value even if the price remained constant for the rest of the simulation.9 Moments that were robust and good indicators of realistic price series include the GPH statistic, the Hurst exponent, and the Hill estimator. Due to the nature of the model, the Hurst exponent remained relatively constant and above 0.5 across parameters and simulations indicating a tendency towards momentum behaviour. Assigning a value of close to zero for the σ parameter of fundamentalists resulted in mostly mean-reverting behaviour with a Hurst exponent close to 0.5. On average, most parameters by themselves do result in signiﬁcant diﬀerences in simulated moments across their range of values. On the other hand, individual diﬀerences 9During calibration the instability of certain moments is ac- counted for by the inverse covariance matrix of empirical moments by down-weighting the eﬀect of those moments on the objective function (refer to Section 5). in parameters κ and N were found to result in slightly diﬀerent simulated moments across their range of values on average. The strong dependence of simulated moments onN is expected as this parameter controls the number of liquidity providers. Smaller values ofκ exhibited more lep- tokurtic log-returns which captures the intended eﬀect in the model deﬁnition — small values ofκ intensiﬁes compe- tition while larger values relax competition. Another ob- servation worth noting is the relatively stable Hurst expo- nent which, with the exception of N, remains consistently above 0.5 — indicating a time-series exhibiting largely mo- mentum behaviour. Considering diﬀerent parameter combinations together produced simulated moments that were signiﬁcantly diﬀer- ent from those obtained by averaging the marginal eﬀects of individual parameters over all other parameter combina- tions. This can been by the kurtosis, Hurst exponent and Hill estimator moment surfaces in Figure D.13 for combi- nations of δ & κ and N & ν. Certain moment surfaces in Figure D.13 diﬀer depending on the use of mid-price or 10 Figure 3: Bootstrapped correlations between individual parameter-moment combinations calculated on simulated micro-price time-series obtained from the sensitivity analysis. The parameter descriptions are provided in Table 3 and the moment descriptions in Table 2. micro-price log-returns. From Figure 3, as expected, the kurtosis, Kolmogorov- Smirnov statistic and Hill estimator are strongly correlated to the ratio of liquidity providers to liquidity takers while the ADF statistic and standard deviation of log-returns are negatively correlated. Similarly, with κ controlling the order-placement depth, it is positively correlated with the Hill estimator and negatively correlated with the standard deviation of log-returns. 5. Calibration The three most common calibration strategies are (i) the maximum likelihood approach which is applicable to mod- els with closed form solutions, (ii) the sequential Monte- Carlo approximate Bayesian computation method, 10 and (iii) the method-of-moments (MM) which often employs variations of simulated minimum distance (SMD) meth- ods. The MM approach has been criticised for requiring the selection of an arbitrary set of moments and for creat- ing a rough objective surface with many local minima and for only generating point estimates as opposed to cred- ibility intervals and posterior distributions. 11 Nonethe- less, ignoring parameter inference, we apply the MM SMD method for its simplicity, speed and reliability when there 10SMC-ABC was applied to the Preis et al. [55] model in [23] with the surprising result that frequentist methods were suﬃcient. 11For an extensive comparison of the many diﬀerent calibration techniques refer to Platt [50]. are more moments than parameters and we have signiﬁ- cant computational time and resource constraints. As such our calibration should be considered indicative rather the robust. From the full set of model parameters a small subset of 5 free parameters was chosen: θ ={N,δ,κ,ν,σ } (see Section 2 and Figure B.10). This set of 5 parame- ters are described in Table 3 and are the parameters to be calibrated. The list of ﬁxed parameters that control other simula- tion characteristics are as follows. The inter-arrival rate parameter with minimum and maximum sampling inter- vals for liquidity takers (λT , λT min and λT max respectively) and liquidity providers ( λP , λP min and λP max respectively) control for any low-frequency or high-frequency trading behaviour and aﬀect, among other things, the amount of liquidity in the order book. These parameters are, how- ever, redundant in the presence of parameters ν and δ which also control liquidity. Here simulations were not conducted in real time, but for computational convenience, event times were appended to the data after submission. Lastly, there was the power-law order-size cut-oﬀ parame- ter xm as well as the time-to-arrival of cancellations that were held ﬁxed which also aﬀected the build up of liquidity in the order book. These components were kept ﬁxed to alleviate calibration problems that may occur with redun- dant behaviour speciﬁcations as a result of conﬂicting and dependent parameters. The task of calibrating intraday ABMs in particular has been proven to be challenging for a number of reasons [51]. Firstly, model parameters often demonstrate degen- eracies and have a haphazard eﬀect on the objective func- 11 Param. Description N The population ratio of liquidity takers to liquidity providers (see eq. (1)). δ Volume size aggression multiplier as a per- centage of mid-price (see eqs. (6) and (7)). κ Placement depth multiplier (see eq. (9)). ν Scaling factor for power-law volume order size (see eqs. (8) and (10)). σ Fundamentalists’ value perception uncer- tainty for the trading day (see eq. (4)). Table 3: Free model parameters (for calibrated values see Table 4). tion which leads to consecutive calibration experiments with signiﬁcantly diﬀerent parameters. Certain parame- ters tend to dominate all the others and it is often diﬃcult to identify the role and dependencies between the various parameters. For the models we have considered the degen- eracies are hypothesised to ﬁnd much of their origin in the realistic matching processes, and in the particular model and its price setting mechanism [52]. In our case, agent decision rules are explicitly encoded, resulting in fewer pa- rameters to calibrate and possibly a more unique set of calibrated parameters. This also ensures that the num- ber of free parameters is less than the number of moments used to construct the objective function. For the problem of calibrating models with as few pa- rameters as this one, we adopt the frequentist/method-of- moments simulated minimum distance (SMD) approach where the objective function is chosen to take into account the stylised facts of ﬁnancial data [63]. The objective func- tion to be minimised is thus the weighted sum-of-squares of estimation errors between simulated and empirical mo- ments. The moments to be estimated are those mentioned in Section 4 along with the mean, standard deviation and Komogorov-Smirnov statistic which are estimated on the micro-price log-returns. 12 Denoting me = [me 1,...,m e k]′ and [ms| θ] = [ ms 1,...,m s k]′ as the vector of empirical moments of real and simulated data respectively, we min- imise the quadratic function min θ∈Θ f(θ) =G(θ)′WG(θ), with G(θ) = 1 I I∑ i=1 (me i− [ms i|θ]), where θ is the vector of parameters, Θ is the space of feasible parameters and I = 5 is the number of repli- cations/simulations used in estimating the average mo- ments and statistics. The matrix of weights W , given by the inverse covariance matrix of empirical moments (Cov−1[me]), takes into account the joint distribution of 12Tick-by-tick mid-prices were found to unreliable when trying to identify distributional properties through moments. moments and assigns larger weights to those moments with the least uncertainty and that are more robust [63]. 13 To alleviate the issue of a globally non-convex objective surface, we employ the Nelder-Mead with Threshold Ac- cepting (NMTA) heuristic optimisation routine [19, 21, 47] (refer to Appendix E). The data on which the model is calibrated is chosen to be 1-hour of Naspers level-1 trade- and-quote data from the JSE. From the sensitivity analysis we generate chains of pa- rametersθ from which we can compute the moments ms; each vector of moments is then associated with particular vectors of parameters. From the sensitivity analysis we can the compute the exposure B (here a 5× 9 matrix) of pa- rameters to the moments. 14 Then from the bootstrapped moment covariance matrix Σme = Cov[me] = W−1 and the approximated parameter exposures to the momentsB, we can construct an indicative covariance for the param- eters: Σ θ = B′ΣmeB. The diagonal of this gives us in- dicative sample variances: σ2 θ = diag(Σθ). Parameters ob- tained from calibration and sensitivity analysis are shown in Table 4. To obtain the indicative error bars on simulated mo- ments in Table 5, we obtain moment variances from the diagonal of the bootstrapped moment covariance matrix Σme and compute conﬁdence intervals as ms± 1.96×√ diag(Σme). Parameter ˆθ0.025% ˆθ ˆθ0.975% N 3.609 5.992 8.376 δ 0.058 0.092 0.125 κ 1.716 2.555 3.394 ν 2.876 3.381 3.887 σ 0.08 0.418 0.756 Table 4: Calibrated parameters along with 95% conﬁdence intervals where parameter variances are obtained from sensitivity analysis pa- rameter chains. See Table 3 for the parameter descriptions. 6. Exploratory Data Analysis It is diﬃcult to compare the “goodness” of one ABM to another. Such comparisons are usually based on the model’s ability to replicate empirical observations which involves subjective comparisons given the qualitative na- ture of most stylised facts. There are a wide variety of 13The weight matrix W is estimated by applying a moving block bootstrap to the time series with a window of size 2000. As opposed to sampling individual returns, sampling bootstrap blocks preserves the auto-correlations of the time-series. For each block/window we re-sample with replacement until we obtain 1000 samples, each of which is equal to the length of the original data set. The moments and statistics are then calculated on each of these samples such that we can obtain the covariance between them. The condition number of the weight matrix W is 8.375811152908104× 1019 computed as ||W −1||·|| W||. 14Here Bij = Cov[θi,ms j]/Var[ms j] for ith parameter and jth mo- ment in the exposure matrix B. 12 Moment ˆ ms 0.025% ˆms ˆms 0.975% ˆme Mean -0.0 -0.0 0.0 0.0 StDev. 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.001 Kurtosis -1195.441 2323.204 5841.849 4.12 KS 0.424 0.456 0.488 0.0 Hurst 0.488 0.527 0.566 0.231 GPH -0.199 0.055 0.309 0.729 ADF -311.74 -296.876 -282.012 -176.529 GARCH 0.859 1.033 1.207 1.005 Hill 0.676 0.958 1.241 2.043 Table 5: Comparison between empirical moments and moments esti- mated on tick-by-tick simulated micro-price returns along with 95% conﬁdence intervals. See Table 2 for the description of the calibration moments. ﬁnancial ABM’s that are able to replicate common em- pirically observed facts. However, Platt and Gebbie [51] demonstrate possible inadequacies of a stylised fact-centric approach to model validation and stress the importance of rigorous calibration methods as well as qualitative mea- sures relating to model parsimony and the ability of the model to make predictions or produce empirical phenom- ena not directly encoded in, or used in the estimation pro- cess. It is also usually the case that a unique set of pa- rameters for the calibration of a speciﬁc model to a time series does not exist. Without a unique set of parameters allowing us to reproduce the properties of ﬁnancial time series drawn from a particular market, we cannot argue that introducing and observing changes in the model truly reﬂects the same changes in the market. A good model should both be able to replicate the stylised facts of ﬁ- nancial markets and have parameters that behave in clear ways and do not have insigniﬁcant eﬀects on the resulting behaviour of the simulation. That said, given the uniqueness of diﬀerent markets, qualitative empirical-versus-simulation comparisons re- main the best validation methods in computational agent- based models. We choose an extensive list of stylised facts that are constraining enough to demonstrate the realism of our simulations (see Appendix C for a shortened list of ﬁnancial market stylised and empirical facts). 6.1. Stylised facts The stylised facts presented hereafter are computed on micro-prices on a tick-by-tick basis and are compared be- tween simulated and empirical data. The micro-price is updated whenever an event changes the best bid or ask. The returns are computed as price ﬂuctuations: rtk = ln ( Stk+1 ) − ln (Stk), whereStk is the micro-price as time tk. The stylised facts included are by no means exhaustive but rather include the most common of these: order-ﬂow auto-correlation, log-return and extreme log-return distributions and log- return auto-correlation. In addition to these we compute the depth-proﬁle curves on simulated LOB data. First, we investigate the distribution of the tick-by-tick returns. Figure 4 plots the full distribution of the returns with quantile-to-quantile (QQ) plots ﬁtted to a normal dis- tribution provided as insets. Both distributions are highly leptokurtic with heavy tails. Note, however, that empirical returns are more volatile and has its density more evenly distributed away from the mean. This is in contrast to sim- ulated returns which has a larger proportion of its density centred at zero. Referring to the log-return auto-correlation plots in Figure 5, the strong negative ﬁrst order auto-correlation seen in empirical returns is indicative of a strong mean- reverting component. This is less prevalent in simulated returns which exhibit signiﬁcant auto-correlations for the ﬁrst few lags that decay to zero relatively quickly. We spec- ulate that these diﬀerences in long-memory characteristics are due to the signiﬁcant diﬀerence in relative liquidity and order book resilience that are produced by the calibrated parameters. The order-ﬂow is represented by a time-series of values with +1 for buyer initiated trades, and −1 for seller ini- tiated trades. Persistence in the order-ﬂow is then in the sense that buy orders tend to be followed by more buy or- ders, and sell orders tend to be followed by more sell orders. Possible causes for this are herding behaviours (positive correlation between the behaviour of diﬀerent investors) and order splitting (positive auto-correlation in the be- haviour of single investors). Figure 6 plots the order-ﬂow auto-correlations from the simulations and empirical data on JSE level 1 trade-and-quote data. The trade classiﬁca- tion is performed using the Lee–Ready classiﬁcation [40] for the empirical data and we compute up to 500 lags be- tween the trades. Furthermore, the same auto-correlation plots presented on a log10 scale are provided as insets. De- spite the signiﬁcant diﬀerences in liquidity and the number of trades, we see that both simulated and empirical data sets exhibit persistent order-ﬂows. Figure 7 includes the distributions of the left tail (be- low the 5th percentile) and the right tail (above the 95th percentile) with QQ-plots ﬁtted to a power-law distribu- tion provided as insets (presented on a log-log scale). The power-law distributions are ﬁtted using maximum like- lihood estimation (MLE) where the probability density function is as: p(x) = α− 1 xmin ( x xmin )−α , where x ≥ xmin > 0. The complementary cumulative distribution is: 1−F (x) = ( x xmin )−α+1 . Here we only estimate α because xmin is set as the cutoﬀ 13 (a) CoinTossX - calibrated parameters (b) JSE - empirical Figure 4: Tick-by-tick simulated and empirical micro-price log-return distribution properties are depicted along with ﬁtted Normal distri- butions as references. Simulated price-series were generated by applying the optimal calibration parameters on CoinTossX while empirical results are obtained from JSE level 1 trade-and-quote data. QQ-plots are provided as insets. (a) CoinTossX - calibrated parameters (b) JSE - empirical Figure 5: Tick-by-tick simulated and empirical microprice log-return auto-correlations plots. Simulated price-series were generated by applying the optimal calibration parameters on CoinTossX while empirical results are obtained from JSE level 1 trade-and-quote data. Absolute log- return auto-correlation plots are provided as insets as an indicative measure of long-memory [41]. percentile. The MLE for α is given as: ˆα = 1 +n [ n∑ i=1 ln xi xmin ]−1 . The tail distributions between data sets diﬀer signiﬁcantly with simulated returns having less of a power-law be- haviour than empirical returns as indicated by the smaller estimated tail-index α. Our empirical data only has the level 1 LOB, so the depth proﬁle is only computed on calibrated parameters. To construct these proﬁles we average the total volume available at the top 7 price levels of the LOB. The resulting curves exhibit a strong decay in the amount of liquidity available at each price level. We also observe asymmetry between the bid and ask mean relative depth proﬁles. The tendency for most of the volume to be placed at the ﬁrst level of the LOB is inline with empirical observations [2, 24] and provides a partial explanation for the power-law price- impact curves. 6.2. Price response and impact Here we compare the immediate price impact functions, which are the immediate price responses that are due to transactions, between the empirical and simulated data. Price impact quantiﬁes how a transaction of a given vol- ume aﬀects the best bid/ask price [25, 29]. Let mt be the mid-price, then we deﬁne the impact or immediate price 14 (a) CoinTossX - calibrated parameters (b) JSE - empirical Figure 6: Order-ﬂow auto-correlation plots based on true and inferred trade signs for simulated and empirical results respectively. Simulated price-series were generated by applying the optimal calibration parameters on CoinTossX while empirical results are obtained from JSE level 1 trade-and-quote data. Provided as insets are the same auto-correlation plots with the lags presented on a log 10 scale. (a) CoinTossX - calibrated parameters (b) JSE - empirical Figure 7: Distributions of upper and lower extreme log-returns above the 95th percentile and below the 5th percentile respectively computed on tick-by-tick simulated and empirical micro-price log-returns. Simulated price-series were generated by applying the optimal calibration parameter on CoinTossX while empirical results are obtained from JSE level 1 trade-and-quote data. The left and right tails have QQ-plots ﬁtted to a power-law distribution provided as insets. increment of a transaction occurring at time tk as: ∆ptk = ln ( mtk+1 ) − ln (mtk), where tk is the time of mid-price before the transaction and tk+1 is the time of mid-price immediately after the transaction.15 Additionally, we follow Harvey et al. [25] and Jericevich 15We make the strict assumption to only use the mid-price imme- diately after the transaction. For the JSE data set, all transactions are immediately followed by an updated quote. For CoinTossX, we also update the quote immediately following a transaction. et al. [29] and normalise the trade volume as: ωij = vij ∑Tj k=1vkj [∑M j=1Tj M ] , where ωij is the normalised daily-normalised volume for trade i on day j, Tj is the number of trading events on the jth day and M is the total number of days. The rela- tionship between price change and transaction size is in- vestigated separately for buyer- and seller-initiated trans- actions. The transactions in the JSE data set are classiﬁed according to the Lee–Ready rule [40]. In Figure 9 we investigate the price impact for a given volume size. We create 20 logarithmically spaced nor- 15 Figure 8: LOB depth proﬁles on simulated results from optimal cali- bration parameters as depicted by the average volume at each of the top seven price levels through time. malised volume bins between [10−1, 101]. For each of these volume bins we compute the average price change ∆p∗ and the average normalised volumeω∗ over the entire data set. The relationship between the average price change ∆ p∗ and the average volume binω∗ is then plotted on a log-log scale for buyer- and seller-initiated transactions. Consis- tent with previous ﬁndings [25, 29, 42], we see that there is a power-law relationship (linear on a log-log scale) be- tween the price change and normalised volume in both the simulated and empirical data. 7. Discussion 7.1. Limitations For the purpose of future improvements in market simu- lations with CoinTossX we mention two key shortcomings of the model in this work. The ﬁrst and most important for dynamics and agent activation being that of the limit price placement. As shown by the depth proﬁles, limit price placements are sampled from a Gamma distribution which will have most of their density at or just below the best bid/ask. This results in most of the volume being placed at the best bid or ask price level. Although this loosely conforms with empirical observations, this characteristic tends to result in little to no liquidity taker activation in the presence of too many liquidity providers because trade volumes were often insuﬃcient to break through the ﬁrst level. This can then result in very little price movement and thus little variation in log-returns. This shortcoming is further aggravated, but not caused, by the choice of a power-law volume distribution. There is a tension because too many liquidity takers will mean too little liquidity even at level 1. Deeper levels in the order book are shallow with most volume directed at level 1. Clusters of trades or large individual trades breaking through the ﬁrst level would subsequently break through all deeper levels and thereby emptying one side of the order book. With one side empty, subsequent limit prices place- ments sampled through the Gamma distribution would tend to place prices far from the contra best — result- ing in a large spread. This behaviour would repeat as large price movements can increase the aggression of liq- uidity takers. The end result being unrealistically large price changes, sometimes into the negatives. Addition- ally, once large price changes occur, the fail-safe prevent- ing volatility-auctions to trigger would prevent LT agents submitting further market orders. The second feature that may have had adverse eﬀects on simulation dynamics were agent activation rules. In particular, fundamentalists were assigned a ﬁxed value perception for the day. If the perceived value was far from the starting mid-price, consistent upward/downward trends would persist throughout the day with little market pressure being applied to the opposite side. This may give evidence for the existence of contrarian strategies in real markets. 7.2. Future extensions and reactive agents Having an independent matching infrastructure at our disposal means that greater attention can be applied to the model speciﬁcation, conﬁgurations and attributes as the mechanics of order matching is externally provided as a given. To implement a truly asynchronous actor-based model, the modelling framework needs to be able to react to streaming data in an event based framework. This will require the model management system and its integration with the data feed to become reactive. This is how real ﬁnancial markets function. This will require a reactive framework such as akka to implement a truly multi-agent model framework (as one example) or the extension of the existing code base. 16 Doing so will allow the system to include additional classes of agents, e.g., RL agents, learning agents, dis- tressed agents and multi-asset agents that can potentially induce cross asset correlations. Each asset can then still be traded by at least the 3 basic agent formulations: the two LF and HF agents who will then be operating in event time. Additional agent classes can then inject trades into the matching engine and the various model management systems can then monitor the order book and trade events in order to make trading decisions. Examples of multi-asset agent-based models can be found in [3, 54]. These models have historically been based on sequential order submission and market clearing. How- ever, with a bit of work these can be extended to become compatible with an event driven asynchronous framework moderated by a matching engine. 16The requirement for reactive agents can be implemented using our Julia components by a simple migration into a framework such as Reactive.jl or Rocket.jl to replace our hybrid implementation. 16 (a) CoinTossX - calibrated parameters (b) JSE - empirical Figure 9: Individual buyer-initiated and seller-initiated price impact curves plotted on a log-log scale with average daily-normalised volumes ω∗ on the x-axis and average price increments ∆ p∗ on the y-axis. Simulated price-series were generated by applying the optimal calibration parameters on CoinTossX while empirical results were obtained from JSE level 1 trade-and-quote data. 8. Conclusion We have presented an agent-based model in an artiﬁcial exchange framework that is able to recover price-impact while replicating the conventional stylised facts by directly interacting with a decoupled Matching Engine (ME) that manages orders away from the software relating to agent interactions and rules. The key innovation here is that the model updates no longer occur in chronological or calendar time. In many models such as that of Leal et al. [36], the activations are random, but the model takes place in calendar time with sequential market clearing. This means that the agent rules do not depend on market clearing prices and addi- tional constraints are needed to create realism. Here the Model Management System (MMS) polls the market data feed based on asynchronous model time, rather than be entirely driven by the event time of the market. This is a “hybrid framework” where we have not isolated the MMS from the ME entirely. This was a con- venient choice made to reduce compute times for the work done here. However, the system was designed and setup for the “reactive framework” which is what future work should focus on. We recall that the MMS plays the same roles as the OMS/EMS in a typical trading technology stack. The hy- brid solution is computationally convenient here because we make use of the model speciﬁcation that the only trade events experienced by the matching engine will be those triggered and injected from the MMS environment. This means that we do not need to implement a truly reactive framework as there are no other agents that can trigger events for which the agent-based model needs to react to, i.e., there are no agents outside of those from the model speciﬁcation. The complexity of balancing a reactive agent-based modelling system with the convenience of fast calibra- tion is central to the design decisions taken here. The use of Nelder-Mead (NM) with the heuristic Threshold- Acceptance (TA) approach was similarly pragmatic in as much as we have opted for a fast calibration methodol- ogy that will allow us to quickly get to indicative param- eter values. Hence a practical framework that allows one to quickly get indicative parameters and generally repli- cate market stylised facts with relative eﬀectiveness. The framework balances theoretical and statistical rigour, com- putational convenience and implementation realism. We also made the choice of having more moments than there are calibration parameters; here 5 parameters but 9 mo- ments. The agent-based model’s optimal calibration parame- ters were found to provide more consistent time-series be- haviour across seeds than parameter values selected based on the sensitivity analysis. It was noted that simulated prices obtained from sensitivity analysis parameters would occasionally either trigger the volatility-auction fail-safe or close out prices until they remained unchanged — thereby preventing any further actions from agents who depend on price movements. In the instance where the MMS is one of many such frameworks connected to the market then the MMS needs to listen for externally triggered event types that are not the result of its own agent responses. This is computa- tionally expensive. This is important if one is then going to implement alternative agents exogenous to those speci- ﬁed in this particular MMS, e.g., distressed agents, learn- ing agents, a speciﬁc implementation of a particular trad- ing algorithm, or particular types of agent rules that one would like to investigate relative to the core framework. The system as it is currently designed and conﬁgured can 17 accommodate this. However, this was not implemented here due to computational eﬃciency requirements and is left to future work. Reproducibility The speciﬁc version of CoinTossX used can be found at: https://github.com/IvanJericevich/CoinTossX/tree/abm- experiment. Code and instructions for replication can be found at: https://github.com/IvanJericevich/IJPCTG- ABMCoinTossX. Acknowledgements We would like to thank Dharmesh Sing for extensive support with regards to CoinTossX. References [1] Avellaneda, M., Stoikov, S., 2008. High-frequency trading in a limit order book. Quantitative Finance 8, 217–224. doi: 10. 1080/14697680701381228. [2] Biais, B., Hillion, P., Spatt, C., 1995. An empirical analysis of the limit order book and the order ﬂow in the paris bourse. the Journal of Finance 50, 1655–1689. doi: 10.2307/2329330. [3] B¨ ohm, V., Chiarella, C., 2005. Mean variance preferences, expectations formation, and the dynamics of random asset prices. Mathematical Finance: An International Journal of Mathematics, Statistics and Financial Economics 15, 61–97. doi:10.1111/j.0960-1627.2005.00211.x. [4] Bonabeau, E., 2002. Agent-based modeling: Methods and tech- niques for simulating human systems. Proceedings of the Na- tional Academy of Sciences 99, 7280–7287. doi: 10.1073/pnas. 082080899. [5] Bouchaud, J.P., M´ ezard, M., Potters, M., 2002. Statistical prop- erties of stock order books: empirical results and models. Quan- titative ﬁnance 2, 251–256. doi: 10.1088/1469-7688/2/4/301. [6] Brandouy, O., Mathieu, P., Veryzhenko, I., 2013. On the de- sign of agent-based artiﬁcial stock markets, in: Agents and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Springer. pp. 350–364. doi: 10.1007/ 978-3-642-29966-7_23 . [7] Cartea, ´A., Jaimungal, S., Penalva, J., 2015. Algorithmic and high-frequency trading. Cambridge University Press. [8] Chakraborti, A., Toke, I.M., Patriarca, M., Abergel, F., 2011a. Econophysics review: I. empirical facts. Quantitative Finance 11, 991–1012. doi: 10.1080/14697688.2010.539248. [9] Chakraborti, A., Toke, I.M., Patriarca, M., Abergel, F., 2011b. Econophysics review: Ii. agent-based models. Quantitative Fi- nance 11, 1013–1041. doi: 10.1080/14697688.2010.539249. [10] Chakraborty, T., Kearns, M., 2011. Market making and mean reversion, in: Proceedings of the 12th ACM conference on Elec- tronic commerce, pp. 307–314. doi: 10.1145/1993574.1993622. [11] Chang, P., Pienaar, E., Gebbie, T., 2021. The Epps eﬀect under alternative sampling schemes. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications , 126329doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j. physa.2021.126329. [12] Chiarella, C., Dieci, R., He, X.Z., 2009. Heterogeneity, mar- ket mechanisms, and asset price dynamics. Handbook of ﬁnan- cial markets: Dynamics and evolution , 277–344doi: 10.1016/ B978-012374258-2.50009-9 . [13] Cont, R., 2001. Empirical properties of asset returns: stylized facts and statistical issues. Quantitative Finance 1, 223–236. doi:10.1080/713665670. [14] Crafa, S., 2021. From agent-based modeling to actor-based reactive systems in the analysis of ﬁnancial networks. Jour- nal of Economic Interaction and Coordination 16, 649–673. doi:10.1007/s11403-021-00323-8 . [15] Das, S., 2005. A learning market-maker in the glosten– milgrom model. Quantitative Finance 5, 169–180. doi: 10.1080/ 14697680500148067. [16] Dieci, R., He, X.Z., 2018. Heterogeneous agent models in ﬁnance. Handbook of computational economics 4, 257–328. doi:10.1016/bs.hescom.2018.03.002. [17] Epps, T.W., 1979. Comovements in stock prices in the very short run. Journal of the American Statistical Association 74, 291–298. doi: 10.1080/01621459.1979.10482508. [18] Farmer, J.D., Patelli, P., Zovko, I.I., 2005. The predictive power of zero intelligence in ﬁnancial markets. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 102, 2254–2259. doi: 10.1073/ pnas.0409157102. [19] Gao, F., Han, L., 2012. Implementing the nelder-mead sim- plex algorithm with adaptive parameters. Computational Optimization and Applications 51, 259–277. doi: 10.1007/ s10589-010-9329-3 . [20] Geweke, J., Porter-Hudak, S., 1983. The estimation and appli- cation of long memory time series models. Journal of time series analysis 4, 221–238. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9892.1983.tb00371. x. [21] Gilli, M., Winker, P., 2003. A global optimization heuristic for estimating agent based models. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis 42, 299–312. [22] Glosten, L.R., Milgrom, P.R., 1985. Bid, ask and trans- action prices in a specialist market with heterogeneously in- formed traders. Journal of Financial Economics 14, 71–100. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-405X(85)90044-3. [23] Goosen, K., Gebbie, T., 2020. Calibrating high-frequency trad- ing data to agent-based models using approximate bayesian computation. Master’s thesis. University of cape town. URL: https://github.com/KellyGoosen1/hft-abm-smc-abc , doi: 10. 25375/uct.12894005.v1. [24] Gould, M.D., Porter, M.A., Williams, S., McDonald, M., Fenn, D.J., Howison, S.D., 2013. Limit order books. Quantitative Finance 13, 1709–1742. doi: 10.1080/14697688.2013.803148. [25] Harvey, M., Hendricks, D., Gebbie, T., Wilcox, D., 2016. De- viations in expected price impact for small transaction volumes under fee restructuring. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 471, 416–426. doi: 10.1016/j.physa.2016.11.042. [26] Hewitt, C., 2011. Actor model of computation: Scalable robust information systems. Proceedings of Inconsistency Robustness, Stanford . [27] Hewitt, C., Bishop, P., Steiger, R., 1973. A universal modular actor formalism for artiﬁcial intelligence. IJCAI . [28] Hommes, C.H., 2006. Heterogeneous agent models in economics and ﬁnance. Handbook of computational economics 2, 1109– 1186. doi: 10.1016/S1574-0021(05)02023-X. [29] Jericevich, I., Chang, P., Gebbie, T., 2020. Comparing the market microstructure between two South African exchanges. arXiv:2011.04367. [30] Jericevich, I., Chang, P., Gebbie, T., 2021a. Simulation and estimation of a point-process market-model with a matching engine. arXiv:2105.02211. [31] Jericevich, I., Sing, D., Gebbie, T., 2021b. Cointossx: An open-source low-latency high-throughput matching engine. arXiv:2102.10925. [32] Johannesburg Stock Exchange, 2013. New Equity Market Trad- ing and Information Solution: Volume 00 – Trading and Infor- mation Overview. Technical Report. JSE. V2.03. [33] Kahneman, D., Tversky, A., 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica 47, 363–391. doi: 10.2307/ 1914185. [34] Kullmann, L., T¨ oyli, J., Kertesz, J., Kanto, A., Kaski, K., 1999. Characteristic times in stock market indices. Phys- ica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 269, 98–110. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-4371(99)00084-9. [35] Kumar, P., Rupika, R., Vennilla, S., Abinaya, K., Mohandas, V., 2013. Implementing an agent based artiﬁcial stock market model in jade-an illustration. International Journal of Engineer- ing & Technology 5, 2636–2648. 18 [36] Leal, S.J., Napoletano, M., Roventini, A., Fagiolo, G., 2016. Rock around the clock: An agent-based model of low-and high- frequency trading. Journal of Evolutionary Economics 26, 49– 76. [37] LeBaron, B., 2000. Agent-based computational ﬁnance: Sug- gested readings and early research. Journal of Economic Dy- namics and Control 24, 679–702. doi: 10.1016/S0165-1889(99) 00022-6. [38] LeBaron, B., 2002. Building the santa fe artiﬁcial stock market. Physica A , 1–20. [39] LeBaron, B., 2006. Agent-based computational ﬁnance. Hand- book of computational economics 2, 1187–1233. doi: 10.1016/ S1574-0021(05)02024-1. [40] Lee, C.M.C., Ready, M.J., 1991. Inferring trade direction from intraday data. The Journal of Finance 46, 733–746. doi: 10. 1111/j.1540-6261.1991.tb02683.x. [41] Lillo, F., Farmer, J.D., 2007. The long memory of the eﬃcient market. Studies in Nonlinear Dynamics & Econometrics 8, 1–1. doi:10.2202/1558-3708.1226. [42] Lillo, F., Farmer, J.D., Mantegna, R., 2003. Master curve for price-impact function. Nature 421, 129–30. doi: 10.1038/ 421129a. [43] Mandelbrot, B.B., 1963. The variation of certain speculative prices. The Journal of Business 36, 394–419. [44] Mande¸ s, A., 2015. Microstructure-based order placement in a continuous double auction agent based model. Algorithmic Finance 4, 105–125. doi: 10.3233/AF-150049. [45] Microsoft, 2021. Microsoft Azure: Cloud Computing Service. URL: https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/. Accessed: 2021- 07-27. [46] Microsoft Azure, 2021. Av2-series. Overview of Linux VMs in Azure (PDF Documentation 3/10/2021). URL: https: //docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/ linux/overview. accessed: 2021-07-27. [47] Nelder, J.A., Mead, R., 1965. A simplex method for function minimization. The Computer Journal 7, 308–313. [48] Nuyts, J., 2010. Inference about the tail of a distribution: Im- provement on the hill estimator. International Journal of math- ematics and mathematical sciences 2010. doi: 10.1155/2010/ 924013. [49] Pagan, A., 1996. The econometrics of ﬁnancial markets. Jour- nal of empirical ﬁnance 3, 15–102. doi: 10.1016/0927-5398(95) 00020-8. [50] Platt, D., 2020. A comparison of economic agent-based model calibration methods. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Con- trol 113, 103859. doi: 10.1016/j.jedc.2020.103859. [51] Platt, D., Gebbie, T., 2016. The problem of cali- brating an agent-based model of high-frequency trading. arXiv:1606.01495. [52] Platt, D., Gebbie, T., 2018. Can agent-based models probe market microstructure? Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 503, 1092–1106. doi: 10.1016/j.physa.2018. 08.055. [53] Plerou, V., Gopikrishnan, P., Amaral, L.A.N., Gabaix, X., Stanley, H.E., 2000. Economic ﬂuctuations and anomalous dif- fusion. Physical Review E 62, R3023. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE. 62.R3023. [54] Ponta, L., Raberto, M., Cincotti, S., 2011. A multi-assets ar- tiﬁcial stock market with zero-intelligence traders. EPL (Euro- physics Letters) 93, 28002. doi: 10.1209/0295-5075/93/28002. [55] Preis, T., Golke, S., Paul, W., Schneider, J.J., 2006. Multi- agent-based order book model of ﬁnancial markets. EPL (Eu- rophysics Letters) 75, 510. doi: 10.1209/epl/i2006-10139-0. [56] Raman, N., Leidner, J.L., 2019. Financial market data simula- tion using deep intelligence agents, in: Demazeau, Y., Matson, E., Corchado, J.M., De la Prieta, F. (Eds.), International Con- ference on Practical Applications of Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, Springer. pp. 200–211. [57] Raman, N., Leidner, J.L., Vytelingum, K., Horrell, G., . Synthetic reality: Synthetic market data gen- eration at scale using agent based modeling. URL: https://www.simudyne.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/ Simudyne-Refinitiv-Paper.pdf. [58] Schmitt, N., Westerhoﬀ, F., 2017. On the bimodality of the distribution of the s&p 500’s distortion: Empirical evidence and theoretical explanations. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 80, 34–53. doi: 10.1016/j.jedc.2017.05.002. [59] Sing, D., 2017. Cointossx software. URL: https://github.com/ dharmeshsing/CoinTossX. [60] Sing, D., Gebbie, T., 2017. JSE Matching Engine Simulator. Master’s thesis. University of the Witwatersrand. URL: http: //wiredspace.wits.ac.za/handle/10539/25136. [61] Wang, L., Ahn, K., Kim, C., Ha, C., 2018. Agent-based mod- els in ﬁnancial market studies. Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1039, 012022. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/1039/1/012022. [62] Wilcox, D., Gebbie, T., . Hierarchical causality in ﬁnancial eco- nomics. Available at SSRN: doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ ssrn.2544327. [63] Winker, P., Gilli, M., Jeleskovic, V., 2007. An objective function for simulation based inference on exchange rate data. Journal of Economic Interaction and Coordination 2, 125–145. doi: 10. 1007/s11403-007-0020-4 . 19 Appendix A. Market data and messaging The basic procedure for submitting orders to CoinTossX is demonstrated in pseudocode 5 of Appendix B. We will discuss how diﬀerent order type submissions are speciﬁed. Instead of specifying limit order expiry durations, we cancel orders manually once their active time limit is reached. Cancellations require an order identiﬁcation number, a side and a price. These ﬁelds should match the limit order to be cancelled and is determined by the decision rules of the liquidity providers. Limit orders require a volume, side and price which are similarly determined by liquidity providers. Market order messages only require a side and volume. These ﬁelds are determined by the decision rules of the liquidity takers. We deviate slightly from original CoinTossX architecture in order to receive the market data from CoinTossX. Since Julia currently cannot integrate with Aeron media driver, we open another port in the matching engine for the forwarding of byte encoded messages via UDP. This is in response to issues regarding the LOB snapshot functionality previously used in Jericevich et al. [30]. First, requesting a snapshot of the LOB is not realistic from a trading/exchange point of view. Second, in the event of a large build of of orders in the LOB, requesting it often would compromise latency. Therefore, we assign a dedicated listener to the modelling framework in Julia that will continuously wait and receive market data messages as they occur. The LOB is built with each message update as a separate process and will form the “lit order book”. In terms of the feedback from each order submission, the market data feed is easy to customise and currently adopts the following format. Each report is represented by a single string which is encoded into a vector of bytes and sent via UDP to a speciﬁed port and address. The message is decoded back into a string in Julia to be processed. The reason for adopting this process is so that the transmitting speed is as fast as possible. This method also automates the process of receiving market data as opposed to manually requesting execution reports. The snippet below provides examples of messages transmitted. The ﬁrst ﬁeld provides the number of milliseconds since the unix epoch at which the event(s) arrived. The second speciﬁes the event type which will either be: “New” (limit order), ‘Trade” or “Cancelled”. The third ﬁeld speciﬁes the side of the order. The fourth ﬁeld provides the agent’s identity. More importantly, the last ﬁeld is given in vector form where each sub-vector contains the ID, price and volume of the order. In the second last case where a trade walked the LOB and executed against the ﬁrst two limit orders, two diﬀerent sub-vectors are recorded and corresponds to the single market order that was split into two and executed at two diﬀerent prices. 1621159225272,New,Buy,HF|1,50,100 1621159230899,New,Buy,HF|2,49,100 1621159235548,Trade,Sell,LF|1,50,100|2,49,50 1621159242341,Cancelled,Buy,HF|2,0,0 The data output follows the format below and is only written out to ﬁle once all clients are logged out at the end of the simulation so that latency is not compromised during trading sessions. Execution times are printed at millisecond precision. Each order is associated with the ID of the trader who submitted the order (“TraderMnemonic”), the ID assigned to the order (“ClientOrderId” used to track cancelled and executed orders) as well as the price, volume, side and type of the order. 17 Orders speciﬁed by the “New” type are limit orders. As shown below, CoinTossX duplicates individual trade events by printing both the full “unbroken” market order submitted as well as the split trades that have been executed at multiple prices. Unbroken market orders have a zero execution price. The unbroken market orders retain their assigned order IDs but the “split” market orders are assigned order IDs corresponding to the limit orders against which they were executed. Similarly, cancel orders are assigned the ID of the corresponding limit orders. "DateTime","TraderMnemonic","ClientOrderId","Price","Volume","Side","Type" "2021-05-19 11:35:34.827","1","1","20","100","Buy","New" "2021-05-19 11:35:43.405","1","3","0","150","Sell","Trade" "2021-05-19 11:35:43.406","1","2","49","100","Sell","Trade" "2021-05-19 11:35:43.415","1","1","20","50","Sell","Trade" "2021-05-19 11:35:47.027","1","2","49","0","Buy","Cancelled" "2021-05-19 11:35:59.973","1","4","50","100","Buy","New" 17Note that a single “client” logged in to CoinTossX need not be associated with a single trader. The “clients” in CoinTossX may be interpreted as a group of traders or an investment ﬁrm. 20 Appendix B. Simulation State-Flow Here we provide the simulation pseudocode for the agent-base model simulation framework. The framework starts with the basic logic for the updating the Limit-Order Book (LOB) (Algorithm 1), agent can then be activated from one of the three classes of agents: fundamentalists (Algorithm 2), liquidity providers (Algorithm 3), and chartists (Algorithm 4), and ﬁnally the submission of orders into the Matching Engine (ME) (Algorithm 5 to complete the order and agent activation sequence. The MMS listens for activation events. The Matching engine (ME) is separated from the Model Management System (MMS) as shown in Figure 1). The relationships between the algorithms in the MMS are shown in the simulation state-ﬂow diagram in Figure B.10. The deﬁnitions of key variables and parameters used in the simulation state-ﬂow are given in Table B.6. Fundamentalist (Algorithm 2) Liquidity provider (Algorithm 3) Chartist (Algorithm 4) LOB state (Algorithm 1) u∼U(0, 1)< ρt+1 2 ft <m t mt < ¯pt BuySell α = 1 + ρt ν η∼ Γ ( st,e −ρt κ )α = 1− ρt ν η∼ Γ ( st,e ρt κ ) px =at− 1−ηpx =bt + 1 +η ωx∝p−(α+1) x Submit to CoinTossX (Algorithm 5) Market Data Listener noyes Figure B.10: ABM simulation state ﬂow diagram . See Table B.6 for the deﬁnition of the variables and concepts used. The algorithm that updates the state of the Limit-Order Book (LOB) is given in Algorithm 1. The agent activation algorithms are given by algorithms 2, 3, and 4 for the implementations for the Fundamentalist, Liquidity provider and Chartist agents, respectively. The order injection algorithm with the order submission logic is given in Algorithm 5. 21 Deﬁnition Description Order An order is a tuple x = (px,ωx,tx) submitted at time tx with price px and size ωx > 0 and is a commitment to buy (sell) up to ωx units of a traded asset at a price no greater (less) than px. Limit order book A Limit Order-Book (LOB) L(t) is the set of all active orders in a market at time t. The active orders in a LOB can be partitioned into the set of active buy orders B(t) and the set of active sell ordersA(t). The LOB can then be considered as a set of queues at speciﬁed prices. Depth The bid-side depth and ask-side depth at price p and time t are given by: nb(p,t ) :=∑ x∈B(t)|px=pωx and na(p,t ) :=∑ x∈A(t)|px=pωx. Spread The bid-ask spread at time t is s(t) :=a(t)−b(t). Mid-price The mid-price at time t is m(t) := [a(t) +b(t)]/2. Imbalance The order imbalance at time t is ρ(t) := ∑ x∈B(t)ωx−∑ x∈A(t)ωx∑ x∈B(t)ωx+∑ x∈A(t)ωx Table B.6: Key market model deﬁnitions used in the ﬁnancial market agent-based model algorithms: 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 (see Figure B.10). Algorithm 1: Algorithm for updating the state of the LOB with the latest execution message from CoinTossX Input: A conﬁrmation or execution report string message from CoinTossX Output: The updated LOB state L(t) 1 Extract order type, price, side, volume and trader identiﬁcation ﬁelds 2 if A new limit order has been conﬁrmed then 3 if Buy limit order then Add limit order xti toB(t) 4 else Add limit order xti toA(t) 5 else if A trade has been executed then 6 if Buy market order then Remove the executed volume from the limit order having the corresponding ID in A(t) 7 else Remove the executed volume from the limit order having the corresponding ID in B(t) 8 else if A limit order has been cancelled then 9 if Buy limit order then Remove the limit order having the corresponding ID from B(t) 10 else Buy limit order 11 Remove the limit order having the corresponding ID from A(t) 12 end 13 ifA(t)⁄=∅ andB(t)⁄=∅ then 14 Update a(t) and b(t) with the current updated LOB state L(t) 15 else 16 ifA(t)⁄=∅ then Update a(t) with the current updated LOB state L(t) 17 ifB(t)⁄=∅ then Update b(t) with the current updated LOB state L(t) 18 end 19 Update s(t) , m(t) and ρ(t) with the current or historic LOB state 22 Algorithm 2: Fundamentalist agent action algorithm Input: LOB stateLt, agent parameters ft and simulation parameters θ Output: Market order xi = (0,ωxi,txi) 1 if (m(t)−ft)>δm (t) then xm = 50 2 else xm = 20 3 if ft <m (t) then 4 xi is a sell order 5 α = 1− ρ(t) ν 6 else 7 xi is a buy order 8 α = 1 + ρ(t) ν 9 end 10 if The contra side of LOB Lt is non-empty then Submit market order xi with volume ωxi∼f(x; 10,α ) Power Law distribution with tail index parameter α (eq. (2)) Algorithm 3: Liquidity provider agent action algorithm Input: LOB stateLt and simulation parameters θ Output: Limit order xi = (pxi,ωxi,txi) 1 Sample u∼U(0, 1) 2 if u< (ρ(t) + 1)/2 then xi is a sell order 3 else xi is a buy order 4 if xi is a sell order then 5 α = 1− (ρ(t)/ν) 6 Sample η∼ Γ ( s(t),e ρ(t) κ ) 7 Set the limit price as pxi =b(t) + 1−⌈η⌉ 8 Set the volume as ωxi∼ Power Law distribution with tail index parameter α 9 else 10 α = 1 + (ρ(t)/ν) 11 Sample η∼ Γ ( s(t),e −ρ(t) κ ) 12 Set the limit price as pxi =b(t)− 1−⌈η⌉ 13 Set the volume as ωxi∼f(x; 10,α ) Power Law distribution with tail index parameter α (eq. (2)) 14 end Algorithm 4: Chartist agent action algorithm Input: LOB stateLt, agent parameters τ and pt, and simulation parameters θ Output: Market order xi = (0,ωxi,txi) 1 Compute the agent’s decision inter-arrival time ∆t 2 λ = 1−e−∆t/τ 3 Set the agent’s EWMA pt =λ(m(t)−pt) 4 if (m(t)−pt)>δm (t) then xm = 50 5 else xm = 20 6 if m(t)<pt then 7 xi is a sell order 8 α = 1− ρ(t) ν 9 else 10 xi is a buy order 11 α = 1 + ρ(t) ν 12 end 13 if The contra side of LOB Lt is non-empty then Submit market order xi with volume ωxi∼f(x;xm,α ) Power Law distribution with tail index parameter α (eq. (2)) Appendix C. Expected stylised facts We present a selection of stylised facts useful to constrain simple order book agent-based models. For more extensive lists of the empirical facts of ﬁnancial markets we suggest readers refer to Bouchaud et al. [5], Chakraborti et al. [8], Cont [13], Gould et al. [24], Lillo and Farmer [41], Pagan [49], and Schmitt and Westerhoﬀ [58]. One key attribute of agent- based modelling is the idea that simple relational rules and interactions between agents can generate a variety of complex 23 Algorithm 5: Basic logic for the submission of orders to CoinTossX Input: Agent and simulation parameters θ 1 Initialise agents with their submission times, order types and order IDs 2 Set the initial LOB state L(0) with values for s(0), a(0), b(0), m(0) 3 Login a single client to CoinTossX to trade in a single security 4 Open the market data feed socket by connecting to the correct port and IP address for the receival of UDP message packets 5 Convert agent relative decision times to calendar time 6 foreachxi = (pxi,ωxi,txi) with i∈ 1,...,T do 7 if txi is the liquidity providers’ decision time then 8 if xi is a limit order then 9 Set order ﬁelds pxi and ωxi according the liquidity provider decision rules 10 else 11 Cancel the limit order having the current order’s pre-assigned order ID 12 end 13 else if txi is the liquidity providers’ decision time then 14 if The static price reference does not deviate from the bes by more than 10% then 15 if Agent is a chartist then 16 Set order ﬁelds pxi and ωxi according the chartist decision rules 17 else if Agent is a fundamentalist then 18 Set order ﬁelds pxi and ωxi according the fundamentalist decision rules 19 end 20 end 21 end 22 Receive UDP conﬁrmation/execution message from CoinTossX that corresponds to the current order submitted 23 Update the LOB state L(t) 24 end 25 Disconnect from the market data feed port 26 Log out from CoinTossX and dynamic in-sample distributional features; features that do not need to be directly (and distributionally) encoded into the model representation. Rather the distributional properties and various features emerge from the aggregate interaction between agents and their environment. 24 Feature Description Return auto-correlations The absence of auto-correlations in price ﬂuctuations is sometimes cited as support for random walk models and the Eﬃcient Market Hypothesis (EMH) because the presence of auto-correlations in the returns from ﬁnancial markets would imply the existence of very simple strategies for making money using only knowledge of past share prices co-movements [13]. Given the great incentives people have to make money, it follows that such opportunities would quickly be snatched upon by traders up until the point where the opportunity no longer exists through the cancelling out of auto-correlations by the behaviour of the traders. Thus, the existence of this stylised fact, when considering returns over a suﬃcient period of time is intuitive. More importantly as related to the order book, returns on bid-ask prices exhibit a signiﬁcant negative ﬁrst lag auto-correlation [13], suggesting fast mean reversion at the tick resolution. The absence of auto-correlations does not hold for time-scales greater than a week [13]. Heavy/Fat tails Mandelbrot [43]: The distribution of returns being leptokurtic, where a distribution is considered leptokurtic if its kurtosis is greater than that of the Normal distribution (kurtosis = 3).Returns at the extreme percentiles or tails are found to exhibit a power-law distribution with tail index 2 < α <5 – even after correcting returns for volatility clustering via GARCH-type models, the residual time series still exhibit fat tails. Suggested distributions include the generalized hyperbolic Student-t, the normal inverse Gaussian, the exponentially truncated stable, etc [8, 49]. Aggregational Gaussianity Kullmann et al. [34]: The distribution of returns as the time-scale at which they are calculated ∆t increases, tends to normality. This feature becomes more apparent when calculating log-returns in trade time [8]. Volatility clustering Biais et al. [2] and Mandelbrot [43]: The slow decay in the auto-correlations of the absolute value of price ﬂuctuations is indicative of long memory, and large changes in ﬁnancial markets returns tend to be grouped together. Gain/Loss asymmetry Large drops in prices tend to be observed more frequently than large price increases [33]. Trade-sign auto-correlation Order-ﬂow in equity markets are persistent. That is, buy orders tend to be followed by more buy orders and sell orders tend to be followed by more sell orders. This feature is usually attributed to agent herding behaviour and trade splitting [41]. Depth proﬁles Mean relative depth proﬁles exhibit a hump shape in a wide range of markets. The maximal mean depth available is most often reported to occur at bt and at (at a relative price of 0) [2, 5, 24]. Volume-volatility correlation Trading volume is correlated with all measures of volatility. It has been shown that the variance of log-returns after N trades is proportional to N [53]. Other desirable features The bimodality of a security’s price distortion [58] — a feature that is diﬃcult to explain by the EMH, the Epps eﬀect [11, 17], the leverage eﬀect — where most measures of volatility are correlated with returns, the power-law placement of limit orders around the best quotes , and the Power-law distribution of trade inter-arrival times, order volumes, and limit order average lifetime are other desirable features we would hope to be able to recover or conform to with a reasonably representative model of ﬁnancial market interactions. Table C.7: Summaries of some useful ﬁnancial market stylised facts used to inform the model and parameter constraints. Appendix D. Sensitivity analysis results 25 Figure D.11: Mid-Price Moments: Summary statistics box-plots for each individual parameter-moment combination calculated on both simulated mid-price time-series. Columns represent individual moments while rows represent individual parameters. The vertical axis of each plot gives the values of the moments and the horizontal axis gives the unique parameter values chosen. 26 Figure D.12: Micro-price Moments: Summary statistics box-plots for each individual parameter-moment combination calculated on both simulated micro-price. Columns represent individual moments while rows represent individual parameters. The vertical axis of each plot gives the values of the moments and the horizontal axis gives the unique parameter values chosen. 27 (a) Mid-price Kurtosis surfaces for δ & κ and N & ν (b) Micro-price Kurtosis surfaces for δ & κ and N & ν (c) Mid-price Hurst exponent surfaces for δ & κ and N & ν (d) Micro-price Hurst exponent surfaces for δ & κ and N & ν (e) Mid-price Hill estimator surfaces for δ & κ and N & ν (f) Micro-price Hill estimator surfaces for δ & κ and N & ν (g) Mid-price GPH statistic surfaces for δ & κ and N & ν (h) Micro-price GPH statistic surfaces for δ & κ and N & ν Figure D.13: Moment surfaces for pairwise combinations of parameters calculated on simulated log-returns and averaged over all combinations of other parameters 28 Appendix E. Heuristic optimisation (a) Convergence criterion and objective ﬁtness values of the best vertex (b) Objective ﬁtnesses of vertices in the simplex Figure E.14: NMTA optimization results are visualised through traces of the convergence criterion and simplex objective values Standard local optimisation methods are prone to failure because such an objective function does not always behave well to guarantee a global optimum solution. The objective function, built when taking into account the statistical properties of data, is not smooth or globally convex. There tends to be many local optima, so it is important to use an optimisation routine that is able to escape these local optima. Furthermore, due to the complexity of the problem and the nature of agent-based models, ﬁnding a global optimum is very computationally intensive, so any optimisation routine used should be able to eﬃciently explore the parameter space. Using the methodology proposed in the paper by Gilli and Winker [21], we describe the Nelder-Mead with threshold accepting algorithm for the global optimisation of the objective function. In particular we follow the approach of Gao and Han [19] when deﬁning adaptive Nelder-Mead parameters that take into account the dimensionality of the optimisation problem. In the Nelder-Mead (NM) simplex algorithm, each current solution has n free moving parameters which consists of n+1 vertices of a simplex in the parameter spaceΘ. Each vertex represents a set of values for the free moving parameters of the model. At each iteration, the algorithm shifts the simplex according to either reﬂection, expansion, contraction and shrinkage. These steps are repeated until the iteration limit is reached or the convergence criterion is met. For non-convex functions such as the one dealt with here, the simplex shrinks rapidly to local minima. The standard threshold accepting (TA) algorithm considers only a single point in the parameter space. A single step consists of shifting the value of a randomly chosen parameter to a neighbouring value (however that may be deﬁned). If the new point obtained represents an improvement in ﬁtness it is accepted as the new current solution. However, even if the new point is slightly worse, it will still be accepted as the new current solution provided the drop in ﬁtness does not exceed a predeﬁned threshold. This improves the ability of the algorithm to escape local minima in the objective function. The ﬁtness thresholds τ =τ1,...,τ r are decreased at set length intervals/rounds to allow for convergence to a more globally optimal solution at the end of the optimisation. Four diﬀerent relative thresholds are chosen to explore the local structure of the objective function along with a ﬁxed number of steps ns ={14, 12, 10, 8} for each round respectively. The Nelder-Mead simplex method provides an eﬃcient way of identifying the search direction while threshold accepting helps to avoid local minima. Now considering a combination of the two algorithms, each iteration uses either the Nelder- Mead search or Threshold Accepting random shift with a probability of (1−ξ) andξ respectively. The Nelder-Mead search will have a higher probability of being chosen. In the TA algorithm, the magnitude of the random shift is dependent on the mean value (over the simplex) of the parameter being shifted. In addition to the TA algorithm, threshold accepting is also applied to the simplex search by ensuring that reﬂection, expansion, contraction and shrinkage perturbations are evaluated against threshold adjusted ﬁtness such that a worse ﬁtness may be accepted in the simplex search as well. The trace results of the optimisation routine are visualised in Figure E.14. Close to convergence was reached near 40 iterations with no thresholds being applied in the last few iterations. Vertices in the simplex were close to converging to the best with no signiﬁcant improvement in the best vertex for subsequent iterations. 18 18Optimisation with CoinTossX and the Julia-Java wrapper was initially prone to crashes in the Julia environment. It was suspected to be a Julia memory and garbage collection issue that came with very long consecutive simulations. It is noted that CoinTossX was designed purely as a matching engine for simulations, rather than a tool to be used for calibration. 29