Deep Hawkes Process for High-Frequency Market Making Pankaj Kumar∗ Abstract High-frequency market making is a liquidity-providing trading strategy that simultaneously generates many bids and asks for a security at ultra-low la- tency while maintaining a relatively neutral position. The strategy makes a proﬁt from the bid-ask spread for every buy and sell transaction, against the risk of adverse selection, uncertain execution and inventory risk. We de- sign realistic simulations of limit order markets and develop a high-frequency market making strategy in which agents process order book information to post the optimal price, order type and execution time. By introducing the Deep Hawkes process to the high-frequency market making strategy, we al- low a feedback loop to be created between order arrival and the state of the limit order book, together with self- and cross-excitation eﬀects. Our high- frequency market making strategy accounts for the cancellation of orders that inﬂuence order queue position, proﬁtability, bid-ask spread and the value of the order. The experimental results show that our trading agent outperforms the baseline strategy, which uses a probability density estimate of the fun- damental price. We investigate the eﬀect of cancellations on market quality and the agent’s proﬁtability. We validate how closely the simulation frame- work approximates reality by reproducing stylised facts from the empirical analysis of the simulated order book data. 1 Introduction Technological innovations and regulatory initiatives in the ﬁnancial market have led to the traditional exchange ﬂoor being displaced by the electronic ∗Copenhagen Business School, Denmark. Email:pk.mpp@cbs.dk 1 arXiv:2109.15110v1 [cs.CE] 30 Sep 2021 exchange. The electronic exchange is a fully automated trading system pro- grammed to incisively enforce order precedence, pricing and the matching of buy and sell orders. Each order’s pricing, submission and execution is performed using sophisticated algorithmic trading strategies, which account for 85% of the equity market’s trading volume (Mukerji et al., 2019). High- frequency trading (HFT, or high-frequency trader), a subset of algorithmic trading, is characterised by exceptionally high speeds, minuscule timeframes and complex programs for initiating and liquidating positions (SEC, 2014). The critical discussion on the role of HFT in a fragmented market has been reignited after the Flash Crash of 6 May 2010 (Kirilenko et al., 2017). This systemic intra-day anomaly only lasted for a couple of minutes, but tem- porarily wiped away a trillion dollars in market value. The analysis of agents resolved transaction level data in the E-mini by Kirilenko et al. (2017) also looks at the behaviour of market makers, whose inventory dynamics remain stationary in conditions of ﬂuctuating liquidity. Even though the market design of E-mini has no high-frequency market maker liability, unlike equity markets, this seminal paper(Kirilenko et al., 2017) gave a boost to research aimed at understanding high-frequency market making or other liquidity- providing strategies in an algorithmic trading setting. Market making is a liquidity-providing trading strategy that quotes nu- merous bids and asks for a security in anticipation of making a proﬁt from a bid-ask spread, while maintaining a relatively neutral position (Chakraborty and Kearns, 2011). The high-frequency market making strategy can be char- acterised as subset of HFT that uses latency, at a scale of nanoseconds, to trade in a fragmented market (Menkveld, 2013). The growing literature re- ports that the market makers provide quality liquidity, improve market qual- ity, contribute to price eﬃciency and have a positive but moderate welfare eﬀect (Kirilenko et al., 2017; Brogaard et al., 2014; Menkveld, 2013). How- ever, there is another strand in the literature that argues that the quality of liquidity is deceptive. The orders are characterised as phantom liquidity, which quickly disappears before other market participants can access it. The optimal design of market making strategies is therefore an important question for practical applicability, market design and security exchange regulations. The research on market making spans numerous disciplines, including ﬁnance (Ho and Stoll, 1981; Glosten and Milgrom, 1985; O’Hara and Old- ﬁeld, 1986; Avellaneda and Stoikov, 2008; Gu´ eant et al., 2013; Cartea et al., 2014; Ait-Sahalia and Saglam, 2017), agent-based modeling (Das, 2005; Preis et al., 2006; Wah et al., 2017; Chao et al., 2018), and artiﬁcial intelligence (Spooner et al., 2018; Ganesh et al., 2019; Kumar, 2020). Inspired by seminal work of Ho and Stoll (1981) and its mathematical formulation (Avellaneda and Stoikov, 2008), the quintessential research in ﬁnance considers market 2 making as a stochastic optimal control problem. In a simplistic setting, the market is modelled as a stochastic process, in which market makers try to maximise the expected utility of their proﬁt and loss under inventory con- straints (Gu´ eant et al., 2013). In parallel to inventory-based models, Glosten and Milgrom (1985) proposed information-based models, in which market makers face adverse selection risk emerging from informed traders. The un- realistic assumptions placed on market models to mathematically extract the market maker’s asset pricing forces researchers to look beyond stochastic optimal control approaches. Market making has also been extensively investigated in agent-based modelling (ABM, or agent-based model) literature (Das, 2005; Wah et al., 2017). The ABMs in market making evolved from zero intelligence to an in- telligent variant by incorporating order book microstructure for order place- ment, execution and pricing policy. For example, Muni Toke (2011) rein- forced the zero-intelligence market maker model with order arrival following mutually exciting Hawkes processes. The Hawkes process has been exhaus- tively used in an empirical estimation and calibration of market microstruc- ture models deemed essential for designing optimal market-making strategies (Muni Toke, 2011; Hawkes, 2018; Morariu-Patrichi and Pakkanen, 2018). In these models, the arrival rate of orders is not dependent on the state of the limit order book. However, the empirical results suggest the existence of feedback loop between order arrival and the state of the limit order book, together with self- and cross-excitation eﬀects, for which current models fail to account (Gonzalez and Schervish, 2017; Morariu-Patrichi and Pakkanen, 2018). In addition, the Hawkes process constrains the parametric speciﬁca- tion for conditional intensity, which limits the model’s eloquence. To tackle the parametric speciﬁcation problem, Mei and Eisner (2017) proposed the Neural Hawkes process, in which the Hawkes process is generalised by calcu- lating the event intensities from the hidden state of a long short-term memory (LSTM). Despite the success of the Neural Hawkes process in natural lan- guage processing (Mei and Eisner, 2017), the facile LSTM architecture might be inadequate when it comes to modelling noisy, asynchronous order book events. In recent years, deep learning has made signiﬁcant inroads into high- fre- quency ﬁnance. The Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architecture and its variants were used to model price-formation mechanisms using order book events as input (Sirignano, 2019; Cont and Sirignano, 2019; Tashiro et al., 2019; Tsantekidis et al., 2017). However, the CNN architectures are not so- phisticated enough to capture self- and cross-excitation eﬀects in the limit order book (LOB) (Zhang et al., 2019). The deep long-short term memory (DLSTM) architecture performs a hierarchical processing of complex order 3 book events, and as such is able to capture the temporal structures of LOB (Sagheer and Kotb, 2019a,b). However, training the DLSTM model directly through stochastic gradient descents, initialised with random parameters, may have led to the backpropagation algorithm being trapped within mul- tiple local minima (Sagheer and Kotb, 2019b; Vincent et al., 2010). To circumvent the aforementioned limitations, the literature proposed an unsu- pervised pre-training of each layer and a stacking of many convolutional layers (Vincent et al., 2010). We use Stacking Denoising Autoencoders (SDAEs) together with DLSTM to resolve the random weight initialisation problem in base architecture (Sagheer and Kotb, 2019b). In addition, SDAEs are quite eﬀective at ﬁltering out noisy order-level data at minuscule resolutions. The exemplary predictive performance of deep-learning models has en- couraged researchers to augment order book data with agent-based artiﬁ- cial market simulation, for the purpose of investigating algorithmic trading strategies (Maeda et al., 2020). The success of the model is dependent on the simulation framework of the ﬁnancial market being close to realism. How- ever, algorithmic trading research is still waiting for market simulators that could be used for developing, training, and testing algorithms in a manner similar to classic Atari 2600 games simulator (Mnih et al., 2015). In this pa- per, we develop realistic simulations of the ﬁnancial market and use them to design a high-frequency market making agent using the Deep Hawkes process (DHP). The DHP models the streams of order book events by constructing a self-exciting multivariate Hawkes process and a limit order state process, which are coupled and interact with each other. Based on a long stream of high-frequency transaction-level order book data for the diﬀerent events (e.g. buy, sell, cancel, etc), the high-frequency market makers use DHP to accurately predict every held-out event. 1.1 Contribution This paper is the ﬁrst to incorporate DHP into the market making strategy, which allows feedback loops between order arrival and the state of the limit order book, together with self- and cross-excitation eﬀects. We extend the neurally self-modulating multivariate point process (Mei and Eisner, 2017) to the deep framework by stacking SDAE with DLSTM, resulting in DLSTM- SDAE. The SDAE resolves the problem associated with weight initialisation, multiple local minima and ultra-noisy order book data that the stacked re- current network fails to address. Our approach outperforms the NHP in predicting the next order type and its time. The gained predictive power helps agents to outperform the benchmark market making strategy, and uses a probability density estimate of the fundamental price. We outline our 4 contribution below: 1. We designed a multi-asset simulation framework that is scalable and can augment markets of substantial size. The framework is built on realistic market architecture, interface kernels, a matching engine and the Financial Information eXchange (FIX) protocol. 2. We are ﬁrst to introduce a feedback loop between order arrival and the state of the order book using DHP in the high-frequency market making setting. 3. We investigate the predictive and trading performance of the agents with the benchmark. 4. We explore the eﬀect of cancellation on order queue position, agent’s proﬁtability, bid-ask spread, and value of order relative to queue po- sition, in order to verify the existing empirical ﬁndings (Moallemi and Yuan, 2017; Dahlstr¨ om et al., 2018). 1.2 Structure The paper is organized as follow. Section 2 presents the background to the limit order book, market making, Hawkes process, Neural Hawkes process, and long short-term memory. Section 3 explores the research stream in mar- ket making strategies. Section 4 explains the novel deep Hawkes process. Section 5 illustrates the multi-agent simulation framework. Section 6 elab- orates on the experimental conﬁguration. Section 7 provides the results of the experiments. Section 8 presents our conclusions. 2 Background In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the limit order book together with basic deﬁnitions. We then brieﬂy present examples of market making strategy, and review essential tools for designing and investigating the classical market making model. We start with the Hawkes process, the assumptions of which are violated in the ﬁnancial markets. To check the missing links of the Hawkes process, we describe the Neural Hawkes process. Finally, we discuss the LSTM framework, which represents a divergence from selecting a parametric form for the conditional intensity in the Hawkes process variants. 5 2.1 Limit Order Books The LOB is a centralised database for outstanding orders submitted by traders to buy or sell a speciﬁed number of securities on an exchange. Fig- ure 1 illustrates an example of the reconstructed LOB for Apple securities traded on NASDAQ. The smallest increment by which the price of the secu- rity can move is called a tick. The highest price at time t for which there is outstanding buy order is called bid price(168.60), while the lowest sell price is called ask price (168.50). The bid-ask spread (0.10) at time t is deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the ask and bid prices. The mid price (150.05) at time t is the arithmetic average of the bid and the ask. For an in-depth review of deﬁnitions, mechanisms and nomenclature, please refer to Gould et al. (2013). 168.3 168.4 168.5 168.6 168.8 Price 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 Volume 168.7 Figure 1: Limit order book at NASDAQ for Apple Inc. (AAPL) on March 29th, 2018. In an exchange, the traders can primarily submit three diﬀerent types of orders: limit orders, market orders, and cancellation orders. A limit order 6 is an order to buy or sell a particular number of securities at a speciﬁed price or better. A market order is an order to immediately buy or sell a certain number of securities at the best available price in the LOB. The arrival of market orders is instantly executed against the best available price in the limit order book. Orders that exceed the size available at the best price automatically spill over to the next best available price. Unlike market orders, the limit orders rest in the order book, pending execution against a market order or being partially or fully canceled by traders. The limit orders posted near to bid and ask are executed instantly, but may be prolonged if market prices diverge from the requested price. Market makers utilise this attribute to design optimal trading strategies (Spooner et al., 2018). In an exchange, several orders posted by traders can have the same price at a given time t. To eﬀectively match the orders within each discrete price level, the LOBs employ various priority mechanism algorithms. The algo- rithm most commonly employed by various exchanges is price-time. In this case, for buy or sell orders, the matching algorithms give priority to the or- ders with the highest or lowest price. In the event of ties, preference is given to orders with the earliest submission time relative to other orders (Gould et al., 2013). Other prominent priority mechanism algorithms include pro- rata and price-size. Under the pro-rata algorithms, the ties at the given price are broken by distributing orders according to the depth in the LOB, while price-size mechanism algorithms break the ties by giving higher prior- ity to larger orders. Our study makes use of price-time priority mechanism algorithms, as these encourage market makers to submit limit orders when designing their trading strategies. 2.2 High-Frequency Market Making Market making is a liquidity-providing trading strategy that quotes nu- merous bids and asks for a security in anticipation of making a proﬁt in the form of bid-ask spread, while maintaining a relatively neutral position (Chakraborty and Kearns, 2011). The modern market making strategy or high-frequency market making strategy can also be characterized as subset of HFT, where traders uses ”lightning fast with a latency (inter-message time) upper bound of 1 millisecond, only engages in proprietary trading, generates many trades (it participates in 14.4% of all trades, split almost evenly across both markets), and starts and ends most trading days with a zero net position” (Menkveld, 2013). The foundation of designing optimal market making strategies is dependent on optimising order-handling costs, adversely selected bid or ask quote costs, and non-zero position risk-averse costs(Menkveld, 2013). 7 In order to better understand high-frequency market making, let us con- sider a simple example from LOB illustrated in Figure 1. The market making strategy places a buy order at 100 .00 and sell order at 100 .10. The execu- tion of the both orders will give the traders proﬁt of 00 .10, which is also the spread. As millions of market maker’s trades are executed each second, they can amass huge proﬁts. However, high-frequency market making strategies are always exposed to the risk of adverse price movements, uncertain executions and adverse selections (Penalva et al., 2015). To avoid the above risks, the high-frequency market making strategies seek to compete in the market through lower order- processing costs, fast matching engines and low latency. The fast matching engine reduces the adverse selection risk by facilitating a market-making strategy to immediately update quotes on the arrival order book information, while low latency reduces the search for market venues to mitigate a costly non-zero inventory position (Penalva et al., 2015; Menkveld, 2013). The array of sophisticated statistical or machine learning models used on the real-time order book data serve to optimise the transaction costs, which are directly related to proﬁtability. 2.3 Hawkes Process To set the stage for Hawkes process, we ﬁrst explicate key concept related to counting process, point process, and conditional intensity function from the classical literature (Gao et al., 2018; Hawkes, 2018; Bacry et al., 2015; Embrechts et al., 2011). Let us consider a positive sequence of event arrival time, {tn}n∈N, such that∀ n∈ N, tn < tn+1, deﬁned on probability space (Ω ,F, P) with almost surely ﬁnite, right-continuous step function deﬁned for all t∈ R+, and com- plete information ﬁltration (Ft)t≥0, such that F =FN(t), t≥ 0. Then the counting process N(t) and its analogous point process L(t) is deﬁned as: N(t) = ∑ n∈N Itn≤t and L(t) = ∑ n∈N 𝓁n· Itn≤t (2.1) where I{.} is the indicator function and {𝓁n : n≥ 1} is a sequence of non- negative random variable having independent and identical distribution. In academic literature, counting and point process terminology is often indistinguishable. The reader is expected to infer the nature of the process depending on the context. For example, point process are often characterized by the distribution function of the occurrence of the event conditioned to the past, but problems associated with the conditional arrival distribution mean that this is not very practical. Instead, the conditional intensity function is 8 used. For counting process N(t) with associated history H(t) and adapted to a ﬁltration F, we deﬁne the conditional intensity as: λ(t|F) = lim h→0 E [(N(t +h)−N(t))|H(t) h ⏐⏐⏐⏐F ] (2.2) We now deﬁne Hawkes process characterized by intensityλ(t) with respect to its natural ﬁltration as: λ(t|F) =µ(t) + ∫ t −∞ φ(t−τ) dN(τ) (2.3) where µ is an the baseline intensity and φ is a non-negative kernel function such that||φ||1 = ∫∞ 0 φ(τ)dτ <1. Prominent kernel function used in ﬁnance is exponential decay φ(t) = αe−βt, where parameter α represents previous event weight and β past event duration. Now, we consider N(t) = {Ni t}M i=1 as the M-dimensional counting pro- cess, and its analogous point process as {Li t}M i=1. Similarly, we deﬁne the multidimensional Hawkes process as: λi(t|F) =µi + M∑ j=1 ∫ t 0 φi,j(t−τ)dNj(τ), (2.4) where, µ ={µi}M i=1 a baseline intensity vector and φ(t) = {φi,j(t)}M i,j=1 a matrix-valued kernel that is component-wise non-negative, causal, and L1- integrable (Bacry et al., 2015). We can also enrich the Equation 2.4 by associating each event with time of eventtn, its component κn and markkn. For example, modeling the trades performed at event time tn with diﬀerent volumekn and drawdown intensity κn (Bacry et al., 2015). The vector intensity function of the multivariate marked Hawkes process will be deﬁned as: λi(t,n|F) =µi + M∑ j=1 ∫ t 0 φi,j(t−τ)ψj(n)dNj(τ×δ), (2.5) where, µ ={µi}M i=1 a exogenous intensities vector, φ(t) = {φi,j(t)}M i,j=1 a matrix-valued kernel and ψj(n) a impact function of marks. The properties of the Hawkes process can be characterized thoroughly in an analytical manner due to the linear structure of the stochastic intensity (Hawkes, 2018; Bacry et al., 2015).The linear properties of a Hawkes process enable linear predictions of the models, given their base intensity and the kernels as parameters (the kernels are non-parametrically calibrated from 9 the data). A Hawkes process can be appropriately approximated as auto- regressive process, wiener processes, and clustering representation (Bacry et al., 2015). Simply put by Mei and Eisner (2017), ” the Hawkes process sup- poses that past events can temporarily raise the probability of future events, assuming that such excitation is positive, additive over the past events, and exponentially decaying with time”. In a simpliﬁed setting, these proper- ties might be useful for modelling constrained processes, but might not be applicable to real world examples. For example, at large scales, the price for- mation process’s microscopic variables, as they relate to order book events, do not diﬀuse toward Wiener processes. Similarly, the massive cancellation of orders in LOB might inhibit price rather than exciting it. 2.4 Neural Hawkes Process The Neural Hawkes Process was (NHP) introduced to ﬁll the gaps in the Hawkes process’s unrealistic assumptions. Building on the earlier formula- tion, the positivity constraints on baseline intensity vector µ, kernels φ, and decay rate δ limit the eloquentness of Hawkes process. It fails to capture inhibition and inherent inertia eﬀect, which are characteristics of realistic ﬁnancial market (Mei and Eisner, 2017). Let{tn, κn,kn}n∈N is a event streams, where tn are times of occurrence of an event, its component κn, and their corresponding mark {kn}n∈N in kn :={1,...,K }. Then, the probability of incidence of next event at time tn of type kn is P{(tn, κn,kn)|H n, (tn−tn−1)}dt. The associated intensity function conditioned on the past events h for self-exciting multivariate point process or Hawkes process with exponentially decaying kernel function is: λk(t) =µk + ∑ h:th<T =αkh,k exp(−βkh,k(t−th)), (2.6) The inhibition and inherent inertia eﬀect are introduced in the self-modulating model, where we relax positivity constraints on parameters α and µ. The negative total resultant activation is then passed through non-linear transfer function (e.g. rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) function, softplus function etc.) such that: λk(t) =fk(˜λk(t)), (2.7) ˜λk(t) =µk + ∑ h:th<t αkh,k exp(−βkh,k(t−th)). (2.8) 10 where µk < 0, αj,k < 0 allows inertia and inhibition eﬀect respectively (Mei and Eisner, 2017). The summation in Equations 2.8 places a restriction on the ˜λk(t), where past events have an independent and additive inﬂuence. This deviates from reality, which is characterised by the existence of complex dependence be- tween the intensities in terms of number of order event types and past event timings (Bacry et al., 2015). Mei and Eisner (2017) proposed the Neural Hawkes Process to learn and predict complex dependency by replacing the summation with a novel recurrent neural network. In this novel process, the hidden state vector h(t) controls the dynamics of time varying event intensi- ties, which in turn depends on a vector c(t) of memory cells in a continuous- time long short-term memory (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997). 2.5 Long Short-Term Memory The central idea of LSTM is the use of memory cell , which overcomes the problem associated with vanishing gradient (Arras et al., 2019). The memory cell of LSTM is a complex unit, built from alike nodes in a distinct connec- tivity pattern, with the novel inclusion of multiplicative nodes, represented in ﬁgure 2. A typical LSTM memory cell architecture contains a cell input activation vectorxt, an input gateit, a forget gateft, a cellct, an output gate ot and an output responseht. The distinctive feature of the LSTM approach, input gate and forget gate, govern the information ﬂow into and out of the cell according to gate logic. Whereas, the output gate controls the amount of information ﬂow from the cell to the outputht. A self-connected recurrent edge with ﬁxed unit weight in the memory cell ensures that error can ﬂow across many time steps without vanishing or exploding. 11 Figure 2: LSTM Memory Cell (Zhu et al., 2016). At each time step t, the recursive computation in the LSTM model pro- ceeds according to the following equations: it =σ (Wxixt + Whiht−1 + Wcict−1 + bi), ft =σ ( Wxfxt + Whfht−1 + Wcfct−1 + bf ) , ct =φ (Wxcxt+Whcht−1+bc), ct = ft⊙ ct−1+ it⊙ ct, ot =σ (Wxoxt + Whoht−1 + Wcoct + bo), ht = ot⊙φ (ct), (2.9) where xt is input vector at time t, the activation function σ (x) / φ (x) is deﬁned as sigmoid σ (x) = 1/(1 +e−x) / φ (x) = tanh, WAB is the weight matrix between A and B (e.g., Wxi is the weight matrix from the inputs xt to the input gates it), bB denotes the bias term ofB withB∈{i,f,c,o } and ⊙ denotes point-wise multiplication of the two vectors. To ensure compre- 12 hensibility with standard literature, we follow the same naming conventions discussed in the paper by Zhu et al. (2016). 3 Literature Review In this section, we brieﬂy review three prominent streams of research into how the Hawkes process is used to design market making strategies. We are well aware of blurred and overlapping boundaries across research streams, but strongly believe in capturing the essence of Hawkes models in market making. 3.1 Stochastic Optimal Control The classical ﬁnance literature employs a stochastic optimal control frame- work to determine market maker’s optimal quotes for bid and ask in the pres- ence of inventory risk, adverse selection, information asymmetry and latency (Ho and Stoll, 1981; Sandas, 2001; Avellaneda and Stoikov, 2008; Penalva et al., 2015). The market maker aims to maximise the expected utility of the proﬁt and loss contour at closing time. By integrating a utility framework into the microstructure of LOB, Avellaneda and Stoikov (2008) were able to analytically derive optimal bid and ask quotes. In the continuous-time model, the mid-prices evolve according to Brownian motion, and the order arrival follows a Poisson process. In one particular case, a non-homogeneous Poisson process is reduced to the Hawkes process (Bacry et al., 2015). The unrealistic assumptions limit the model’s ability to capture adverse selection eﬀects, market impact and autocorrelation structures in the security being traded. Building on the seminal work oﬀ Avellaneda and Stoikov (2008), numerous researchers looked at price impact, adverse selection eﬀects, and latency, together with diﬀerent objective functions (Penalva et al., 2015). The purpose of all of the improvements in the model is to provide numerical approximations for the associated stochastic diﬀerential equations. However, problems related to model ambiguity have yet to be addressed (Nystrom et al., 2014). The profusion of transaction-level data at a minuscule resolution pro- vides an unprecedented opportunity to apply Hawkes processes to the study of market microstructure with a view to deciphering price formation mech- anism, liquidity dynamics and volatility (Morariu-Patrichi and Pakkanen, 2018). The use of Hawkes processes to model extreme price moves and order ﬂow is well integrated with the high- frequency market making model (Nys- trom et al., 2014; Bacry et al., 2015). For example, Nystrom et al. (2014) 13 proposed a market making model based on model risk or uncertainty, in which inventory dynamics, ﬁll rates and price formation are modelled using two independent Hawkes processes. While the market making models based on the Hawkes processes have been moderately successful in integrating a re- alistic order arrival process, they fail to incorporate the complex interaction between the self- and cross-excitation eﬀects of the endogenous state vari- ables that describe the LOB (Morariu-Patrichi and Pakkanen, 2018). In the classical ”buy low and sell high” market making strategies, (Cartea et al., 2014) used a multivariate Hawkes process to capture the interaction between market orders and the state of LOB. However, the constraints placed on para- metric speciﬁcation for conditional intensity by the Hawkes process limit the model’s eloquence. 3.2 Agent-Based Models Market making has been also been extensively investigated in ABM (Das, 2005; Wah et al., 2017). Using a bottom-up approach, the ABMs try to artiﬁ- cially simulate the systems’ aggregate behaviours caused by the actions and interactions between heterogeneous autonomous agents (Samanidou et al., 2007). The ABMs in market making range from the simple ”zero intelli- gence” of mainstream economics to representing in detail the full complexity of the order book and market microstructure. The seminal work of Muni Toke (2011) assimilated a microscopic, dynamical statistical model for the contin- uous double auction (Smith et al., 2003) into Hawkes framework. The re- inforced zero-intelligence market making model populated with the liquidity provider and liquidity taker uses mutually exciting Hawkes processes for the order arrival process. However, the parametric speciﬁcation of the exponen- tial kernels contradicts the empirical results on the existence of a feedback loop between order arrival and the state of LOB (Gonzalez and Schervish, 2017; Morariu-Patrichi and Pakkanen, 2018). The Neural Hawkes process Mei and Eisner (2017) applied a Neural Hawkes process to natural language processing in order to tackle the parametric speciﬁcations problem, and gen- eralised the Hawkes process by calculating the event intensities from the hidden state of an LSTM. Another prominent ABM in market making research (Wah et al., 2017)uses empirical game-theory analysis to examine the eﬀect of market making on market performance in diﬀerent scenarios. In the paper, the authors use mul- tiple background traders (e.g. traditional zero intelligence agents) to produce realistic market microstructure. The Bayesian market makers were then used to investigate welfare eﬀect, trading gains and strategic behaviour. The sim- plistic adaptive trading strategies adopted by the market makers ought to be 14 suﬃcient to investigate market equilibria, but would face serious challenges in relation to developing realistic market making strategies that also take account of market microstructure. The academic literature needs to assim- ilate the success of artiﬁcial intelligence in designing trading strategies that interact with close-to-reality market simulations. 3.3 Artiﬁcial Intelligence The success of deep reinforcement learning in board games (Silver et al., 2017) and video games (Mnih et al., 2015) soon sent ripples through the world of ﬁnance. Drawing on the classical mathematical setup by Avellaneda and Stoikov (2008), Gueant and Manziuk (2019) used a model-based deep actor-critic algorithm to ﬁnd the optimal bid and ask quotes across a high- dimensional space of corporate bonds. Spooner et al. (2018) rreconstructed a limit order book from historical data and used it to construct a market mak- ing agent using temporal-diﬀerence reinforcement learning. The next natural progression, a multi-agent simulation of a dealer market, was developed by Ganesh et al. (2019) to understand the behaviour of market making agents. The success of this model is dependent on a realistic simulation framework of the ﬁnancial market. However, algorithmic trading research is evolving, and is still at the stage of exploiting market simulators that could be used to develop training and testing algorithms in a similar vein to the classic Atari 2600 games simulator (Mnih et al., 2015). Despite the exemplary predictive performance of deep learning models, market making has not yet been comprehensively addressed. If we return to stochastic optimal control in market making, we notice that the dynamics of order ﬂow are mostly described by variants of Hawkes processes, while the re- sultant control algorithms are associated with continuous semi-martingales, which are hard to solve recursively (Gueant and Manziuk, 2019). In addi- tion, the unavailability of a realistic simulation framework and high-quality order-level data restricts researchers’ ability to replicate the successes of deep learning in market making. Nevertheless, deep learning models (based on CNN architecture) have done moderately well when it comes to modelling price-formation mecha- nisms using order book events as input (Sirignano, 2019; Cont and Sirig- nano, 2019; Tashiro et al., 2019; Tsantekidis et al., 2017). The literature is proof that empirical investigation of order-level data has always augmented the model of choice. In short, the ABM, statistical modelling and artiﬁcial intelligence approaches to market making all have desirable attributes that the others lack. For example, the CNN architectures lacks self- and cross- excitation eﬀects while modelling LOB dynamics (Zhang et al., 2019). The 15 DLSTM architecture performs hierarchical processing of complex order book events, and as such is able to eﬃciently capture the temporal structures of LOB (Sagheer and Kotb, 2019a,b). As market making involves placing opti- mal bids and asks, the DLSTM architecture, together with the Hawkes pro- cess, would eﬃciently model order arrival and price-formation mechanisms by constructing a self-exciting multivariate Hawkes process with limit order state process, which are coupled and interact with each other. 4 Deep Hawkes Process In this section, we propose that the Deep Hawkes Process (DHP) be used to concurrently model the order book event timings and associated event types. By assimilating it into the order arrival process, the market makers have control over the sending of diﬀerent orders at speciﬁc points in time. The basic idea behind our approach is to view the conditional intensity of the Hawkes process as a nonlinear deterministic function of past history, and to use DLSTM to automatically learn a high-dimensional representation from the data. We believe that capturing the constraints of the Hawkes process and recurrent network architecture enables a replication of the success of the natural language process (Du et al., 2016; Mei and Eisner, 2017) and time series prediction (Sagheer and Kotb, 2019a,b) in market making. 4.1 Deep Long Short-Term Memory Despite the success of recurrent marked temporal point processes and the Neural Hawkes process across disciplines, the conventional shallow recurrent network architecture and its variant long short-term memory (LSTM) might be inadequate when it comes to modelling noisy asynchronous order book events. Lately, the DLSTM architecture (Sagheer and Kotb, 2019a,b; Zhu et al., 2016) used in action modelling and multivariate time series forecasting validated its precedence over traditional LSTM architecture. The architec- ture of the DLSTM is same as the previously introduced LSTM, apart from the fact that it involves multiple LSTM layers stacked on top of each other. 4.2 DLSTM-SDAE In an ideal setting, the performance of the DLSTM model proved to be empirically better than existing contemporary statistical and deep modules. However, as the non-linear variables are modelled in such a way as to be 16 scaled up, the overall learning of the models suﬀers greatly due to the back- propagation algorithm trapped within multiple local minima (Sagheer and Kotb, 2019b). This may be the biggest hurdle when it comes to modelling limit order book events that comprise complex, asynchronous non-linear mul- tivariate time series. The ultra-noisy order book data also makes processing more challenging. To circumvent the limitations of the conventional stacked LSTM model, we use the stacked denoising auto-encoder (SDAE) together with DLSTM. The SDAE enables the deep neural networks with multiple nonlinear hidden layers to learn complex features from noisy limit order book data (Li et al., 2019; Vincent et al., 2010) and resolves the random weight ini- tialization of LSTM’s units problem in DLSTM (Sagheer and Kotb, 2019b). Figure 3 shows the proposed DLSTM- based SDAE architecture for DHP. hN t+1hN thN t−1 LSTM N LSTM 2 LSTM 1 LSTM NLSTM N LSTM 2LSTM 2 LSTM 1LSTM 1 SDAE SDAE SDAE h2 t+1 h1 t+1 hN t+1 h2 t+1 h1 t+1 hN t−1 h2 t−1 h1 t−1 h2 t h1 t h2 t−1 h1 t−1 hN thN t−2 h2 th2 t−2 h1 th1 t−2 xt−1 xt xt+1 Figure 3: The DLSTM-SDAE architecture. As shown in Figure 3, the reconstructed order book data is denoised by SDAEs layers in in DLSTM-SDAE architecture. In this method, at the ﬁrst layer the input xt is corrupted into ˜ xt using stochastic mapping ˜ xt∼ 17 SD( ˜ xt| xt). Then, the autoencoder maps corrupted input ˜ xt to a hidden representation h = fθ( ˜ xt) with encoder fθ( ˜ xt) = ( W ˜ xt + b). Lastly, the decoder gθ′ reconstruct z = gθ′( ˜ xt) from the hidden representation h. The parametersθ andθ ′ are trained using stochastic gradient descent to minimize reconstruction error measured in the squared error loss L2(x, z) =‖x− z‖2. Once mapping is learned, the high-level hidden state h is applied for training the next layer. For detail learning procedure in SDAE, please refer to seminal paper on the subject (Vincent et al., 2010). At time t, the denoised input xt from SDAE is then passed to ﬁrst layer of LSTM together with previous hidden state h1 t−1. The hidden state at time t, h1 t is calculated using recursive LSTM procedure discussed in Equation 2.9. Its is then moved to next time step and LSTM layers. In the second layer, the hidden state h1 t and the previous h2 t−1 is used to compute h2 t and procedure repeats until last layer is complied. 4.3 Model Formulation Let{tn, κn,kn}n∈N be a stream of order book event, where tn are times of occurrence of an event, its component κn, and their corresponding mark {kn}n∈N in kn := {1,...,K }. Then, the probability that the next event occurs at time tn is of type kn is P{(tn, κn,kn)|H n, (tn−tn−1)}dt. We are interested in the model to predict next event stream{tn, κn,kn} given a past history of eventkn, evaluate its likelihood and simulate the next event stream by learning from the past event stream. Equation 4.1 shows the associated intensity function of the DHP with relaxed positivity constraints: λk(t) =fk(w⊤ k h(t)) (4.1) The hidden state h(t) is updated from the memory sell c(t) as in Equation 4.2. h(t) = on⊙φ(c(t)) for t∈ (tn−1, tn] (4.2) The life of interval ( tn−1,tn] is determined by the next event kn at tn, DLSTM reads{tn, κn,kn} and updates the current memory cellsc(t) to cn+1, associated with hidden state h(tn). The other parameters of the DLSTM are recursively updated according to the Equation 4.3. 18 in+1 =σ ( Wxixn + Whih(tn) + Wcic(tn) + bi ) , fn+1 =σ ( Wxfxn + Whfh(tn) + Wcfc(tn) + bf ) , cn+1 =φ ( Wxcxn+Whch(tn)+bc ) , cn+1 = fn+1⊙ c(tn)+ in+1⊙ cn+1, ˆcn+1 =ˆfn+1⊙ˆc(tn)+ˆin+1⊙ cn+1, on+1 =σ ( Wxoxn + Whoh(tn) + Wcoc(tn) + bo ) , ¯¯ sn+1 =f ( Wxdxn + Whdh(tn) + Wcdc(tn) + bd ) , (4.3) where xn isnth input vector represented by one hot encoding of new order book eventkn; the activation functionsσ (x) /φ (x) are sigmoid / hyperbolic tangent function, respectively; WAB (e.g., Wci) is the weight matrix from the memory cell to input gate vector;bB denotes the bias term ofB withB∈ {i,f,c,o,d }, ¯¯ sis exponential decay parameter andf(x) =s log(1+exp(x/s)), s> 0 is scaled soft plus function. As it can be seen in the Equation 4.3, the parameters are updated using the hidden state h(tn) at time tn, succeeding its decay over intervaltn−tn−1 rather previous hidden state (Equation 2.9). The memory cell c(t) on the interval (tn−1,tn] follows power-law distribution decaying from cn+1 toˆcn+1 and deﬁned as: c(t) =ˆcn+1 + (cn+1−ˆcn+1) ( (t− tn)−¯¯ pn+1 ) for t∈ (tn, tn+1] (4.4) The DHP, with novel discrete update of stacked LSTM state, allows the model to capture a delayed response, ﬁts non-interacting event pairs, and copes with partially observed event streams. Mei and Eisner (2017) discuss in detail these beneﬁts of the neural version of the model. In or- der to ensure mathematical tractability, we have illustrated parameter up- dates for one of the layers of stacked LSTM, but this can be easily ex- tended to deep architecture. For example, the hidden state hb at block b in stacked LSTM is recursively computed from b = 1 :N and t = 1 :T using hb t =σ(Whb−1hbhb−1 t + Whbhbhb t−1 + bh). 4.4 Feedback Loop Exploration The empirical results (Morariu-Patrichi and Pakkanen, 2018; Gonzalez and Schervish, 2017) indicate the existence of feedback loop between the order ﬂow and the shape of the LOB, together with the self- and cross-excitation eﬀects. In order to eﬃciently capture this feedback eﬀect in high-dimensional 19 parameter space, we infuse the feedback loop exploration process into the DLSTM-SDAE architecture, as discussed in Figure 3. In connection with designing the deep network architecture and appropriate regularisation, we take into consideration that the network can automatically explore distinct feedback loops for diﬀerent types of events and their codependency. For example, the feedback eﬀect of market buy and sell orders on price, volume and the bid-ask spread of LOB. Consequently, we design a fully connected deep network in which each neuron represents an LOB state or feedback eﬀect of the preceding layer, in order to automatically explore the feedback loop. Furthermore, the neu- rons in the same layer are partitioned into B blocks to take into account diﬀerent combinations of feedback loops. The corresponding regularisation is incorporated into the loss function and described by: L= min WxB L+λ1 ∑ B∈S ‖WxB‖1+λ2 ∑ B∈S B∑ b=1 ‖‖‖WxB,b T ‖‖‖ 2,1 , (4.5) where L is the loss function of the DLSTM, and other two terms are feedback loop regularization applied to each block in the network (Zhu et al., 2016). WxB∈ RNN×KJ is weight matrix, with number of neurons NN and inputs dimension KJ. The S characterizes the set of gates and cell in LSTM neurons for each block in DLSTM. Lastly, the ‖W‖2,1 =∑ i √∑ jw2 i,j is a structural 𝓁21 norm. The loss function (Equation 4.5) was solved by using Adaptive Moment Estimation (Adam) (Kingma and Ba, 2015). Adam opti- mization is an augmentation to stochastic gradient descent that is memory eﬃcient, extremely insensitive to hyperparameters, works with sparse gra- dients, is appropriate for non-stationary objectives, and learns the learning rates itself on a per-parameter basis. It is well suited for highly noisy and/or sparse-gradient order book data. 4.5 Parameters Estimation Given a collection of sequence of order book eventsS,{tn, κn,kn}n∈N, the the log-likelihood of the model can be expressed as the sum of the log-intensities of lapsed event minus an integral of the aggregate intensities over the whole interval observed till T : L= ∑ n:tn≤T logλkn(tn)− ∫ T t=0 λ(t)dt, (4.6) The parameter (k,t ) is estimated maximizingL using Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2015) and Monte Carlo methods (Mei and Eisner, 2017). The frequently 20 used thinning algorithm adapted from multivariate Hawkes process is then used to sample random sequence from the model. 5 Multi-Agent Simulation Framework Multi-agent-based modelling is a bottom-up computational modelling ap- proach intended to artiﬁcially simulate the aggregate behaviours of systems caused by the actions and interactions between heterogeneous autonomous agents in an environment or environments (Samanidou et al., 2007). In this section, we describe the important components of multi-agent-based mod- elling, including environment (market simulator), agent ecology (trading strategies) and reward (proﬁt and loss), to study the behaviour of market making agents whose strategies employ Deep Hawkes processes. 5.1 Market Simulator The market simulator is an essential tool for designing, evaluating and back- testing algorithmic trading strategies under various market scenarios. The market is ﬂooded with various proprietary and open- source ﬁnancial simu- lation frameworks, but the constraints associated with licences, application interfaces and software design limit their usability (Maeda et al., 2020; Izumi and Toriumi, 2009). In this paper, we have designed a multi-asset market simulator from scratch, which is scalable to markets of substantial size. The asynchronous event-based interface is built over realistic market architecture, interface kernels, a matching engine and the Financial Information eXchange (FIX) protocol – an open electronic communications protocol standard used to carry out trades in electronic exchanges. 5.1.1 Market Architecture The market architecture consolidates the communication interface, market and matching engine. Figure 4 outlines key components of market architec- ture and their interaction from a high-level perspective. The agents connect to the market via a kernel that hosts order management details. This acts as a transmission channel between agents and markets, thereby providing the extreme throughput and lowest latency for order transactions. It also throt- tles the amount of transactions, as per the market requirement. As such, there is a guarantee of fairness between agents waiting to place orders. The markets represent an information interchange, in which heterogeneous agents communicate through kernels for order transactions, processing and execu- tion according to the matching engine, as per the ﬁnancial instruments. The 21 markets respond to order status by sending an execution report that covers the period from start to market reset event. This provides opportunities for agents to tweak the parameters in their trading strategies after every trading period if required. Agents Kernel Markets Matching Engines Figure 4: Market Simulator. 5.1.2 Communication Interface The communication interface between agents and markets follows the FIX standard protocol to increase eﬃciency, competition and innovation. It is an electronic communications protocol designed for the real-time exchange of information between agents and exchanges, including agent identiﬁers, order identiﬁers, order handling, trade notiﬁcations, broadcasts and execu- tion reports. The widespread adoption of the FIX protocol across ﬁnancial markets reduces costs associated with connectivity, regulatory compliance, liquidity searches and transactions. Using the FIX protocol, multiple agents can interact with the market via kernels, simultaneously and independently. 5.1.3 Matching Engine At the core of the market simulator are several matching engines for diﬀer- ent ﬁnancial instruments. Each matching engines matches bids and asks to execute trades in speciﬁc instruments. The orders are matched using price- time priority mechanisms. In this context, among bids or asks, the matching algorithms give priority to orders with the highest or lowest price. The ties are broken by giving preference to orders with the earliest submission time compared to other orders. Other well-known priority mechanism algorithms are pro-rata and price-size (Gould et al., 2013). 5.2 Market Ecology The success of a ﬁnancial simulation framework depends on the precise rep- resentation of market ecology that can adequately mimic the real market de- sign. In ﬁnance literature, the term ”market ecology” (Farmer, 2002) refers to the composition of heterogeneous trading strategies that keep evolving over time in response to pressure from a contrasting market. The correct mapping 22 of ﬁnancial market ecology requires the availability of agent-resolved order- level data, which enables identiﬁcation of sources and events in the market. In the absence of agent-resolved data, the trading strategies are classiﬁed by theoretical considerations, the results of surveys, direct investigations of the trading proﬁle of classes of investors and proxies for HFT (Kirilenko et al., 2017; Mankad and Michailidis, 2013). In this paper, we adapt the market ecology from the diﬀerent strands of academic literature (McGroarty et al., 2019; Paulin et al., 2019; Musciotto et al., 2018; Kirilenko et al., 2017; Leal et al., 2016; Mankad and Michailidis, 2013; Toth et al., 2012). 5.2.1 Deep Hawkes Market Makers Despite the existence of sophisticated market making strategies, the clas- sical ”buy low and sell high” strategy (Cartea et al., 2014) is a preferred strategy to make money in the securities market. The success of making a proﬁt from short-term price predictions on bids and asks hinges on placing orders at precisely the right time. The mathematical modelling of the com- plicated order arrival process is done using the Poisson process (Chakraborti et al., 2011), which assumes that orders arrive randomly. However, this is contrary to empirical ﬁndings, which show that order arrival times are strongly connected (Rambaldi et al., 2017), have self- and cross-excitation ef- fects (Morariu-Patrichi and Pakkanen, 2018) and that a feedback loop exists between the order arrival and the state of the LOB (Gonzalez and Schervish, 2017). In this article, we incorporate the feedback loop between order arrival and the state of the limit order book, together with self- and cross- excitation eﬀects, using DHP, to design a high-frequency market making strategy. The order book events in the securities market are stochastically excited or impeded by a pattern in the past event streams. The market makers are interested in learning the distribution and structure of order book events stream to accurately predict the next order (limit orders, market orders, cancellations, etc.) together with an associated labels (price, volume, etc.). Given a stream of order book events {tn, κn,kn}n∈N, the market makers cal- culate the probability that the next event occurs at time tn is of type kn and its probability density conditioned on the history of events Hn by: λ(t)dt = P{(tn, κn,kn)|H n, (tn−tn−1)}. (5.1) fn(t) =λ(t) exp ( − ∫ t tn−1 λ(τ)dτ ) . (5.2) To predict the time and the next event having minimum loss without information about the time tn, we choose ˆtn = ∫∞ tn−1 tfn(t)dt and ˆkn = 23 arg maxk ∫∞ tn−1 λk(t) λ(t)fn(t)dt. The associated intensity function for calculating the next order book events is the same as DHP as described in Equation 4.1. The real securities market has numerous distinct order book events, which is diﬃcult to incorporate in our simulation framework. For the sake of com- putational tractability, we decided to only include limit order buy/sell, mar- ket order buy/sell, and partial/full cancellations. We also assume that the high-frequency market maker is trading a single security in a market whose price at time t is denoted by pt. Unlike traditional market making strategies (Spooner et al., 2018), the DHP market makers can trade with rational limit or market order quantity, price surge and bid-ask spread distributions. The deep hawkes market maker (DHMM) place orders at a speciﬁed depth relative to the mid-price, pt. At each time step t, the DHMM agent’s pricing mechanism is given by: pa,b t =pt + δ∑ i=1 i· Ji,u t − δ∑ i=1 i· Ji,d t (5.3) where pt is the mid price at time t, Ji,u is the number of upward jumps withi ticks, and Ji,d is the number of downward jumps with i ticks between 0 and t, i = 1,..., δ. The intensities of Ji,u and Ji,d are λk,u(t) and λk,d(t), respectively, λk,i(t) =fk,i(w⊤ k,ih(t)), k = u, d. (5.4) The parameters of the Equation 5.4 are calculated as discussed under model formulation in Section 4.3. Most of the quantitative ﬁnance research into the high-frequency market making problem is based on the assumption of constant order size (Huang et al., 2015). However, the empirical analyses suggests that the order sizes have striking statistical distribution at diﬀerent timescales (Lu and Abergel, 2018; Rambaldi et al., 2017; Mu et al., 2009). The limit order size follows q-Gamma distribution (Mu et al., 2009). The market maker’s willingness to sell or buy speciﬁed quantities of securities is deﬁned as: qa,b lt = [ Γ(α,β ) ]qmax qmin · ( It± ¯I ¯I ) , (5.5) where It is inventory at time t, ¯I maximum inventory, and Γ( α,β ) is q- Gamma distribution is described as: Γ(α,β ;q) = 1 Z (q α )β[ 1− (1− q)q α ] 1 1−q , 24 Z = ∫ ∞ 0 (q α )β[ 1− (1− q)q α ] 1 1−q dq. One striking feature of equity markets is the existence of short- lived limit orders that are modiﬁed or cancelled once every 50 milliseconds (Dahlstr¨ om et al., 2018). The limit order cancellation is an important characteristic of market making strategies that are related to expected proﬁt, bid-ask spread and order queue position. We model cancellation sizes as follows: qa,b ct = [ Pc(q;Q) ]qmax qmin · ( It± ¯I ¯I ) , (5.6) where Pc(q;Q) is truncated geometric distribution (Lu and Abergel, 2018). The LOB is represented as [ Q−i : i = 1,...,L ] and [Qi : i = 1,...,L ] with corresponding quantities qi. The truncated geometric distribution is deﬁned as: Pc(q;Q) = P[q|Q] = p0 c(1−p0 c)q−1 1− (1−p0 c)Q 1 {q≤Q}. Finally, the market order follows a mixture of truncated geometric distri- bution and the dirac delta distribution (Lu and Abergel, 2018). The market order size that a market maker is willing to buy or sell is described as: qa,b mt = [ Pm(q;Q) ]qmax qmin · ( It± ¯I ¯I ) , (5.7) Pm(q;Q) =θ0 p0 m(1−p0 m)q−1 1− (1−p0 m)Q 1 {q≤Q} + ⌊ Q−1 5 ⌋∑ k=1 θk1 {q=5k+1} +θ∞1 {q=Q,Q⁄=5n+1}. The parameters{p0 c,p 0 m,θ 0,θk,θ∞} are estimated using a maximum like- lihood method. The details of estimation and calibration can be retrieved from the Lu and Abergel (2018). The market orders are used to clear the unexecuted inventory at the end of trading. 5.2.2 Probabilistic Market Makers To ensure fair competition with DHMM and incorporate the existing state-of- the-art, we include a probabilistic estimate-based benchmark strategy (Das, 25 2005) adapted to our simulation framework. In this market making strategy, the agent attempts to track the fundamental price of securities by maintain- ing a probability density estimate of the fundamental price. The probabilistic market makers (PMM) intent to sell or buy q unit of security at time t for price pa,b t in a market populated with uninformed, informed and noisy informed agents. Let us assume that the fundamental price of the security at time t is ft, ξ be the fraction of informed agents and the probability of buy or sell orders by the uninformed agents is ζ. The noisy informed agents assumes that the price of securities follow normal distributionpt = ft +Ns(0,σ 2 n). Whereas the fundamental price of security evolves according to a jump process. The order book event deﬁnes the jump and prices follow normal distribution. The PMM ask and bid prices at time t are then deﬁned as: pa,b t = 1 PBuy,Sell ft=pa,b t∑ ft=fmin [( (1−ξ)ζ + Pr(Ns(0,σ 2 n) ≷ (pa,b t −ft)) ) ftPr(f =ft) ] + 1 PBuy,Sell ft=fmax∑ ft=pa,b t +1 [( (1−ξ)ζ + Pr(Ns(0,σ 2 n) ≶ (ft−pa,b t )) ) ftPr(f =ft) ] (5.8) PBuy,Sell = ft=pa,b t∑ ft=fmin [ (1−ξ)ζ + Pr(Ns(0,σ 2 n) ≷ (pa,b t −ft)) ] Pr(f =ft) + ft=fmax∑ ft=pa,b t +1 [ (1−ξ)ζ + Pr(Ns(0,σ 2 n) ≶ (ft−pa,b t )) ] Pr(f =ft) wherePBuy,Sell is a priori probability of a buy or sell order and Ns(0,σn) is sample from normal distribution. The bids/asks equations derivation, its approximate solutions, density estimate update, and algorithm are discussed in the benchmark paper (Das, 2005). We add layers of complexity on the benchmark algorithm by allowing the PMM to sample order or cancellations size from a normal distribution. The order cancellations size at time t deter- mined as follows: qa,b t;o,c =ηo,c(¯pt− ¯pt−1) +Ns(0,σ 2 o,c), 0<η o,c < 1 (5.9) 26 5.2.3 Fundamental Traders Fundamental traders decide to trade based on the presumption that the se- curities prices will eventually return to their basic, intrinsic or fundamental value. Therefore, they strive to buy (sell) the security when the price at time t is below (above) its fundamental value. Fundamental traders are predom- inantly categorised as buyers or sellers, depending on the inventory at the end of a trading day. The accumulation of directional net positions is an important element in identifying buyers or sellers, since the latter acquire sizable net positions by executing numerous small-size orders, while the for- mer only execute a couple of large orders (Kirilenko et al., 2017; Mankad and Michailidis, 2013). According to the agent ecology literature, the fundamen- tal traders assume that fundamental value of a security will follow a random walk: ft =ft−1(1 +δf)(1 +xt), δ f > 0; xt∼N (0,σ 2 x) (5.10) Given last mid-price at time t, the limit order price by fundamental traders is determined by: pt = ¯pt−1(1 +δf)(1 +zt), zt∼N (0,σ 2 z) (5.11) Finally, the order under fundamental traders strategy are calculated as follows: qt;f =ηf(ft− ¯pt−1) +Ns(0,σ 2 f), 0<η f < 1 (5.12) The decision to buy or sell is governed by following logic: Dt = { Buy, q t;f≥ 0 Sell, q t;f < 0 (5.13) 5.2.4 Chartist Traders Unlike fundamental traders, the chartist or technical trader’s strategy de- pends on predicting future price direction based on past price movement. The chartist traders in our simulation framework use a simple trend-following strategy described in Leal et al. (2016). The price, order size and trade di- rection are described below: pt = ¯pt−1(1 +δc)(1 +zt), zt∼N (0,σ 2 c) (5.14) qt;c =ηc(¯pt−1− ¯pt−2) +Ns(0,σ 2 c), 0<η c < 1 (5.15) 27 Dt = { Buy, q t;c≥ 0 Sell, q t;c < 0 (5.16) 5.2.5 Noise Traders In the securities market, noise traders make trading decisions based solely on non-information. In the models, they serve as an essential proxy for random- ness, no trade and no speculation. We incorporate the slightly more evolved noise or background traders from a seminal paper by Wah et al. (2017). The noise traders ask or bid price is determined by its fundamental private val- uation and trading strategy. The fundamental value evolves according to a mean-reverting stochastic process (Wah et al., 2017). ft =max [ 0,ηn ¯f +ηn(1−ft−1) +yt ] , 0<η n < 1; yt∼N (0,σ 2 n) (5.17) The private valuation for the noise traders at time t is given by: pv =max [ 0,df ] , df∼N (ft,σ 2 v) (5.18) The noise trader calculates its private value and decide to buy or sell qt;n order sampled from a normal distribution, N (0,σ 2 n), with equal probability of 1/2. 5.3 Reward Design Unlike traditional reward design, in which an agent’s performance is assessed at the end of a trading period, we calculate the agent’s instantaneous rewards at each timestept. The reward function for the agents (j) comprises proﬁt & loss (PnL), inventory cost (IC) and transaction cost (TC). The PnL is simple proﬁt or loss made by the agents through buying or selling security at the exchange. Its is deﬁned as: PnLt;j =qa t;j ( pa t;j− ¯pt ) +qb t;j ( ¯pt−pb t;j ) (5.19) As a agent’s inventory is exposed to the volatility of the market price, we incorporate it our reward design using a term associated with inventory cost. Its given by: ICt;j =It;j (¯pt− ¯pt−1) (5.20) 28 Finally, we consolidate a quadratic penalty on the number of shares ex- ecuted to account for transaction cost. Speciﬁcally, the transaction cost for order executed qe t by agent j till time t is: TCt;j = ℸ ( qe t;j )2 , 0< ℸ< 1 (5.21) The reward function is the sum of orders bought or sold plus inventory cost less a transaction cost penalty. Rt;j =PnLt;j +ICt;j−TCt;j. (5.22) 5.4 Capital Allocation The amount of currency units held by an agent is represented by capital. Prior to securities market opening in simulation framework, every hetero- geneous agents endowed with diﬀerent amount of capital by a power law distribution. The agent’s initial capital ca follows a power law if it is drawn from drawn from a probability distribution p(ca)∝ca−αa. The αa is referred as scaling parameter which ordinarily lies between 2 and 3 (Clauset et al., 2009). 6 Experiments In this section, we elaborate on data, its processing, performance metrics, benchmarks, training and the parameter conﬁguration for the proposed model. 6.1 Data We use the publicly available historical Nasdaq TotalView-ITCH 5.0 data feed sample 1 to reconstruct limit order book (Huang and Polak, 2011). The reconstructed database provides tick-by-tick details of full order book depth by listing every quote and order at each price level of a speciﬁc security in Nasdaq, NYSE, and regional-listed securities on Nasdaq. The raw data feed in the binary format has a series of sequenced messages to describe the sys- tem, securities, order, and trade events at a resolution of the nanosecond scale. The event stream at nanosecond timestamp guarantees the inclusion of stochastically missing events which might increase the predictive accuracy of the Deep Hawkes model. Although the neural hawkes model (Mei and Eisner, 2017) is expressive enough to take account of missing event stream, 1ftp://emi.nasdaq.com/ITCH/Nasdaq_ITCH/ 29 it makes sense to access the performance of deep hawkes model at millisec- ond resolution order book data as compared to nanoseconds. Nasdaq uses multiple messages to indicate the current order, trading, system, and circuit breakers event’s status as discussed in technical report (Nasdaq, 2020). For mathematical tractability, we have sampled high frequency data for hundred most liquid securities over eight days from reconstructed orderbook. The extracted sample data consists of approximately a billion transaction records at nanosecond resolutions together with the possible event of limit order buy/sell, market order buy/sell, and cancellations partial/full. The recon- structed limit order book for Apple at 11:21 on March 29th, 2018 is shown in Figure 1. The reconstructed orderbook data is divided into training, validation and test set. For a single security at nanosecond and millisecond resolution, the descriptive statistics are given in Table 1. The validation set is included to optimize the model’s hyper-parameters while training, thus having control at over-ﬁtting. To avoid high variance in the data set, we only record the average value over multiple splits denoted by≈ in the Table 1. Table 1: Descriptive statistics of the orderbook data Data # Orderbook Event Token Stream Length Train Val Test Min Mean Max Nanosecond ≈ 9210480 921000 2302620 26752 85874 116217 Millisecond ≈ 432116 42252 108029 1167 3670 5216 6.2 Performance Metrics DHMM agents use DHP to accurately predict Experiments order book events (buy, sell or cancel) and their timing. The accuracy of DHMM’s predic- tions in terms of events and time is an important determinant of its trading proﬁtability. The performance metrics are vital components for measuring the performance of the trained model’s prediction reliability with observed test data. The widely used scale- dependent metric(Hyndman and Koehler, 2006), root mean square error (RMSE) and classiﬁcation error rate (ER) were used to evaluate the prediction performance of the Neural Hawkes model. Following Mei and Eisner (2017), we predict each prevailed order book event stream{tn, κn,kn} from the past event stream Hn and evaluate prediction using RMSE and ER. The predominant metric for evaluating the performance of the agents is 30 proﬁt and loss at the end of the trading period. However, this approach may be misleading, as agents are tested across heterogeneous securities, with varying pricing and liquidity structures. Alternatively, to eﬃciently capture spread, we use a normalised PnL (NPnL) with inventory and quadratic trans- action costs. The NPnL is calculated every hour by dividing the total reward by the weighted average market spread. To take account of the small inven- tories maintained by the market maker,, Spooner et al. (2018) introduced the mean absolute position (MAP) metric. An extreme score under this metric indicates a risky speculative strategy, while a moderate one indicates a strat- egy based on a stagnant market. We record the variability for NPnL and MAP using the standard deviation and mean, respectively. 6.3 Benchmarks We aim to evaluate the performance of the DHMM with a modiﬁed proba- bilistic estimate-based benchmark strategy (Das, 2005). The market making strategy is an extension of the classic information-based model (Glosten and Milgrom, 1985), in which agents use the probability estimates of the funda- mental price of securities to set bid and ask prices. The agents can sample limit, market or cancellation orders from the normal distribution or contra- dictory to a unit market order. We implement the probabilistic estimate- based strategy at the top of our simulation framework in continuous-time simulation rather than a discrete-time simulation. This provides the perfect test-bed to assess the performance of the simulation framework in extend- ing the discrete-time mechanisms to continuous-time, where heterogeneous agents interact asynchronously. The DHP extends the seminal Neural Hawkes process to the deep learning framework in a market making setting. We introduce the novel architecture to circumvent complications related to random weight initialisation, training and noisy order-level data (Sagheer and Kotb, 2019b). Given that the Neural Hawkes process is the kernel of our proposed deep model, we evaluate the performance of market making agents that use the earlier model in their trading strategies. For comparison purposes, we use the same architecture and training mechanism as discussed in the seminal paper (Mei and Eisner, 2017). The neurally self-modulating multivariate Hawkes process also acts as benchmark model for evaluating DHP’s performance on the prediction of order book events and in terms of time on the reconstructed limit order book data. 31 6.4 Training The high-frequency marker making agents uses DHP to learns from recon- structed limit orderbook data to place bids or asks or cancels at suitable time. The learned prediction is then infused into the market making strategy to trade with the simulation framework. The agents learn the system parame- ters in a two-step process. Firstly, the preprocessed order book stream, n-th event, kn is embedded into a latent space before passing into SDAE layer together with timing tn. The deep network, consists of a stack of multi- ple DAEs, generate higher representation of convoluted order book events interaction. The high level denoised representations are then fed into DL- STM to predict the next order’s type and the time to evaluate the loss. The DLSTM-SDAE learns the deep representation in two phases: pre-training and ﬁne-tuning. In pre-training, a greedy layer-wise structure is used to train each layer of DAE iteratively, to form a three-layer SDAE. At the end of pre-training, a stack of three LSTMs is produced as an output of SDAE. Secondly, the parameter of DLSTM-SDAE is then ﬁne-tuned to minimise the error in predicting events and time, using using stochastic gradient-descent and Adam optimisation algorithms. The early stopping methods used on the validation set’s log-likelihood performance were also used on the held- out validation set to avoid overﬁtting. We also add isotropic Gaussian noise to augment generalisation in the performance of the events’ classiﬁcation. Table 2 lists the hyper-parameters tuned by validation set performance for the DLSTM-SDAE network architecture. The other non-LSTM parameters includessn∈ R and Wn∈ RD as discussed in Section 4. The market making agent using NHP uses single layer LSTM and the number of hidden nodes from a small set (64, 128, 256, 512, 1024) as described in the base paper (Mei and Eisner, 2017). The hyperparameters are optimized based on the perfor- mance of the validation set. The high-frequency market making agents are trained in the simulation framework for 1000 trading days. Each trading day starts at 9:30 and lasts until 16:00. Two hundred trading days were used to ﬁne tune the hyper- parameters using random search. We acknowledge the existence of diﬀerences between the real data and simulated data, but ﬁrmly believe that they are generated from the same mechanisms – a claim substantiated by agent-based models that reproduce stylised facts similar to empirical ﬁndings. Taking the above into consideration, we train market makings agents using DHP and NHP for 100 trading days ﬁve times. The aim of this exercise is to synchronise the agents’ learning over diﬀerent sets of data generated from the same stochastic process. We then test the performance of the agents against the benchmark for 300 trading days. To ensure fair competition 32 with market making agents, we use heterogeneous market ecology consisting of fundamental, chartist and random agents. The important parameters pertaining to the trading agents in the simulation framework are given in Table 2. Table 2: Parameters conﬁguration. Description Parameter/Hyperparameter Value Total sessions size Ttotal 1300 days Training sample size Ttrain 1000 days Testing sample size Ttest 300 days Total number of traders at ≈ 104 Number of market makers am 3 Number of fundamental traders af 3000 Number of chartist traders ac 6000 Number of noise traders an 4000 Initial capital ca ∼p(2.3) × 104 Min inventory min Inv ∼−p(2.3) × 105 Max inventory max Inv ∼p(2.3) × 105 Scale factor sn 1 LSTM weights Wn ∼N (0, 0.01) DHMM limit order parameters Γ( α,β ) Γ(0 .07, 1.52) DHMM limit order cancellations parameters Pc(q;Q) 0.60 Fraction of informed agents ξ 0.33 Probability of buy/sell by uninformed agents ζ 0.33 PMM order cancellation size parameter ηo,c 0.04 Fundamental order size parameter ηf 0.04 Chartist order size parameter ηc 0.04 Noise price parameter ηu 0.04 Transaction cost penalty ℸ 0.06 Number of layers (DAE/LSTM) NL 3/3 Number of hidden unit per layer NH1024 Learning rate for pretraining αLPT 0.05 Learning rate for ﬁne-tuning αLFT 0.10 Number of pretraining epochs ϵPT 100 Additive isotropic Gaussian noise ηnoise ∼N (0, 0.50) 7 Results In this section, we investigate the performance of market making agents in predicting types of order book events and their timestamps. Having learned which orders to send and at what time, we evaluate the agent’s trading performance in the simulation framework. We tweak order cancellations to 33 examine the impact on the agent’s proﬁtability and the microstructure of the order book. We then check the robustness of the model by performing sensi- tivity analysis. Finally, we validate our simulation framework by reproducing stylised facts with our simulated data. 7.1 Predictive Performance Given a stream of order book events{tn, κn,kn}n∈N, the market makers seek to predict the next event type and its time. We evaluate predictive per- formance of ˆtn and ˆkn using RMSE and ER, respectively.To avoid getting entangled in the problem of overﬁtting, we divide the training set into the sub-training and validation sets. We train DHP and NHP models on the sub- training set so as to choose hyperparameters for validation set. Following the training procedure of Mei and Eisner (2017), we generate the predictive per- formance of the market making agents on reconstructed order book data at nanosecond resolution in Figure 5. As is evident from the ﬁgure, neither model is invariably better at predicting events or, in particular, time. It seems that the both models do not explicitly address the complex dynamics of asynchronous order book data at nanosecond resolution. The event dy- namics at nanosecond timestamps need much more sophisticated models to ﬁlter noise and to model event interaction and non-linearity. 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 Time Index 0.0 2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 10.0 12.0 14.0Interarrival time Data DHP NHP (a) Time Prediction Graph NHP DHP Agents 5.0 10.0 15.0 20.0 25.0 30.0 RMSE (b) Time Prediction Error NHP DHP Agents 40 50 60 70 ER % (c) Event Prediction Error Figure 5: Performance evaluation of high-frequency market making agents in predicting order book events and time at nanosecond resolution. The standard deviation over 10 experiments using diﬀerent train-val-test sample is denoted by error bar. In Figure 6, we evaluate the predictive performance of the high-frequency market making agents using millisecond data sampled from the reconstructed order book. Compared to the earlier results, the DHP model’s performance has drastically increased. In addition, the time prediction is consistently 34 better than with the NHP. The deep model with novel architecture and pre- training module are sophisticated enough to capture excitation and feedback eﬀects in the order book. The results also substantiate the claim of the NHP model regarding stochastically missing data. The order book events at mil- lisecond timestamps theoretically omit the events at the ﬁner time resolution, but they are generated by a diﬀerent mechanisms. This is the reason why there are completely diﬀerent results at the two time resolutions. The Deep Hawkes model presented here is expressive enough to learn true predictive distribution with scholastically missing events, but only if they are generated from the same mechanism. By integrating the predictive capabilities into the market making strategies, the agents trade in a simulation framework popu- lated with heterogeneous trading strategies. In the next section, we explore the agents’ trading performance. 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 Time Index 0.0 2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 10.0 12.0 14.0Interarrival time Data DHP NHP (a) Time Prediction Graph NHP DHP Agents 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 RMSE (b) Time Prediction Error NHP DHP Agents 20 30 40 50 ER % (c) Event Prediction Error Figure 6: Performance evaluation of high-frequency market making agents in predicting order book events and time at millisecond resolution. The standard deviation over 10 experiments using diﬀerent train-val-test sample is denoted by error bar. 7.2 Trading Performance The trading performance of the high-frequency market making agents is dis- cussed in Table 3. Our simulation framework evaluates various models, including the Neural Hawkes model, the benchmark probabilistic estimate model, and our proposed Deep Hawkes model. According to the performance metrics speciﬁed in Table 3, our proposed agent using DHP (DHMM) consis- tently outperforms the PMM and NHMM, which suggests that the proposed trading agent beneﬁts by learning the robust microstructure of order book data. Further, the DHP lets the agent capture the self- and cross-excitation eﬀects of the limit order book together with a feedback loop, to place the right order at the right time. We discuss the performance of each agent in 35 detail below. As shown in Figure 6, the DHMM is better at predicting the type of order and its time compared to NHMM. This is an important element of the market making strategy. The novel DLSTM-SDAE architecture allows the agents to learn the hidden representation of the noisy order book data, and therefore to place orders that add to its proﬁtability. Furthermore, DHMM exhibits a faster convergence rate compared to NHMM, as shown in Figure 7. The baseline strategy used by PMM maintains a probability density es- timated on the basis of fundamental price. The fundamental price evolves according to the jump process, following a normal distribution. This works in the favor of PMM, which makes more proﬁt at the beginning, as veriﬁed in Figure 7.Over time, however, the DHMM and NHMM learn the art of placing the right order with the right intensity. Afterwards, the proﬁtability of the PMM fall dramatically. The PMM might perform better if it took a long position over several days, rather than trading intraday. It would be interesting to check the performance of the PMM agents with diﬀerent prob- ability density estimate conditions on the joint distribution of microstructure features. 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 Episode (days) 30 20 10 0 10 20 30 40 NpnL (units) DHMM 900 NHMM PMM (a) Train 60 120 180 240 Episode (days) 30 20 10 0 10 20 30 40 NpnL (units) DHMM NHMM PMM (b) Test 10:00 11:00 12:00 13:00 14:00 15:00 Episode (hours) 20 10 0 10 20 30 NPnL (units) DHMM NHMM PMM (c) Random day Figure 7: Trading agents performance with DHMM, NHMM and PMM while training, testing and random day. 36 Table 3: Mean and standard deviation on the daily normalised PnL (PnL) and mean absolute positions (MAP) for diﬀerent market makers Agents NPnL [105] MAP[unit] Mean Std.Dev. Mean Std.Dev. DHMM 2.1 ±18.26 17 ±20 NHMM 1.1 ±4.09 4 ±6 PMM -1.6 ±79.55 41 ±74 7.3 Order Cancellation Eﬀect Massive numbers of order cancellations in a short period are a distinctive attribute of the equity market. For example, at Nasdaq Nordic, order can- cellations typically account for 40% of submitted limit orders on a particular trading day. Market making strategies using limit order cancellations con- tribute to the market marker’s proﬁt, bid-ask spread and order queue position (Dahlstr¨ om et al., 2018).We study the distribution of proﬁt, bid-ask spread and order queue position by removing the cancellations mechanism in the base simulation framework. We estimate the intrinsic value of the order rel- ative to the queue position by applying the model developed by Moallemi and Yuan (2017). The agent’s order queue position provides an estimate of number of orders ahead of the agent’s order at a particular price. A position at the front of the queue guarantees prompt execution, higher ﬁll rate, low latency and lower adverse selection cost. We estimate the queue position in the order book by reconstructing the limit order book from the simulated data feed. Lets us suppose that the high-frequency market making agent places a limit order at timet= 0 seeking best ask pricepa which gets ﬁlled or canceled at timeτ. Filling the order pays the agentpa while cancellations pay nothing. We now describe the value of the order perceived by agents relative to the queue position as: 37 Vt = E[(pa−pt)IFILL− (p−pt)IFILL|F t] = FPt(LSPt− ASCt) =fillprobablity (liquidity spreadpremium−adverseselectioncost ) (7.1) where FPt ≜ P ( FILL|F t ) , LSPt ≜ (pa−pt), ASCt ≜ E [ (pτ−pt)|F t, FILL ] To empirically calibrate the model (Equation 7.1), we take the same pa- rameters used by Moallemi and Yuan (2017). These are exponential order size distribution, trade arrival rate (TAR), average trades size (ATS), trade size in the stan-dard lot (TSS), cancellation arrival rate (CAR), average can- cellation size (ACS), price jump arrival rate (PJR), average jump size (AJS), market impact (MI) and average queue size (AQS). The trade size is identi- ﬁed as the limit order or market order, contrary to aggressive market orders as described by Moallemi and Yuan (2017). Table 4 speciﬁes the estimated parameters for simulated data with no cancellation mechanisms (Simulated NC), without cancellation mechanisms (Simulated WC) and an average (Sim- ulated AV) over 21 days. The paper itself provides more detail regarding the parameters, calibration and model ﬁtting (Moallemi and Yuan, 2017). Table 4: Estimated parameters for simulated orderbook data. Data TAR (/min) ATS (shares) TSS (shares) CAR (/min) ACS (shares) PJR (/min) AJS (ticks) MI AQS (shares) Simulated NC 2.53 3467 7664 92.72 5061 1.26 0.32 10.91 16416 Simulated AV 2.04 4037 6901 82.21 4022 1.01 0.46 8.76 23554 Simulated WC 5.26 6329 8083 43.71 1107 3.75 2.06 11.92 40191 Simulated AV 4.07 5463 9147 40.31 1560 3.01 2.06 13.02 46815 Table 4 shows that an absence of cancellation mechanisms at the high- frequency market maker’s end leads to a drastic increase in the average queue size. The decrease in the cancellation rate increases the queue size, which aﬀects the high-frequency market maker’s proﬁtability, bid-ask spread and market impact. The value of the order as a function of the queue position, bid-ask spread, and the agent’s proﬁt eﬃciently captures the claim illustrated by the data in Figure 8. The wider bid-ask spread when agent’s are unable to cancel the limit order in Figure 8d has negative eﬀect on the proﬁtability (Figure 8e ) as compared to scenarios with cancellations (Figure 8a,8b ). As 38 stated in the model in Equation 7.1, the value of an order that is not ﬁlled is zero. Figure 8f shows that an increase in queue length decreases the proba- bility of execution, and therefore the value. The value of the order becomes ﬂat, as the queue length is extremely large. Our results are consistent with the ﬁndings of Dahlstr¨ om et al. (2018) when investigating the determinants of order cancellations. It is diﬃcult to infer causal relationships between cancellations and market microstructure variables based on artiﬁcially cre- ated scenarios, but this approach nonetheless it paves the way for future investigation using order level data. 10:00 11:00 12:00 13:00 14:00 15:00 Time 166.5 167.0 167.5 168.0 168.5 169.0 Price Bid Ask (a) BAD WC 10:00 11:00 12:00 13:00 14:00 15:00 Episode (hours) 20 10 0 10 20 30 NPnL (units) (b) DHMMP WC 1 2 3 4 5 6 Order Queue Position (x 10⁴) 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 Order Value (ticks) Simulated_AV Simulated_WC (c) VOPQ WC 10:00 11:00 12:00 13:00 14:00 15:00 Time 166.5 167.0 167.5 168.0 168.5 169.0 Price Bid Ask (d) BAD NC 10:00 11:00 12:00 13:00 14:00 15:00 Episode (hours) 20 10 0 10 20 30 NPnL (units) (e) DHMMP NC 1 2 3 4 5 6 Order Queue Position (x 10⁴) 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 Order Value (ticks) Simulated_AV Simulated_NC (f) VOPQ NC Figure 8: Eﬀect of limit order cancellations on the market. The top row (marked WC) represents the distribution when the market maker’s agents can cancel the limit orders. The bottom row (marked NC) represents a situation with no cancellations. BAD is intraday bid-ask distribution, DHMMP is proﬁt distribution of DHMM over the trading day, and VOPQ is the value of the orders relative to queue position. The average queue length on a particular trading day is represented by a black triangle. 7.4 Sensitivity Analysis We perform sensitivity analysis on the proposed model by changing the hy- perparameters – speciﬁcally, the number of layers, the number of hidden units per layer and the noise level. The aim is to conﬁrm the robustness of the model, rather than overﬁtting parameters. Table 5 shows the performance 39 of our proposed model when there is an increase in the number of layers, hidden units and noise level. The model is robust to the noise level at the optimal choice of numbers of layers, parameters and hidden units. Table 5: Sensitivity to the number of hidden units and Gaussian noise. The DLSTM-SDAE used in our model has 3 DAE layers and 3 LSTM layers. In performing sensitivity analysis, we ﬁx the 3 LSTM layers and change only the DAE layer. # Number of layer 1 # Number of layer 2 # Number of layer 3 Number of hidden unit per layer (64 , 128, 256, 512, 1024) (64 , 128, 256, 512, 1024) (64 , 128, 256, 512, 1024) RMSE (4 .6, 4.4, 4.1, 4.1, 4.0) (3 .5, 3.0, 3.0, 2.5, 2.5) (2 .0, 2.0, 2.0, 1.5, 1.5) ER (55 .7, 55.7, 55.7, 50.4, 54.0) (47 .2, 44.4, 44.1, 44.1, 44.1) (37 .5, 37.0, 35.0, 35.0, 34.0) Gaussian noise (0 .10, 0.20, 0.30, 0.40, 0.50) (0 .10, 0.20, 0.30, 0.40, 0.50) (0 .10, 0.20, 0.30, 0.40, 0.50) RMSE (7 .2, 5.9, 4.3, 5.4, 6.5) (4 .1, 3.9, 3.0, 4.0, 4.6) (2 .2, 2.2, 2.0, 2.1, 2.1) ER (60 .2, 55.9, 50.1, 60.0, 63.5) (55 .6, 52.2, 49.1, 55.3, 67.5) (37 .2, 37.9, 37.3, 37.1, 37.2) 7.5 Validation The validation of the trading simulation framework is performed by measur- ing how successfully the simulation’s output exhibits persis- tent empirical patterns in the order book data. Such empirical patterns are common across various markets and instruments, and even timescales are often classiﬁed as ”stylised facts” (Cont, 2001). We present a nominal set of stylised facts, re- produced from the empirical analysis of simulated order book data, as shown in Figure 9. Let p(t) be the price of a security at time t. Given a timescale ∆ t, we deﬁne log return at ∆ t as r(t, ∆t) = lnp(t + ∆t)− lnp(t). The cumulative distribution (CDF) of returns is given as F∆t(x) = P[r(t, ∆t)≤ x]. The derivative of the earlier gives probability density function (PDF) F ′ ∆t =f∆t, empirically estimated for normalized simulated return, as illustrated in Fig- ure 9a. The cumulative distribution of return follows power law F∆t∼|r|−α with 2 < α <5. In Figure 9b, the positive tail F + ∆t(x) = P[r(t, ∆t)≥ x] and the negative tail F− ∆t(x) = P[r(t, ∆t)≤ x] of cumulative distribution, shown as yellow circles and green squares, exhibit power law, as denoted by the red line with α = 2.8. In Figure 9c, we show the absence of the autocor- relation of price change, deﬁned as ρ(τ) =Corr ( r(t, ∆t),r (t +τ, ∆t) ) . The autocorrelation function (ACF) drastically decays to zero in few lags. 40 10-7 10-6 10-5 10-4 10-3 10-2 10-1 100 -30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30 Probability density function Normalized returns Normalized returns Gaussian (a) PDF 10−7 10−6 10−5 10−4 10−3 10−2 10−1 100 101 10−1 100 101 102 Cumulative distribution function Normalized returns Positive tail Power law Negative tail (b) CDF -0.4 -0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Lag Autocorrelation (c) ACF Figure 9: Stylised facts reproduced from simulated order book data. All graphs were generated on the basis of ∆ t = 1minute. 8 Conclusions We have developed a market making strategy that takes account of the feed- back loop between the order arrival and the state of the LOB, with self- and cross-excitation eﬀects, while placing an order in our realistic simulation framework. The strategy was designed by integrating the self-modulating multivariate Hawkes process with DLSTM-SDAE. The data-driven approach performed adversely in relation to predicting the next order type and its timestamp when ﬁtted to reconstructed order book data at nanosecond reso- lution. When trained with millisecond resolution data, it outperforms NHP in prediction tasks and benchmark market making strategies in trading per- formance. We have demonstrated that extending the DHP in a market mak- ing setting accomplished better performance when validating empirical claims about the eﬀect of cancellation on the determinants of order size. Our mod- elling approach is still far from inferring causality, but does pave the way exploring a range of diverse research avenues. The most important and im- mediate of these are listed below: 1. Apply more advanced pre-processing, architecture, and learning algo- rithms to ﬁlter out ultra-noisy order book data at nanosecond times- tamps. 2. Explore an intensity-free approach for Hawkes processes with learning mechanisms other than the maximum likelihood approach. 3. Embedding DHP within the reinforcement learning framework to learn the optimal policy. 4. Extend the model to the deep reinforcement learning framework, in which the agent’s trading action and reward from the simulator are 41 asynchronous stochastic events characterised by marked multivariate Hawkes processes. 5. Extract the agent’s trading algorithm parameters directly from the order book data , rather than from random seeds or empirical literature. 42 References Ait-Sahalia, Y. and Saglam, M. (2017). High frequency market making: Implications for liquidity. SSRN Electronic Journal. Arras, L., Arjona-Medina, J., Widrich, M., Montavon, G., Gillhofer, M., M¨ uller, K.-R., Hochreiter, S., and Samek, W. (2019). Explaining and in- terpreting lstms. In Samek, W., Montavon, G., Vedaldi, A., Hansen, L. K., and M¨ uller, K.-R., editors,Explainable AI: Interpreting, Explaining and Visualizing Deep Learning , pages 211–238, Cham. Springer International Publishing. Avellaneda, M. and Stoikov, S. (2008). High frequency trading in a limit order book. Quantitative Finance, 8:217–224. Bacry, E., Mastromatteo, I., and Muzy, J.-F. (2015). Hawkes processes in ﬁnance. Market Microstructure and Liquidity , 01(01):1550005. Brogaard, J., Hendershott, T., and Riordan, R. (2014). High-frequency trad- ing and price discovery. The Review of Financial Studies, 27(8):2267–2306. Cartea, ´A., Jaimungal, S., and Ricci, J. (2014). Buy low, sell high: A high frequency trading perspective. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics , 5(1):415–444. Chakraborti, A., Muni Toke, I., Patriarca, M., and Abergel, F. (2011). Econophysics review: I. empirical facts. Quantitative Finance, 11(7):991– 1012. Chakraborty, T. and Kearns, M. (2011). Market making and mean reversion. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, page 307–314, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Chao, Y., Yao, C., and Ye, M. (2018). Why Discrete Price Fragments U.S. Stock Exchanges and Disperses Their Fee Structures. The Review of Fi- nancial Studies, 32(3):1068–1101. Clauset, A., Shalizi, C. R., and Newman, M. E. J. (2009). Power-law distri- butions in empirical data. SIAM Review, 51(4):661–703. Cont, R. (2001). Empirical properties of asset returns: stylized facts and statistical issues. Quantitative Finance, 1(2):223–236. 43 Cont, R. and Sirignano, J. (2019). Universal features of price formation in ﬁnancial markets: perspectives from deep learning. Quantitative Finance, 19(9):1449–1459. Dahlstr¨ om, P., Hagstr¨ omer, B., and Norden, L. L. (2018). Determinants of limit order cancellations. Microeconomics: General Equilibrium and Disequilibrium Models of Financial Markets eJournal , pages 1–57. Das, S. (2005). A learning market-maker in the glosten-milgrom model. Quantitative Finance, 5(2):169–180. Du, N., Dai, H., Trivedi, R., Upadhyay, U., Gomez-Rodriguez, M., and Song, L. (2016). Recurrent marked temporal point processes: Embedding event history to vector. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , KDD ’16, page 1555–1564, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Embrechts, P., Liniger, T., and Lin, L. (2011). Multivariate hawkes pro- cesses: an application to ﬁnancial data. Journal of Applied Probability , 48(A):367–378. Farmer, J. D. (2002). Market force, ecology and evolution. Industrial and Corporate Change, 11(5):895–953. Ganesh, S., Vadori, N., Xu, M., Zeng, H., Reddy, P., and Veloso, M. (2019). Reinforcement learning for market making in a multi-agent dealer market. Gao, X., Zhou, X., and Zhu, L. (2018). Transform analysis for hawkes processes with applications in dark pool trading. Quantitative Finance, 18(2):265–282. Glosten, L. and Milgrom, P. (1985). Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist market with heterogeneously informed traders. Journal of Financial Economics, 14(1):71 – 100. Gonzalez, F. and Schervish, M. (2017). Instantaneous order impact and high-frequency strategy optimization in limit order books. Market Mi- crostructure and Liquidity, 03(02):1850001. Gould, M., Porter, M., Williams, S., McDonald, M., Fenn, D., and Howison, S. (2013). Limit order books. Quantitative Finance, 13(11):1709–1742. Gu´ eant, O., Lehalle, C.-A., and Fernandez-Tapia, J. (2013). Dealing with the inventory risk: A solution to the market making problem. Mathematics and Financial Economics , 7:477–507. 44 Gueant, O. and Manziuk, I. (2019). Deep reinforcement learning for market making in corporate bonds: Beating the curse of dimensionality. Applied Mathematical Finance, 26(5):387–452. Hawkes, A. (2018). Hawkes processes and their applications to ﬁnance: a review. Quantitative Finance, 18(2):193–198. Ho, T. and Stoll, H. (1981). Optimal dealer pricing under transactions and return uncertainty. Journal of Financial Economics , 9(1):47 – 73. Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):1735–1780. Huang, R. and Polak, T. (2011). Lobster: Limit order book reconstruction system. SSRN Electronic Journal. Huang, W., Lehalle, C.-A., and Rosenbaum, M. (2015). Simulating and analyzing order book data: The queue-reactive model. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 110(509):107–122. Hyndman, R. and Koehler, A. (2006). Another look at measures of forecast accuracy. International Journal of Forecasting, 22(4):679 – 688. Izumi, K. and Toriumi, F.and Matsui, H. (2009). Evaluation of automated- trading strategies using an artiﬁcial market. Neurocomputing, 72(16):3469 – 3476. Kingma, D. and Ba, J. (2015). Adam: A method for stochastic optimiza- tion. In 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015,San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings. Kirilenko, A., Kyle, A., SAMADI, M., and Tuzun, T. (2017). The ﬂash crash: High frequency trading in an electronic market. The Journal of Finance , 72(3):967–998. Kumar, P. (2020). Deep reinforcement learning for market making. In Pro- ceedings of the 20th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, AAMAS ’20, page 1892–1895, Richland, SC. Interna- tional Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems. Leal, S. J., Napoletano, M., Roventini, A., and Fagiolo, G. (2016). Rock around the clock: An agent-based model of low- and high-frequency trad- ing. Journal of Evolutionary Economics volume , 26:49–76. 45 Li, Y., Zheng, W., and Zheng, Z. (2019). Deep robust reinforcement learning for practical algorithmic trading. IEEE Access, 7:108014–108022. Lu, X. and Abergel, F. (2018). Order-book modeling and market making strategies. Market Microstructure and Liquidity , 04(01n02):1950003. Maeda, I., deGraw, D., Kitano, M., Matsushima, H., Sakaji, H., Izumi, K., and Kato, A. (2020). Deep reinforcement learning in agent based ﬁnancial market simulation. Journal of Risk and Financial Management , 13(4):1– 17. Mankad, S. and Michailidis, G. (2013). Discovering the ecosystem of an electronic ﬁnancial market with a dynamic machine-learning method. Al- gorithmic Finance, 2(2):151–165. McGroarty, F., Booth, A., Gerding, E., and Chinthalapati, V. L. R. (2019). High frequency trading strategies, market fragility and price spikes: an agent based model perspective. Annals of Operations Research, 282(1):217–244. Mei, H. and Eisner, J. (2017). The neural hawkes process: A neurally self- modulating multivariate point process. In Proceedings of the 31st Inter- national Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS’17, page 6757–6767, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Menkveld, A. (2013). High frequency trading and the new market makers. Journal of Financial Markets , 16:712–740. Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness, J., Bellemare, M. G., Graves, A., Riedmiller, M., Fidjeland, A. K., Ostrovski, G., Pe- tersen, S., Beattie, C., Sadik, A., Antonoglou, I., King, H., Kumaran, D., Wierstra, D., Legg, S., and Hassabis, D. (2015). Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533. Moallemi, C. C. and Yuan, K. (2017). A model for queue position valuation in a limit order book. Technical report, Columbia Business School Research Paper No. 17-70. Morariu-Patrichi, M. and Pakkanen, M. S. P. (2018). State-dependent hawkes processes and their application to limit order book modelling. Mu, G.-H., Chen, W., Kert´ esz, J., and Zhou, W.-X. (2009). Preferred num- bers and the distributions of trade sizes and trading volumes in the chinese stock market. Physics of Condensed Matter , 68:145–152. 46 Mukerji, P., Chung, C., Walsh, T., and Xiong, B. (2019). The impact of algo- rithmic trading in a simulated asset market. Journal of Risk and Financial Management, 12:68. Muni Toke, I. (2011). ”market making” in an order book model and its impact on the spread. In Abergel, F., Chakrabarti, B. K., Chakraborti, A., and Mitra, M., editors, Econophysics of Order-driven Markets: Proceedings of Econophys-Kolkata V, pages 49–64, Milano. Springer Milan. Musciotto, F., Marotta, L., Piilo, J., and Mantegna, R. (2018). Long-term ecology of investors in a ﬁnancial market. Palgrave Communications, 4:92. Nasdaq (2020). Nasdaq totalview-itch 5.0. http://www.nasdaqtrader. com/content/technicalsupport/specifications/dataproducts/ NQTVITCHSpecification.pdf. accessed: 21.07.2020. Nystrom, K., Ould Aly, S. M., and Zhang, C. (2014). Market making and portfolio liquidation under uncertainty. International Journal of Theoret- ical and Applied Finance , 17(05):1450034. O’Hara, M. and Oldﬁeld, G. S. (1986). The microeconomics of market mak- ing. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , 21(4):361–376. Paulin, J., Calinescu, A., and Wooldridge, M. (2019). Understanding ﬂash crash contagion and systemic risk: A micro–macro agent-based approach. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control , 100:200 – 229. Penalva, J., Cartea, A., and Jaimungal, s. (2015). Algorithmic and High- Frequency Trading. Cambridge University Press, ﬁrst edition. Preis, T., Golke, S., Paul, W., and Schneider, J. (2006). Multi-agent- based order book model of ﬁnancial markets. Europhysics Letters (EPL), 75(3):510–516. Rambaldi, M., Bacry, E., and Lillo, F. (2017). The role of volume in or- der book dynamics: a multivariate hawkes process analysis. Quantitative Finance, 17(7):999–1020. Sagheer, A. and Kotb, M. (2019a). Time series forecasting of petroleum production using deep lstm recurrent networks. Neurocomputing, 323:203 – 213. Sagheer, A. and Kotb, M. (2019b). Unsupervised pre-training of a deep lstm-based stacked autoencoder for multivariate time series forecasting problems. Scientiﬁc Reports, 9:19038. 47 Samanidou, E., Zschischang, E., Stauﬀer, D., and Lux, T. (2007). Agent- based models of ﬁnancial markets. Reports on Progress in Physics , 70(3):409–450. Sandas, P. (2001). Adverse selection and competitive market making: Empir- ical evidence from a limit order market. The Review of Financial Studies , 14(3):705–734. SEC (2014). Equity market structure literature review part ii: High frequency trading, pages 63–103. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Staﬀ of the Division of Trading and Markets. Silver, D., Schrittwieser, J., Simonyan, K., Antonoglou, I., Huang, A., Guez, A., Hubert, T., Baker, L., Lai, M., Bolton, A., Chen, Y., Lillicrap, T., Hui, F., Sifre, L., van den Driessche, G., Graepel, T., and Hassabis, D. (2017). Mastering the game of go without human knowledge. Nature, 550:354–. Sirignano, J. (2019). Deep learning for limit order books. Quantitative Fi- nance, 19(4):549–570. Smith, E., Farmer, D., Gillemot, L., and Krishnamurthy, S. (2003). Sta- tistical theory of the continuous double auction. Quantitative Finance , 3(6):481–514. Spooner, T., Fearnley, J., Savani, R., and Koukorinis, A. (2018). Market making via reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems , AAMAS ’18, page 434–442, Richland, SC. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems. Tashiro, D., Matsushima, H., Izumi, K., and Sakaji, H. (2019). Encoding of high-frequency order information and prediction of short-term stock price by deep learning. Quantitative Finance, 19(9):1499–1506. Toth, B., Eisler, Z., Lillo, F., Kockelkoren, J., Bouchaud, J., and Farmer, J. (2012). How does the market react to your order ﬂow? Quantitative Finance, 12(7):1015–1024. Tsantekidis, A., Passalis, N., Tefas, A., Kanniainen †, J., Gabbouj, M., and Iosiﬁdis, A. (2017). Using deep learning to detect price change indications in ﬁnancial markets. In 2017 25th European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO), pages 2511–2515. 48 Vincent, P., Larochelle, H., Lajoie, I., Bengio, Y., and Manzagol, P.-A. (2010). Stacked denoising autoencoders: Learning useful representations in a deep network with a local denoising criterion. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 11:3371–3408. Wah, E., Wright, M., and Wellman, M. (2017). Welfare eﬀects of market making in continuous double auctions. J. Artif. Int. Res. , 59(1):613–650. Zhang, Z., Zohren, S., and Roberts, S. (2019). DeepLOB: Deep convolu- tional neural networks for limit order books. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 67(11):3001–3012. Zhu, W., Lan, C., Xing, J., Zeng, W., Li, Y., Shen, L., and Xie, X. (2016). Co-occurrence feature learning for skeleton based action recognition using regularized deep lstm networks. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Con- ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , AAAI’16, page 3697–3703. AAAI Press. 49