arXiv:2110.13718v1 [q-fin.TR] 26 Oct 2021 Self-organised criticality in high frequency ﬁnance: the case of ﬂash crashes Jeremy D. Turiela,1 and Tomaso Astea,b aDepartment of Computer Science, UCL, Gower Street, WC1E6BT London, UK; bSystemic Risk Centre, London School of Economics and Politi cal Sciences, London, United Kingdom; 1Corresponding author. E-mail: jeremy .turiel@gmail.com October 27, 2021 With the rise of computing and artiﬁcial intelligence, adva nced mod- eling and forecasting has been applied to High Frequency mar kets. A crucial element of solid production modeling though relie s on the investigation of data distributions and how they relate to m odeling assumptions. In this work we investigate volume distributi ons dur- ing anomalous price events and show how their tail exponents < 2 indicate a diverging second moment of the distribution, i.e . vari- ance. We then tie the dynamics of ﬂash crashes to self-organi sed criticality. The ﬁndings are of great relevance for regulat ors and mar- ket makers as they advocate for rigorous heavy-tailed model ing of risk and changes in regulation to avoid simultaneous liquid ity with- drawals and hard risk constraints which lead to synchronisa tion and critical events. 1. Introduction High frequency trading and the dynamics of market mi- crostructure have seen growing interest in both academia an d industry, with the rise of electronic trading and the emerge nce of major HFT market makers in recent years. Electronic trad- ing has led to an increase in trading volumes and frequencies particularly in the last decade, which sparked an investiga tion into how market dynamics have evolved with market players. The literature and practitioners alike have noted that pric e eﬃciency has improved as a result, but also that exchanges, a s- sets and even markets now carry more systemic risk as a result of large players covering the whole space with similar metho ds and risk constraints shared across assets and exchanges. Th e growth in systemic risk due to electronic trading has given rise to a growing number of increasingly large ﬂash crashes (1) of which the one of May 6th 2010 was the ﬁrst notorious example. The report on the May 6th crash by Nanex ( 2) begins to suggest how high frequency order placement and saturation might have worsened the extent of the crash. The authors in (3) delve deeper into this idea and investigate ﬂash crashes between 2006 and 2011 to show a system-wide phase tran- sition around ∼ 500ms to an all-electronic trading market characterised by black swan events. Further insight into th e impact of HFT players in ﬂash crashes was provided by the simulations in ( 4), where the authors show how lowering the number of HFT players in the simulation reduces the extent of the crash, even when the size of the large sell order which triggered it is kept constant. The authors explain the relation between the number of HFT players and the extent of the crash as due to the “hot potato” phenomenon described in ( 5). This phenomenon can be explained as follows. When an unusually large sell (buy) order hits the market it gets absorbed by liquidity provider s (often HFT market makers) which, as a result, accumulate a short position in their inventory. The unusually large orde r though impacts the price and potentially triggers risk limi ts by those market makers holding the inventory. Meanwhile as the price drops (rises) dramatically ordinary market playe rs withdraw from the market. As a result of the risk limits HFTs try to reduce their inventory with aggressive market orders . As everyone else has withdrawn, they trade with each other at extremely high frequency, thereby creating high trading volumes. This particular phase characterises the “hot pota to” phenomenon, i.e. the inventory exposure being passed aroun d like a “hot potato” . The positive feedback loop continues as follows. When trading volume is used as a proxy for liquidity the “hot potat o” phenomenon creates apparent liquidity which triggers exec u- tion by lower frequency players which are also trying to redu ce exposure as the market drops. The authors in ( 5) make two further points on HFTs and modern market dynamics during these extreme events. An- other cause of apparent liquidity and market depth is ﬂeeing liquidity by HFT market makers. The fast cancellation of limit orders has been the extensive topic of discussion and was suggested to create the illusion of market depth with the consequences discussed above. As the number of trading venues and exchanges rises liq- uidity is fragmented. Sweep orders and arbitrageurs aim to move liquidity and remove arbitrage opportunities across e x- changes, but can create dangerous eﬀects. Sweep orders be- tween markets operate at lower frequencies than these fast cancellations, thereby sweeping the book after liquidity h as potentially already been removed. This worsens the systemi c aspect of these events across the fragmented liquidity stru c- ture of exchanges. Extreme events of this kind, which are characterised by non-linear reactions to shocks in the system and positive fe ed- back loops, exist in man-made and natural systems and are instances of self-organised criticality. In this type of sy stemic events the system reaches a critical state where a small rele ase in energy or imbalance triggers highly non-linear reaction s in size. This is the case of avalanches and more, as described in (6). Events with such underlying dynamics are characterised by heavy-tailed and in particular power law distributions. Th e tail’s decay exponent in these distributions is crucial for their modeling as it indicates which moments of the distribution are deﬁned and which diverge. This can be of great practical relevance for both regulators and practitioners, in partic ular market makers. These are market players with an obligation to provide liquidity at all times, such as banks, which canno t simply withdraw from the market under extreme conditions, but must continue to provide prices for their clients to trad e at. This constraint brings the need to model trade volume ﬂow 1 in the market as well as from clients also under extreme mar- ket conditions. Predictive tools for volume modeling which rely on advanced statistical methods and Artiﬁcial Intelli - gence are now being adopted by most market makers, but the underlying data distribution of the phenomenon is cruci al to estimate conﬁdence intervals on these models. For exam- ple, unbounded distributions have major implications for t he use of Gaussian-based versus distribution-agnostic (quan tiles) conﬁdence intervals and how extreme values are modeled and accounted for in terms of pricing and inventory management. Our work makes the argument that power law distributions and critical dynamics must be included in modern modeling, in particular when dealing with extreme events is the focus, as in risk modeling. From the above discussion we have shown the relevance and interest in these extreme events and how their origin was investigated in particular through simulations. Despi te the great relevance of these properties, to our knowledge no investigation of the statistical properties of these event s in their microstructural dynamics has been conducted yet. The statistics underlying extreme events are of great relevanc e for the study of the dynamics of these phenomena, but mostly for market makers who aim to provide liquidity and stability during such events and should have the tools to model and best navigate them. In this work we bridge this gap by investigating ﬂash crash events in high frequency markets from the perspective of cri t- ical systems and avalanche-like dynamics to show how the detected ﬂash crashes constitute black swan events with un- bounded trading volume distributions while the remaining o r- der ﬂow is sub-critical and bounded. This is of great impor- tance for the modeling of order ﬂow (and related assumptions ) in both normal and extreme market conditions. 2. Data In the present work we consider granular order ﬂow data for Apple (AAPL) from the NASDAQ exchange between 3/1/2017 and 25/9/2020. High frequency price data is obtained from LOBSTER ( 7) and sampled to obtain non- overlapping one minute returns. This frequency was also adopted in ( 1) and other works in the literature for the detec- tion of price jumps as it is understood that below this limit microstructural noise becomes relevant and can impact the validity of the method. The data from LOBSTER provides detailed order ﬂow data which indicates the type (limit orde r, cancellation, execution of a limit order), the side (buy or s ell) and volume of each event in the order ﬂow. This allows to iso- late trading volume and other quantities from the rest of the order ﬂow and we discuss the importance of this in Section 3. 3. Method In the present work we analyse the distribution of aggregate volumes by minute for each event type (independently of the side). We then detect price jumps and compare those dis- tributions between intervals characterised by jumps and on es which are not. We focus particularly on trades based on ﬁnd- ings from the literature on market microstructure which has identiﬁed them as the most informative type of market event in the order ﬂow ( 8), upon which much of the market impact literature is based ( 9–11). A. Jump Detection. In the present work we detect price jumps (up and down crashes) similarly to ( 1), in 1 minute non- overlapping returns. We apply the basic jump detection method from ( 12) and detect jumps at the 1% signiﬁcance level. In addition to the basic features of the method for robust volatility estimati on we obtain an estimate of intraweek periodicity and adjust th e return series and jump detection according to ( 13) as well. B. Power law ﬁt. We analyse the volume distributions for the 1min intervals and ﬁt power law functions to the tails of the empirical Complementary Cumulative Distribution Functio n (CCDF). For ﬁtting purposes, we deﬁne the tail as the per- centile interval [90% , 99.9%], where the highest values are ex- cluded to reduce ﬁtting noise and discount ﬁnite size eﬀects . We highlight that the results are robust to diﬀerent choices of tail quantile intervals, as will be discussed in Section 4. The ﬁt is then simply applied as a linear ﬁt (minimum squared error) to the log-log data. 4. Results The plots in Figure 1 show the distribution of aggregate trade volumes by minute for time intervals when a price jump was detected (Figure 1a) and those when it was not (Figure 1b). We indeed observe the distribution of jump volumes to be shifted in mean and median and characterised by higher vol- umes, but this was expected from the relation between traded volume and price impact ( 8). What is interesting is the fact that the jump distribution is not only shifted with respect to the general distribution, but also characterised by a hea v- ier tail. At this point we highlight that our jump detection method described in Section A is only aware of price changes, thereby removing any bias on explicitly selecting anomalou s volumes, apart from their potentially anomalous correspon d- ing price jump. We apply the methodology from Section B to ﬁt the power law tails of the jump and non-jump trade volume distribution CCDFs (Complementary Cumulative Distribution Function). The decay exponents are reported in Figure 1. We notice how the decay exponent of jump volumes is < 2 in modulus, while that of non-jump volumes is > 2 in modulus. Decay exponents in power law distributions are of great importanc e (6) as they indicate which moments of the distribution are de- ﬁned. Indeed a decay exponent < 2 of the probability density function indicates that the second moment of the distributi on (variance) is not deﬁned, i.e. the distribution is unbounde d, while one > 2 characterises a bounded distribution with well- deﬁned variance. This can also be viewed as the fact that the sample variance diverges with sample size for exponent < 2, while it converges to the “true” variance in the limit, for exponent > 2. As the exponent values are crucial for our discussion, we wish to clarify some robustness properties of the results in re- lation to our description of the ﬁtting methodology in Secti on B. We choose the percentile interval [90% , 99.9%] to ﬁt the power law tail, but our main results are robust to choos- ing a starting level of say 95% and not excluding the last 99.9%. The latter in particular gives a non-jump exponent > 3 ( α = 3 .21) and a virtually unchanged jump exponent. 104 10610-5 10-4 10-3 10-2 10-1 100 (a) Volume distribution and ﬁt for price jump intervals. We ﬁnd a decay exponent < 2 which indicates an unbounded critical distribution. 102 104 106 10-6 10-5 10-4 10-3 10-2 10-1 100 (b) Volume distribution and ﬁt for non-jump intervals. We ﬁnd a d ecay exponent > 3 which indicates a bounded distribution with well deﬁned mea n and variance. Fig. 1. T rading volume distributions Log-log plot of the volume distribu- tions for 1 minute intervals. The plots report the empirical distribution and power law tail ﬁt for intervals with jumps (Figure a) and no jumps (Figure b). This shows how the exponent in Figure 1b is a lower bound and our qualitative conclusions are robust. Another potential critique could arise from the fact that our ﬁt in Figure 1b excludes jump intervals and this could be the cause of the observed bounded variance as extreme values are removed. We have indeed investigated the more compre- hensive distribution which includes both jump and non-jump intervals and found that this has little statistical eﬀect o n the ﬁt and resulting exponent ( α = 2 .02). This also highlights that our ﬁltering of jump intervals alone shows the unbound- edness in their volume distribution and further supports ou r analysis and the validity of its conclusions. A very important consequence of the above observations of the diﬀerent decay exponent between jump and non-jump distributions, rather than just a shift, is the fact that ind eed the two sets of intervals have diﬀerent underlying distribu - tions, generating processes and resulting characteristic s. We report that the idea that the order ﬂow distribution is not fully stationary and that it might inﬂuence the impact and subsequent order ﬂow is already hinted by Bouchaud et al. in (14) on the basis of previous studies on impact ( 9, 15, 16). 104 10610-5 10-4 10-3 10-2 10-1 100 (a) Volume distribution and ﬁt for price jump intervals with positive return. We ﬁnd a decay exponent < 2 which indicates an unbounded critical distribution. 104 10610-5 10-4 10-3 10-2 10-1 100 (b) Volume distribution and ﬁt for price jump intervals with negative return. We ﬁnd a decay exponent < 2 which indicates an unbounded critical distribution. Fig. 2. T rading volume distributions by return sign Log-log plot of the volume distributions for 1 minute intervals. The plots repo rt the empirical distribution and power law tail ﬁt for intervals with jumps and positive (F igure a) and negative (Figure b) corresponding price returns. Our ﬁnding adds the essential point to the microstructural literature than indeed volume distributions are heavy-tai led, but that under “normal” market conditions the distribution is bounded and can be well approximated by a normal distri- bution with well-deﬁned variance. On the other hand, black swan events in volume bursts belong to a diﬀerent distributi on and process altogether. From the perspective of self-organ ised criticality, anomalous price jumps present an underlying v ol- ume process characterised by black swan events of onbounded magnitude where events of arbitrarily large sizes are chara c- terised by non-zero probabilities. The distinction is crucial in this context as black swan events characterise unbounded distributions alone and we o b- serve how these extreme and anomalous price events are char- acterised by black swan events in the underlying market ac- tivity. This indeed supports the thesis from the literature de- scribed in Section 1 that crashes are characterised by a very large and concentrated trade activity with unbounded vari- ance, diﬀerent from the trade distribution of regular order ﬂow. A generalisation of the results from Figure 1a is presented in Figure 2, which provides further insights into the dynamics of crashes in relation to known stylised facts. It is broadly accepted in the literature that the return dis- tribution is asymmetric with a heavier tail for negative re- turns ( 17). Based on the relation between volume imbalance and price returns ( 18) one could suggest that the detected jumps correspond to negative returns which present a heavie r tailed volume distribution. We show that our jump detection method accounts for this asymmetry as we detect a similar number of positive and negative jumps. Further, exponents for the volume distributions of positive and negative retur n intervals in Figure 2 are both consistent with our previous ﬁnd- ings from Figure 1. However, we highlight that, as expected, negative return intervals are characterised by a heavier di stri- bution tail as events are more extreme to the downside. All the above ﬁndings have crucial practical implications for ﬁnancial modeling where Normality assumptions are stil l widespread, in particular in risk models. We highlight that ex- treme events originating from a heavy-tailed distribution with unbounded variance are not compatible with assumptions of Normality and their unbounded variance causes to overesti- mate signiﬁcantly the variance of the “normal” underlying volume distribution. The particular features of the trade volume distribution in ﬂash crashes support the anecdotal explanation of the “hot potato” phenomenon in the literature ( 5) which suggests that HFT market makers stay in the market under extreme condi- tions and absorb large trades which cause them to build up large inventories. Once inventory limits are hit the player s look to reduce it more aggressively as the price moves agains t them, but can only trade with each other. This causes the positive feedback loop of frenetic trading activities betw een these market makers trying to reduce their exposure. On top of the market makers trading aggressively and driving the price further up or down on the crash, other players see an increase in traded volume which they interpret as liquid- ity and start adding to the imbalance in order ﬂow, as they try to reduce their losses during the crash. The careful read er can indeed understand from here why these events are particu - larly characterised by unbounded traded volume distributi ons which originate from dynamics of positive feedback loops an al- ogous to those of self-organised criticality ( 6). The dynam- ics described above induce a positive feedback loop which is bounded by human actions or lack of activity by lower fre- quency agents, but it is unbounded is size in its underlying nature. This further highlights the need for careful regula tion of such events as their potential risk is unbounded. The reader should be aware that our calibration for jump detection discounts changes in overall volatility and dete cts anomalously large jumps. These time intervals are not only characterised by large price changes, but by anomalous ones . These originate from avalanche-like negative feedback loo ps which cause black swan-like trading activity events. We hig h- light that we have also analysed other order ﬂow events such as limit orders and deletions, but trades are the only event we see to be bounded for non-jump intervals and unbounded for jump intervals. These events are indeed anomalous as particularly trade volumes are carefully calibrated by mar ket participants under normal market conditions in order to min - imise impact and detectability of the order ﬂow. 5. Conclusion In this work we investigate anomalous price changes in high frequency markets, also known as ﬂash crashes. We analyse the volume distribution over 1 minute time intervals and sho w that intervals with no anomalous price changes have a tail ex - ponent > 2 which implies a well deﬁned variance. Intervals with anomalous price changes present a volume distribution with tail exponent < 2 which is characterised by black swan events and unbounded variance. Our ﬁndings reﬂect the anal- yses in the literature suggesting how such anomalous crashe s originate from positive feedback loops which involve HFT ma r- ket players. This is in line with ﬁndings in self-organised c rit- icality on natural phenomena such as avalanches. Correct statistics is crucial for risk modeling, in particular when fo- cusing on extreme events. The unboundedness of the crash volume distribution makes the argument for the use of robust heavy-tailed statistics in volume forecasting and risk mod el- ing in high frequency markets. Further, the positive feedba ck loops and the risk of black swan events and market disrup- tions should prompt market regulators to make sure that risk constraints are being implemented in a fragmented manner across assets, exchanges and players to avoid alignments in trading halts and liquidity withdrawals. 1. Calcagnile LM, Bormetti G, T reccani M, Marmi S, Lillo F (20 18) Collective synchronization and high frequency systemic instabilities in ﬁnancial markets . Quantitative Finance 18(2):237– 247. 2. Nanex L (2010) Nanex ﬂash crash summary report. 3. Johnson N, et al. (2012) Financial black swans driven by ul trafast machine ecology . arXiv preprint arXiv:1202.1448. 4. Paddrik M, et al. (2012) An agent based model of the e-mini s &p 500 applied to ﬂash crash analysis in 2012 IEEE Conference on Computational Intelligence for Fin ancial Engineering & Economics (CIFEr) . (IEEE), pp. 1–8. 5. Golub A, Keane J, Poon SH (2012) High frequency trading and mini ﬂash crashes. Available at SSRN 2182097 . 6. Christensen K, Moloney NR (2005) Complexity and criticality . (World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company) Vol. 1. 7. Huang R, Polak T (2011) Lobster: Limit order book reconstr uction system. SSRN Electronic Journal. 8. Potters M, Bouchaud JP (2003) More statistical propertie s of order books and price impact. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 324(1-2):133–140. 9. Bouchaud JP , Farmer JD, Lillo F (2009) How markets slowly d igest changes in supply and demand in Handbook of ﬁnancial markets: dynamics and evolution . (Elsevier), pp. 57–160. 10. Bouchaud JP , Gefen Y , Potters M, Wyart M (2004) Fluctuati ons and response in ﬁnancial markets: the subtle nature of ‘random’price changes. Quantitative ﬁnance 4(2):176–190. 11. Bouchaud JP , Kockelkoren J, Potters M (2006) Random walk s, liquidity molasses and critical response in ﬁnancial markets. Quantitative ﬁnance 6(02):115–123. 12. Lee SS, Mykland P A (2008) Jumps in ﬁnancial markets: A new nonparametric test and jump dynamics. The Review of Financial Studies 21(6):2535–2563. 13. Boudt K, Croux C, Laurent S (2011) Robust estimation of in traweek periodicity in volatility and jump detection. Journal of Empirical Finance 18(2):353–367. 14. Eisler Z, Bouchaud JP , Kockelkoren J (2012) The price imp act of order book events: market orders, limit orders and cancellations. Quantitative Finance 12(9):1395–1419. 15. Farmer JD, Gerig A, Lillo F , Mike S (2006) Market efﬁcienc y and the long-memory of supply and demand: is price impact variable and permanent or ﬁxed an d temporary? Quantitative ﬁnance 6(02):107–112. 16. Gerig A (2008) A theory for market impact: How order ﬂow af fects stock price. arXiv preprint arXiv:0804.3818. 17. Bouchaud JP , Bonart J, Donier J, Gould M (2018) T rades, quotes and prices: ﬁnancial mar- kets under the microscope . (Cambridge University Press). 18. Cont R, Kukanov A, Stoikov S (2014) The price impact of ord er book events. Journal of ﬁnancial econometrics 12(1):47–88.