Information dynamics of price and liquidity around the 2017 Bitcoin markets crash Vaiva Vasiliauskaite Computational Social Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland. Email: vvasiliau@ethz.ch Fabrizio Lillo Dipartimento di Matematica, Università di Bologna and Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, Italy Nino Antulov-Fantulin Computational Social Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland (Dated: November 18, 2021) We study information dynamics between the largest Bitcoin exchange markets during the bubble in 2017- 2018. By analysing high-frequency market-microstructure observables with different information theoretic measures for dynamical systems, we ﬁnd temporal changes in information sharing across markets. In par- ticular, we study time-varying components of predictability, memory, and (a)synchronous coupling, measured by transfer entropy, active information storage, and multi-information. By comparing these empirical ﬁndings with several models we argue that some results could relate to intra-market and inter-market regime shifts, and changes in direction of information ﬂow between different market observables. Bitcoin is a cryptocurrency that was originally designed as a medium of exchange [1], however there is still no strong consensus as to whether it is a currency, a commodity or an asset [2–4]. Cryptocurrencies are usually transmitted and cre- ated via distributed peer-to-peer networks with well-deﬁned cryptographic protocols that record the system’s state via pub- lic ledger (blockchain). Thus blockchain (or another type of a ledger that maintains knowledge of distributed consensus) is at the heart of digital currencies. The blockchain technology promises beneﬁts such as proving the existence of an asset as well as keeping track of its current and all past ownerships, both in a distributed manner. It also plays a role in crypto- asset price discovery [5]. Electronic coins, such as Bitcoin, are “chains” of digital signatures: an owner transfers the coin by digitally signing a hash of the previous transaction and the public key of the next owner, adding them to the end of the coin. The ex- change of cryptocurrencies to ﬁat money (USD, EUR, GBP, etc.) occurs in cryptocurrency exchange markets which are based on electronic double auctions, operating using limit or- der books. Here, real-time market data, such as transaction volume, amount of bid and ask orders, and exogenous infor- mation, such as news and social media mentions, are sources of information that feed into trading decisions. Within the crypto-market ecosystem, two distinguishable types of infor- mation sources exist: intra-market sources and inter-market sources. The ﬁrst source is related to internal dynamics of a market’s limit order book, e.g., its liquidity and volatility, that may inﬂuence trading decisions [6] as well as one another [7]. The second source is related to communication between dif- ferent markets. Therefore, any two crypto-markets are “con- nected”: explicitly, when there is a mutually traded currency (or an arbitrage opportunity), or implicitly, when prices of cur- rencies amongst several markets are correlated. The blockchain ensures that, in the long run, price of a cryp- tocurrency develops synchronously across exchanges, i.e., the law of one price holds [5]. However, even without the pres- ence of blockchain, one would expect price synchronisation across different venues due to arbitrage [8]. Hence, Bitcoin price is processed collectively, in a distributed manner. Its dy- namics is affected both by internal feedback and by exogenous information (e.g., public news), as illustrated in Fig. 1. It is not clear, however, what type of information is the most relevant for the price formation process. Often, these multiple inﬂu- ences lead to very large ﬂuctuations (high volatility in techni- cal terms) of exchange rates between cryptocurrencies and ﬁat money, price bubbles, and sudden price crashes. These prop- erties make cryptocurrencies exchange rates a unique labora- tory to empirically study the collective dynamics leading to market instabilities, which are well known to be ubiquitous in all ﬁnancial markets. Although at low frequencies, the prices of Bitcoin in differ- ent markets (and, oftentimes, prices of other cryptocurrencies in relation to Bitcoin) develop in apparent synchrony, the law of one price does not hold at very high frequencies [8, 9]. Fur- thermore, at sufﬁciently high frequency, one observes lagged relationships between the prices of the asset(s), i.e., past in- formation about the change in price of one cryptocurrency is informative for predicting the future price change of another cryptocurrency. Such mechanisms are detectable with infor- mation transfer measures: linear relationships can be detected via Granger causality [10], while more general nonlinear de- pendencies can be detected via transfer entropy [11, 12], that is one of constituents of a process’s entropy. Entropy itself relates to computation: at each point in time, computation of the next state of the process. When a system is composed of multiple interacting units, information transfer could be thought of as communication or signalling, and the system as a whole as processing information to determine its col- lective behaviour at each time step via distributed computa- tion. A study of information dynamics aims to decompose this computation into unique elements, namely, transferred, stored, and modiﬁed information, and their changes in space and time [13, 14]. Spatio-temporal patterns of information dynamics (in par- ticular, information transfer and multi-information) within the system of interacting markets was observed to increase in the ﬁnancial crisis periods, meaning that the system appears to be arXiv:2111.09057v1 [q-fin.ST] 17 Nov 2021 2 Exogenous information Information transfer Memory in use Market observables, e.g., liquidity, volatility, trade volume FIG. 1: Information is shared between markets (house icons) and within markets. Different nodes indicate separate market observables, discussed in Section I. Past information about one market observable (e.g., volatility) can be used by the same market observable (a self-loop), as well as by other market observables (edges between different colour nodes in the same market). Information is also shared across markets (edges amongst market icons), and the system as a whole is also exposed to unknown exogenous information (curly arrows). more synchronised [15]. Such synchronisation of a system could be a precursor of a “phase transition” [16, 17]—a dra- matic dynamical shift that occurs due to exogenous or endoge- nous events that perturb the system. Inefﬁciencies and delays of transfer of information amongst system’s constituents open possibilities for arbitrage, risk, distress spillover across mar- kets. They may also be precursors of price bubbles. Although the information theoretic measures have been shown to sig- nify dramatic dynamical changes in the system, both where the phase transition can be pinpointed exactly [18, 19], as well as when they are discussed in a more qualitative manner [20], the observed dynamical patterns are difﬁcult to interpret. This is particularly challenging if the data is incomplete, unrepre- sentative, noisy, e.g., sampled at a low [21], inconsistent fre- quency, with not all relevant system’s constituents taken into account, using erroneous measurement tools. Therefore, in this paper, our aim is twofold. First, we study several econometric models that couple market microstruc- ture variables. Our aim is to ﬁnd out whether a particu- lar coupling and its (sudden or slow) change are detectable with information dynamics tools. We then analyse the persis- tence of information dynamical patterns that signify a partic- ular regime shift. We then analyse information dynamics pat- terns across markets during one turbulent event in the crypto- market ecosystem, namely, the Bitcoin bubble in 2017-18. We remind that the bubble occurred in December 2017 when Bit- coin price went up from around 6 ,463$ on the 1st of Novem- ber, 2017 to, at that time, an all-time-high of 19 ,716$ on the 17th of December, see the left panel of Fig. 2. After this crash date the price dropped to 11 ,414$ before the end of the year, descending for weeks and months afterwards. Furthermore, ripple effects of the Bitcoin bubble also penetrated to other cryptocurrencies, and much research has been put in studying the drivers of the crypto crash, e.g. see [22]. This price bub- ble is also unique in that in 2017 Bitcoin was still a dominant cryptocurrency with the largest market capitalisation. At the time of writing, alternative coins have become more promi- nent. Assuming that high frequency market data related to Bitcoin traded against dollar and Tether captures majority of the dynamics that took place at that time, we concentrate our attention on information dynamics within and across markets using this particular set of data. The paper is organised as follows. First, in Section I, we describe the data used, as well as market microstructure ob- servables, related to price as well as liquidity in markets, that we use for inference of information dynamics measures in Section I. A methods section Section II includes description of information theoretical tools, experimental setup for data analysis, and analysis of models. We report the data analysis results in Section III and conclude the paper with a discussion in Section IV. I. DATA The data for this paper are tick-level trading and order book data obtained from [23]. Data of trades is provided at a mil- lisecond frequency, and for observables based on this data, we aggregate the information to a minute level frequency. The limit order book data consists of one snapshot in each minute. Since the snapshots are not taken at exactly the same second of a minute in different markets, we align the data from the limit order books and from trades to ensure the lack of non-causal information ﬂows. We describe this procedure in Appendix A. Note that the alignment procedure ensures that causal order of events is respected when we treat snapshots of a limit order book as a discrete-time process that is studied at a frequency that is at most one minute. For the proceeding analysis, we restrict our attention to the most liquid and the largest cryptocurrency — Bitcoin (BTC), traded against either a ﬁat currency of US dollar (USD) or Tether (USDT), astablecoin, designed to be worth $1.00 at all times. More speciﬁcally, we consider Bitcoin traded against USD in the following venues: Gemini, BTC-e, Bitstamp, Coinbase, Kraken, HitBTC, Bitﬁnex, and against USDT in Binance, Bittrex, and Poloniex. The time period under our study ranges from 1 st of November, 2017 to 1 st of February, 2018. This period involves a price bubble observed in Bit- coin as well as other cryptocurrencies. The left panel of Fig. 2 shows the price dynamics. Microstructural variables In order to study the price and liquidity dynamics in the dif- ferent venues, we introduce three market microstructure vari- ables. 3 Nov Dec Jan 2018 Date 5 10 15 20Price/103 Nov Dec Jan 2018 Date 20 0 20 /103 Nov Dec Jan 2018 Date 10 20 30s FIG. 2: Left: average mid-price of Bitcoin (black). Middle: realised order imbalance expressed in quote currency, aggregated across 12-hour windows and all considered trading venues (black). Right: average 12-hour spread (black). Red lines indicate the peak of the bubble, and the green dotted lines indicate the dates at which each observable reached the maximum value (for price, we show the date of the maximum value of the price returns). From left to right, each dotted green line indicates the following dates: 2017-12-10, 2017-12-07, 2017-12-08. The red line is positioned at 2017-12-17. a. Price quantiﬁes the value of an asset. Here we de- ﬁne price as the mid-price at each snapshot of the order book, namely pt = pat +pbt 2 , where pa, pb are, respectively, the best ask and bid price at time t. We deﬁne the price increments (here- after termed returns for simplicity) as rt = pt− pt−1. Price dynamics is strongly asymmetric around market crashes and shows a slow (power law) relaxation of volatility [24]. b. Order imbalance quantiﬁes the demand of liquidity takers. Speciﬁcally, suppose we have a set of executed trades, indexed over arbitrary integer index i : i∈ Z, and each trade also has an associated time stamp ti∈ R+, a sign εi∈{− 1,1} and a volume vi∈ R+. If the trade is initiated by a buyer, then its sign is εi = +1, while εi =−1 for seller-initiated trades. We deﬁne order imbalance for the time interval (t− δ ,t] as a sum of the signed volumes of all trades within the interval: Ot = ∑ i|t−δ <ti≤t εivi. (1) Similarly, O can be expressed in quote currency: O$,t = ∑i|t−δ <ti≤t εivi pi if pi is the transaction price. For the rela- tion between order ﬂow and price returns, see for example [25, 26]. c. Spread is a symmetric measure of market’s liquidity (as small spread indicates that trades are easily executable), and is deﬁned as st = pa t− pb t . Spread has been shown to display nonsymmetric dynamics around market crashes [27]. In Fig. 2, we show the dynamics of price, order imbalance and spread for time period from 1 st of November, 2017 to 1st of February, 2018. II. METHODS A. Information dynamics for stochastic processes Consider a system, composed of N stochastic processes {X α}α∈Ω, together forming a multivariate process XΩ. Each stochastic process X α is a collection of random variables {X α t }t∈N+ with Q the total number of observations. For each random variable Xt, its realised value is deﬁned as xt. Note that Ω denotes the ﬁnite set of markets in this pa- per. In the deﬁnitions of information dynamics measures, we will use subscripts X, Y to refer to information dynam- ics amongst some two stochastic processes (e.g. X = X α, Y = X β ). These information dynamics measures will be de- ﬁned using length- l and length-k collections of random vari- ables, for each time t: Y(l) t−δ ={Yt−δ−l,Yt−δ−l+1, ...,Yt−δ}, X(k) t−1 ={Xt−1−k,Xt−1−k+1, ...,Xt−1}, where δ is a time delay. a. Information-theoretic measures for static variables The fundamental quantity in this work is Shannon entropy of a random variable X, deﬁned as H(X) =− ∑x p(x)log p(x). Here x is an instance of a random variable, and the sum is over of all possible values thatx can take. Conditional entropy ofX given Y is the average uncertainty that remains about X after learning the values of Y : H(X|Y ) =− ∑x,y p(x,y)log p(x|y). Mutual information between X and Y measures the average amount of information that is communicated in one random variable about another. Y : I(X,Y ) = H(X)− H(X|Y ). The conditional mutual information between X and Y when Z is known is deﬁned as I(X,Y|Z) = H(X|Z)− H(X|Y,Z). These information-theoretic measures for static variables can also be adapted to analyse stochastic processes. When temporal information is incorporated, one can quantify: how much information is shared between system’s units at each point in time; how much information about the current state of X is conveyed in the past states ofY ; how much information about the current state ofX is conveyed in the past states ofX. These questions can be addressed with information dynamics measures [13, 14] that are summarised below. b. Multi-information Multi-information (MI) is deﬁned as a measure of the deviation from independence of the com- ponents in the system [14, 28]: IXΩ = ( N ∑ α=1 H(X α t ) ) − H(XΩ t ). (2) Large value of MI is a signature of high synchronous inter- connectivity of a system. 4 c. Transfer entropy Transfer entropy (TE) encapsulates the “distributed nature” of computation. Schreiber [11], and, independently, Paluš et al. [12], deﬁned TE as the amount of information that a source process Y , and, in particular, its past state Y(l) t−δ provides about a target’s state Xt in the context of the target’s immediate past stateX(k) t−1 [13]: T (k,l,δ ) Y→X = I(Y(l) t−δ ,Xt|X(k) t−1) (3) = H(Xt|X(k) t−1)− H(Xt|X(k) t−1,Y(l) t−δ ). This formulation of information transfer quantiﬁes pairwise relationships between variables. When a system is composed of more than two stochastic processes, (3) is known as ap- parent transfer entropy , as it does not account unobserved sources, potentially leading to over-estimation of the total amount of entropy transferred within the system. d. Conditional transfer entropy To discount redundant joint inﬂuences of two sources Y,Z on a target X, (3) is gener- alised to a measure of transfer entropy from Y to X given that Z can also provide information about X: T (k,l,m,δ ) Y→X|Z = I(Y(l) t−δ ,Xt|X(k) t−1,Z(m) t−1) (4) = H(Xt|X(k) t−1,Z(m) t−1)− H(Xt|X(k) t−1,Y(l) t−δ ,Z(m) t−1). Finally, the conditional TE can be generalised to account for a multivariate set of processes with the next deﬁnition. e. Collective transfer entropy To ﬁnd the total amount of information that was collectively transferred to a target X from all potential sources in the system, we use collec- tive TE , TX, which accounts for redundancies and syner- gies among information that sources provide to a target [14]. To compute TX, we consider a set XΩ. The true effect of one source variable Y to the target variable X in the uni- verse of XΩ is computed through conditional transfer en- tropy: TY→X|XΩ\{Y} X , where XΩ\{Y} X ={Z∈ XΩ\{X,Y}}. How- ever ∑Y TY→X|XΩ\{Y} X would not be equal to the total amount of information transferred to X, as only unique informa- tion [29] would be accounted for. To calculate the collective TE (see [14] for more details), we sum incrementally condi- tional TE terms. Let us consider an ordered set XΩ X ={Z∈ XΩ\{X}} : Z1, ...,Zβ , ...,ZN−1 and its subset XΩ,β X ={Zα∈ XΩ X|α≤ β}. Collective transfer entropy is then deﬁned as T (k) X = N−1 ∑ β =1 TY β→X|XΩ,β−1 X . (5) f. Active information storage Overall, the predictability of the next state of a process X is characterised by its entropy, whose non-overlapping constituents are the collective trans- fer entropy T (k) X , the active information storage (AIS), A(k) X , deﬁned as memory of the process that is actively in use [14]: A(k) X = I(X(k) t−1,Xt ) = H(Xt )− H(Xt|X(k) t−1). (6) AIS is information in the past that contributes to the computa- tion in the next state of X. g. Local information dynamics The measures deﬁned above can also be considered in a point-wise fashion, as they are expectation values of local measures at each observation at time τ as follows [14, 18]: IXΩ =⟨iXΩ(τ)⟩τ = 1 Q Q ∑ τ=1 log p(x1 τ ,x2 τ , ...,xN τ ) ∏N α=1 p(xατ ) , (7) T (k,l,δ ) Y→X =⟨t(k,l,δ ) Y→X (τ)⟩τ = 1 Q Q ∑ τ=1 log p(xτ+1|x(k) τ ,y(l) τ ) p(xτ+1|x(k) τ ) , A(k) X =⟨a(k) X (τ)⟩τ = 1 Q Q ∑ τ=1 log p(xτ+1,x(k) τ ) p(xτ+1)p(x(k) τ ) . B. Experimental setup a. Information dynamics We use Java Information Dy- namics Toolkit – JIDT [30] to compute all information dynamics quantities. For the TE estimator, we choose Kraskov, Stögbauer, Grassberger K-nearest neighbour estima- tor (KSG) [31], which is minimally parameterised and has been shown to be robust for a wide range of data. To en- sure our estimates are reliable, we studied sample-size bias of transfer entropy using the approach of [32] as described in Appendix C. We found that K = 4 for nearest neighbours es- timator produces reliable results for our dataset. All values of information dynamics are reported in units of nats. Throughout the paper, we considered the case where l = 1. To ensure that we do not over-estimate information transfer for active information storage —the memory of a process in use—of X, we chose k = argmax κ∈[1,60] (A(κ) X ) for results in Sec- tion III A and k = argmax κ∈[1,10] (A(κ) X ) for results in Section III B. We then used this k when computing TY→X as well as TX. Lastly, as was demonstrated in [33], when two processes are coupled via non-zero delay u, T (δ ) Y→X is maximised for δ = u. Therefore, we consider T (δ ) Y→X for δ∈ [1,10], and select δ for which T (δ ) Y→X is maximal. Such procedure ensures that non- instantaneous coupling across markets is also captured. For the results in Section III B we do not do this and consider a ﬁxed δ = 1. b. Rolling windows For results discussed in Section III A we considered weekly subsets of the time series, mov- ing each sliding window by three days with respect to the pre- vious one. In such a way we achieve a twofold advantage. First, we reveal temporal patterns in information dynamics. Secondly, we ensure that the data is locally stationary (we ex- pect the time series associated with markets around the crash to be globally non-stationary, however, at sufﬁciently small time windows intervals we observe stationary time series). In Section III B we considered two non-overlapping time series windows: the data preceding the price crash date (December 17th,2017) and the remainder. c. TE Signiﬁcance test All reported results are signiﬁ- cant, where signiﬁcance is tested against the null hypothesis 5 that no information transfer exists. For all results, we used 100 surrogate time series to evaluate signiﬁcance, and, un- less otherwise stated, we chose the signiﬁcance level of 0 .05. For the results of Section III A in each time window a Ben- jamini–Yekutieli procedure [34] was also performed. d. Stationarity test For each observable’s time series in all rolling windows, we considered the Augmented Dickey- Fuller (ADF) test [35] whose null hypothesis is a presence of a unit root, and we use signiﬁcance level of 0.05. We found that we can reject the null hypothesis that there is a unit root with a 5% of signiﬁcance level for the test statistics for all of the time windows of s, O time series. Contrary, we found the presence of unit-roots in price time series, so we used price returns (i.e. equal to applying difference operation rt = pt− pt−1), after which all time windows passed the ADF test. C. Statistics of information dynamics In the data analysis part, we will consider information dy- namics, described in Section II, ﬁrst using one of the ob- servables for each market. In doing so, we assume that the strongest coupling occurs through the same observable (spread in α has a stronger effect on spread in β than on price returns in β), see Fig. 3 for an illustration. Secondly, we also consider the extent to which market variables are internally coupled via different observables (e.g., quantifying how much spread in α has an effect on price returns in α). See Fig. 4 for an illustration. To interpret the results, we aggregate informa- tion dynamics measures into several spatio-temporal global and local metrics. For each information dynamics metric, namely, MI, AIS, and TE, the argumentw denotes the time series window, based on which the reported values are computed. We will also de- note one microstructure observable (e.g., s), with the same capital letter that deﬁnes a random variable for a market, e.g., TX α→X β denotes transfer entropy from a market α to a mar- ket β considering the same market micrstructure observable X, while TX α→Y β would indicate that different microstructure observables are considered. a. Global metrics To quantify the global, system- describing information dynamics, we aggregate results ob- tained for all markets within a time series window. In particu- lar, in Section III A we study the extent to which a microstruc- tural variable in one market affects the same microstructural variable in another market. Therefore the extent of this effect is captured with a sum of transfer entropies (3) between all pairs of markets, namely, the total apparent transfer entropy: T app,sys X = ∑ α,β|α⁄=β TX α→X β (8) and the total collective transfer entropy T coll,sys X = ∑ α TX α . (9) These two metrics reﬂect on the total amount of information transfer within the system. Similarly, we also study markets’ synchronisation within one variable via the multi-information: in the deﬁnition (2) we consider XΩ as a union of random variables that describe a single market observable in N markets, denoting it as Isys XΩ in the further discussion. Lastly, we report the average active information storage , Asys X , deﬁned as Asys X = 1 N N ∑ α=1 AX α =⟨AX α⟩α , (10) i.e., it is the average AIS per market, at a each time series window. b. Market-speciﬁc statistics To analyse the market- speciﬁc information dynamics measures, we will consider av- erages of a measure obtained from different time windows w∈ [1,W ]. The amount of information transfer received by each individual market α, termed an average collective trans- fer entropy is deﬁned as T coll X α = 1 W W ∑ w=1 TX α (w) =⟨TX α⟩w, (11) and an individual market’s average AISis deﬁned as AX α = 1 W W ∑ w=1 AX α (w) =⟨AX α⟩w. (12) c. Comparison between inter- and intra- market connec- tivity In Section III B we consider the amount of information transfer between microstructure observables within one mar- ket. Therefore, we compute the apparent information transfer of the form TX α→Y α , and contrast the amount of information transfer within the market to the amount of information shar- ing across markets. To make a fair comparison, we normalise the average values of TE per possible link in a transfer entropy network where nodes are market observables. For the comparative analysis of inter- and intra- market interactions, consider a directed graph that consists of three nodes that represent our observables. We map information transfer results onto this triadic graph, in which multiple edges are allowed between node pairs. Furthermore, each node is allowed to have multiple self-loops. The directed multi-graph representation depicts information transfer amongst different observables in a market (a somewhat endogenous information ﬂow). In opposition to this type of internal information shar- ing, we also allow for inter-market connectivity, as discussed in Section III A (this can be thought of as exogenous informa- tion ﬂow). Such links are represented as loops in the directed multi-graph, as information is transferred from an observable in one market to the same observable in another. By appropri- ate edge averaging, we will turn this directed multi-graph into a directed graph that depicts averaged information transfer. Each loop represents a signiﬁcant transfer entropy link from one market to another, therefore, at most, there can be N(N− 1) self-loops for each node-observable, since each market can have 2(N−1) TE links (N−1 incoming and N−1 outgoing). 6 Time Price crash Peak in MI Maximum value obtained by the observable FIG. 3: Illustration of analysis described in Section III A. We choose one observable (illustrated with green node) for each market. We then divide the observable’s time series into overlapping sliding windows and compute information dynamical quantities (MI, TE) between markets using this one observable. The connectivity between markets via green observable’s “channel” is illustrated with green edges linking different markets. We also compute the AIS for each market; this is illustrated with a self-loop for green node. Given a set of individual market’s, or pairs of markets information dynamics quantities, we then aggregate these quantities into global statistics for each time window. The timeline illustrates three critical points: the price crash date, the date when we observe the maximum value obtained by the (green) observable, and the peak in MI for a given same observable. In Fig. 7 these points are shown in vertical lines of corresponding colours. We calculate the averaged TE for an observableX between all pairs of markets α, β as: ωself X =⟨TX α→X β⟩α,β = N ∑ α=1 N ∑ β =1|β⁄=α TX α→X β . (13) We also compute the average strength of incoming links, ωin, and outgoing links ωout: ωin X =⟨TY α→X α⟩α,Y = 1 N(N− 1) ∑ Y⁄=X N ∑ α=1 TY α→X α (14) ωout X =⟨TX α→Y α⟩α,Y = 1 N(N− 1) ∑ Y⁄=X N ∑ α=1 TX α→Y α (15) Here X represents one type of observable, e.g.,s, and Y repre- sents a different observable, e.g., r. D. Models of non-linear information transfer in complex systems Here we deﬁne two case models of stochastic processes coupled via lagged non-linear interaction. By analysing the information-theoretic, spatio-temporal signatures of these models, we will be able to explain in the information dynam- ics trends observed using real market microstructure data. a. Vector auto-regressive model of regime shifts Let us ﬁrst consider two coupled auto-regressive processes: Xt = α1Xt−1 + β1ε1,t + K(t)εt (16) Yt = α2Yt−1 + β2ε2,t + K(t)εt +C(t)|Xt−1|d , FIG. 4: Illustration of analysis described in Section III B. Each market is characterised by a set of market microstructure observables (nodes of the same colour illustrates the same observable). In the section we discuss the information transfer between observables. TE between the same observable is illustrated as an edge between nodes of the same colour and results into self-loops in a resulting multigraph where nodes represent microstructure observables. We allow for multiple loops where each edge represents a link based on a single pair of markets. TE between different observables is illustrates as the ﬂow from one colour nodes to another colour nodes. In a resulting directed multigraph these connections are edges between nodes. We again allow for multiple edges where each indicates information transfer from one observable in a market to another observable in the same market, calculated for all markets. The illustration emphasises how connectivity in the triadic multidigraph is obtained for a “green observable”. i.e., we have a time-delayed directional coupling X→ Y , whose time-varying strength is C(t). In addition to this, let us assume the presence of a common, time-varying hidden driver 7 whose strength is K(t). ε terms denote independent Gaussian noise. Here d is a constant, that we use to vary the linearity of the causal link from X to Y . Note that the hidden driver term K(t)εt is present in both variables without any delay. This model is useful to analyse causal interaction amongst system’s sub-units when they are “of the same type”, i.e., representing the same market observable in some pair of markets. We consider several potential systemic changes, and local information dynamics signatures associated with them. A regime shift itself is deﬁned as a signiﬁcant change in the strength of a certain type of coupling between two variables, observed at a certain point in time tC. In particular, here we consider a time-varying coupling strength f modelled via lo- gistic function f (t) = s 1 + e−b(t−tC) +C. (17) Here s relates to the maximum value of the function, and b to the sharpness of the transition. For example, a regime shift of a causal driver may be modelled as a change of a coupling strength term C(t). As Fig. 5(a) shows, in case of a regime shift in a causal driver, we observe a signiﬁcant change in the absolute values of local information dynamical measures [36]. This situation is characterised by large TE and large AIS in high coupling regime and no signiﬁcant change in MI. In the Appendix, we also show that a change in MI is also possible, when K(t)’s absolute value is large: its value is high when AIS and TE values are low and vice versa. Similarly the case of a regime shift of a hidden (common, simultaneous) driver can be modelled via variation in the cou- pling strength K(t). The result, shown in Fig. 5(b) suggests that the change in a hidden driver’s strength is signiﬁed by high MI when coupling is strong, and vice versa when cou- pling is weak. Note that changes in AIS and TE are possible: the former is possible when K(t) is sufﬁciently high-valued, while the latter is possible when C(t) is high-valued. Lastly, we studied a case when β1 = β2 = β (t), deﬁned using (17) i.e., the system’s overall uncertainty is a time func- tional, while C(t) = K(t) = 0.3 =const. In this case, we ﬁnd that all three information dynamic measures can be mutually low-valued the side of transition that models high-uncertainty regime, and mutually low-valued on the other, where the sys- tem’s intrinsic uncertainty is low, see Fig. 5(c). In the Appendix D we also show that the results are ro- bust for a wide range of parameter values s,b,C. Although the analysis ensures that the results shown in Fig. 5 are not coincidental, further statistical proof is needed to prove that signatures are persistent in a general spectrum of nonlinearly coupled autoregressive systems. We also note that it is more than possible that a combination of these effects comes into play in real data, and such convolution and its signature is not studied any further in the current work. b. GARCH model for price returns and spread Next, we analyse a model of coupling between different market mi- crostructure variables, using a variant of generalised autore- gressive conditional heteroskedasticity [7, 37]. Our model considers possibly bidirectional coupling between price re- turns r and spread s when spread is coupled to volatility (vari- ance) of price. Therefore we have coupled time series of the form: rt = σt ε1,t , ε1,t∼ N (0,1) (18) σ 2 t = w + αr2 t−1 + β σ2 t−1 + γs2 t−1, s2 t = as2 t−1 + bσ 2 t−1 + cε2 2,t ε2,t∼ N (0,1). Compared to the standard GARCH(1,1) [37] (where “(1,1)” indicates that there is one variance dependence term, and the second indicates that there is one ARCH term ε, w de- notes constant base level of volatility, α, β determine the in- ﬂuence of past squared returns and past volatility), we have several additional parameters, a,b,c, γ. The new parameters have the following economic interpretation: a is the (bare, i.e., not volatility driven) persistence of the spread, which is known to be strongly autocorrelated (especially for small tick stocks) [27]; c measures the dispersion of spread and εt is the associated innovation noise; b links past volatility to future spread. It might be connected with asymmetric information, since market makers adjust spread according to volatility (see, for example [7]); γ links past spread with future volatility. If the spread is large, it is likely that the limit order book is sparse (as empirically shown in [38]). But a sparse, i.e., illiq- uid, book leads to a more volatile price, since any order can create a large price change [39]. Note that in this formulation, a link from price to spread is indirect, and in fact price returns affect spread at the two- step delay. Therefore in the following ﬁgures we will scan through δ∈ [1,2] and use the one for which the observed TE is larger. Depending on parameter values b, γ we can have bi- or uni-directional couplings Ts→r or Tr→s. Each datapoint in the proceeding results is considered at a signiﬁcance level of 0.01, and results are obtained from 100 independent simulations. Parameters α, β ,a,b,c,w, γ affect stationarity and damping in the system therefore we need to choose such parameter val- ues that system would be stationary throughout. To ﬁnd a stationary combination of the parameters, we perform a mo- ment analysis of the two processes (see Appendix E for more details). In Fig. 6, we show that an expected links from spread to returns (top) as well as from returns to spread (bottom) are detectable using KSG estimator for TE, whereas Gaussian es- timator cannot detect the non-linearly coupled GARCH vari- ables. We also note that at small time series lengths, spuri- ous bidirectional coupling may be observed, and the observed coupling strength converges to a true one when the time series are sufﬁciently long. Since for stationary time series transfer entropy is an expec- tation value of the logarithm of ratios of conditional probabil- ity density functions, deﬁned as per (7), in GARCH model (18), these probability density functions can be estimated using numerical integration and samples of a joint process {rt ,st}. In case of causal link from spread to returns, TE is deﬁned as an expectation value of log p(rt|rt−1,st−1) p(rt|rt−1) . Here we have an exact probabilistic model, namely p(rt = x|rt−1,st−1, σt−1) = N (x;0 ,w + αr2 t−1 + β σ2 t−1 + γs2 t−1), 8 a) 0.0 0.1iX 0 1 tX Y +tY X 100 200 300 400 t 0 1aX K(t) = 0.01,C(t) = 0.5 1 + exp( 10(t tc)) + 3 b) 2 4iX 0.1 0.0 0.1 tX Y +tY X 100 200 300 400 t 0.0 0.5aX C(t) = 0.01,K(t) = 0.5 1 + exp( 10(t tc)) + 3 c) 0.0 0.5iX 0.0 0.5 tX Y +tY X 100 200 300 400 t 0.0 0.5aX 1(t) = 2(t) = 1 (1 + exp( 10(t tc))) + 0.1 FIG. 5: Causally coupled auto-regressive processes and local information theoretic signatures of the response of a system to three types of regime shifts: the change in a) strength of a causal driver, b) strength of a hidden driver c) intrinsic uncertainty. Figures report mean at each time step and the standard error in the mean, obtained from 100 independent simulations. Yellow vertical line indicates tC, purple line shows causal coupling strength C(t), and grey dashed line shows the strength K(t) of a hidden driver. The parameters α1 = α2 = 0.2,d = 0.5 in all ﬁgures. In a) and b), β1 = β2 = 1, while in c) β1 = β2 are functions of time, deﬁned using (17) and depicted in the ﬁgure in grey dashed and magenta dash-dot lines, while K(t) and C(t) are constants, equal to 0.01 and 0.5 respectively. Expected link s→ r 0 2500 5000 7500 10000 N 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 Ts r KSG Gaussian 0 2500 5000 7500 10000 N 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 Tr s KSG Gaussian Expected link r→ s 0 2500 5000 7500 10000 N 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14Ts r KSG Gaussian 0 2500 5000 7500 10000 N 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14Tr s KSG Gaussian FIG. 6: Top: TE from spread to returns (left) and reverse (right), α = 0.1, β = 0.4, a = 0.8, b = 0.0, c = 0.1, γ = 0.9. Bottom: TE from spread to returns (left) and reverse (right), α = 0.1, β = 0.1, a = 0.1, b = 0.9, c = 0.1, γ = 0.0. where N (x; µ = 0, σ 2 = w + αr2 t−1 + β σ2 t−1 + γs2 t−1)) is a Normal probability density function parameterised with µ, σ. Similarly, one can obtain the analytical expression for p(rt|rt−1) via marginalisation. Similarly, transfer en- tropy from returns to spread is the expectation value of log f (st|st−1,st−2,rt−1,rt−2) f (st|st−1,st−2) . In Appendix E we show that the de- nominator, denoted by φ (st = y) can be written as follows φ (y) = 2y Γ(1/2) √ 2c(y2− c∗t ) exp ( −y2− c∗ t 2c ) 1[ √ c∗t ,∞ )(y). Here c∗ t = as2 t−1 + b(w + αr2 t−2 + β σ2 t−2 + γs2 t−2) and 1A stands for an indicator function deﬁned over a subset of real numbers, A . Again, f (st|st−1,st−2) can be obtained by marginalisation. In the Appendix E we show that the values of information transfer that we obtained empirically and report in Fig. 6 are in agreement with the transfer entropy obtained using numerical integration. III. EMPIRICAL RESULTS In this section, we report results of information sharing across markets when a single observable is considered, and when information communication between different observ- ables is taken into account. A. Inter-market information dynamics for a single observable Firstly, we consider information dynamics individually for each of the observables: r, s, O. Here we look at the following: the total apparent transfer entropy, T app,sys r ,T app,sys s ,T app,sys O , multi-information, Isys r ,Isys s ,Isys O , and average active information storage,Asys r ,Asys s ,Asys O . When con- structing each of these measures, only signiﬁcant information dynamics values are considered (the signiﬁcance is discussed in Section II B). The results obtained for each sliding win- dow are reported in Fig. 7: top ﬁgures show the total appar- ent transfer entropy as well as multi-information; bottom ﬁg- ures report average active information storage. Overall, we observe that week by week, there were large ﬂuctuations in the amount of information sharing and synchronisation across markets. The patterns of information dynamics for each mi- crostructural variable differ, therefore we discuss them indi- vidually. a. Spread The temporal evolution of information pro- cessing in spread suggests that a “critical point” exists nearing price peak and the peak in spread itself. Such point in time is thought to be characterised by a peak in MI amongst agents that constitute the system [40–42]. Authors of [20] claim that stock market crashes exhibit a peak in MI at the point in time when one would expect a signiﬁcant regime change to take 9 11/15 12/01 12/15 01/01 01/15 02/01 Date 0 1 2 3 Price returns 11/15 12/01 12/15 01/01 01/15 02/01 Date 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 Imbalance 11/15 12/01 12/15 01/01 01/15 02/01 Date 0.0 0.2 0.4 Spread 11/15 12/01 12/15 01/01 01/15 02/01 Date 0.0 0.1 0.2 11/15 12/01 12/15 01/01 01/15 02/01 Date 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 11/15 12/01 12/15 01/01 01/15 02/01 Date 0.0 0.2 0.4 FIG. 7: Top: Multi-information Isys (denoted with red triangles) and the total apparent transfer entropy T app,sys (denoted with black circles) across all pairs of markets using the following time series (from left to right): price returns, order imbalance, and spread. The blue dashed vertical lines indicate “critical points”: the date of the peak value obtained by each variable is indicated by green dotted line; the red lines indicate the peak of the bubble, and the blue dashed lines highlight the dates at which multi-information was maximal. Bottom: average active information storage Asys. place. A peak in MI observed in Fig. 7 for spread suggests that within that week, a mutual hidden driver could have in- creased in strength for this market microstructure observable (a similar case was simulated in Fig. 5(b)). In information dynamics amongst spread variables we see a large amount of total apparent transfer entropy, as well as large average AIS, persisting for weeks preceding the price crash. This is in line with a situation simulated in Fig. 5(a), there- fore we conclude that spread system variables transit from a strong-coupling regime before the crash to a weak-coupling regime after the crash. Our intuition is further supported by similar results observed by considering T coll,sys s , shown in top left of Fig. 8. In the Tab. 8 we report the average collec- tive transfer entropy for the time windows before and after the price crash. As expected, the absolute values of the to- tal collective transfer entropy T coll,sys s are much smaller than the values of apparent transfer entropy. However, we still ob- serve a similar shift from a strong-coupling regime to a weak- coupling regime, centered around the crash date. In Tab. 8 we analyse AIS and total collective TE for indi- vidual markets in the two market regimes (leading up to and following the price crash). The averages are calculated from either the observed AIS values in the windows that precede the crash or follow it. Markets with small As are, on aver- age, “information absorbers” (e.g., Gemini, Coinbase): their order book spreads are responsive to either exogenous infor- mation sources or inter-market dynamics, or are generally in- trinsically unpredictable. Other markets, such as BTC-e use a lot of information from their memory to compute the next market spread. Lastly, Fig. 8 shows that those markets that were shown to have largeTs, also are those with the largestAs. On the other hand, spread in markets such as Gemini, Coin- base, Bitﬁnex, are driven by exogenous information as both T coll s and As is small. Therefore, given information available from market microstructure observables, they are the least predictable. Tab. 8 shows that Bitﬁnex, Gemini, and Coinbase are exchanges that experienced the smallest inﬂux of infor- mation from other exchanges prior to crash. We also observed that these markets have small average AIS, suggesting that they are “independent” from other exchanges and could pri- marily be driven by exogenous information sources. On the contrary, Binance, Poloniex absorb the largest amount of in- formation from other markets. They were also found to have large average AIS. Such markets could be labelled as “infor- mation absorbers”. b. Price returns and order imbalance Fig. 7 shows that information dynamics patterns for O,r are different from those of s. Firstly, for both observables, temporal evolution 10 11/15 12/01 12/15 01/01 01/15 02/01 Date 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20Tcoll, tot s 0.0 0.5 1.0 As 0.000 0.005 0.010 0.015Tcoll s α Asα· 10−2 before Dec. 17th Asα· 10−2 after Dec. 17th T coll sα · 10−3 before Dec. 17th T coll sα · 10−3 after Dec. 17th BTC-e 30.1 23.1 9.34 0.87 Binance 15.18 3.32 17.65 0.13 Bitﬁnex 4.13 2.35 1.59 0.16 Bitstamp 7.12 5.58 11.62 0.68 Bittrex 8.15 5.87 9.34 0.53 Coinbase 9.17 4.88 3.79 0.05 Gemini 11.4 9.54 4.54 0.29 HitBTC 23.0 9.58 2.44 0.44 Kraken 10.32 5.6 11.35 0.78 Poloniex 7.42 5.03 13.84 0.27 FIG. 8 & TABLE I: Top left: total collective TE. Vertical lines have the same meaning as in Fig. 7. Top right: relationship between average collective TE and average market’s AIS. Black circles show this relationship averaging over time series windows before the price crash date; red triangles show the relationship averaging over the time series windows after the price crash date. Bottom: average market spread’s AIS and average market spread’s collective TE, obtained averaging over windows before the crash date (ﬁrst and third columns), and averaging over windows after the crash date (second and fourth columns). of MI is similar: somewhat symmetric around the crash date, minimal at the crash date, and ﬂuctuating from high MI to low MI with a period of around 2-3 weeks. These observa- tions suggest that similar processes were driving the system at either side of the price bubble. The peak of the bubble is characterised by a clear, although not dramatic, reduction in both TE and MI, and to a lesser extent, reduction in AIS. We observe that for O (and to a smaller extent, for r), all three measures—AIS, TE, MI—follow the same pattern, that is, when TE is large, AIS, MI are also large. We were able to simulate this scenario in Fig. 5(c) by changing the autoregres- sive parameters responsible for the amount of uncertainty in the signals. When the amount of noise, unique for each sys- tem’s constituents, is varied, the three information dynamics measures either increase or decrease in magnitude simultane- ously as a response, being high-valued when the uncertainty is low. The minimal values of information dynamical quan- tities at the peak of the bubble suggest that the system was unpredictable, chaotic and not synchronised. B. Information ﬂow between market microstructure observables Here we consider information sharing between different market microstructure observables and compare it to inter- market information sharing. We study two non-overlapping time series windows: the time series preceding the price crash date (2017-11-01 to 2017-12-17), and the remainder (2017- 12-17 to 2018-01-31). We report the results in Tab. 9. Altogether, they suggest that the system’s connectivity as a whole moved from a high- coupling regime to a low-coupling regime with one signiﬁcant exception for price returns. Namely, for price returns, where we see ωself larger than ωin, ωout and ωself prior to crash date is smaller than after the crash. Lastly, we also observe a larger average AIS for returns prior to the crash. Furthermore, ωin, ωout is of the same order as ωself, suggesting that internal market dynamics played a signiﬁcant role in price movement in the period. For the other two observables, we observe that both inter- and intra- market connectivity becomes smaller after the crash. For spread, we observe that a relatively large inter- market connectivity drops by an order of magnitude after the 11 5min frequency1min frequency Before Dec. 17thAfter Dec. 17th Freq. Period Observ. ωin ·10−3 ωout ·10−3 ωself ·10−3 Asys ·10−3 5min Before Dec. 17th s 6.5 3.07 3.55 272.93 O 1.02 0.65 1.44 56.32 r 0.85 1.98 13.85 162.06 After Dec. 17th s 1.84 0.74 0.33 157.75 O 1.19 0.21 1.01 41.73 r 0.22 1.45 11.23 80.64 1min Before Dec. 17th s 10.56 15.92 9.83 570.48 O 1.42 1.22 4.31 136.18 r 3.7 2.71 6.52 206.75 After Dec. 17th s 5.24 5.46 1.0 325.31 O 1.49 0.79 3.55 104.89 r 1.31 1.97 32.04 126.43 FIG. 9 & TABLE II: Top: Directed multi-graphs of information ﬂow between the three market observables before the price crash (left) and after the price crash (right). Saturation of edges indicates the strength of information transfer. Self-loops represent transfer entropy from one market to another when considering the same observable. Bottom: Amount of apparent information transfer between market microstructure observables per possible link. The last column shows an average active information storage. The ﬁrst part of the table reports results at 5min-level frequency of re-sampling, whereas the second one is for a minute level frequency of re-sampling. crash, suggesting at that time spread is either responsive to changes in other market observables or it responds to un- observed variables. Seeing virtually no strong links in the multigraph that illustrates the post-crash market microstruc- ture (Fig. 9, right), we consider the former case less likely. In comparison, order imbalance both received and absorbed a lot less information in contrast to spread. It may indicate that this variable responds to information that goes beyond our dataset. IV . DISCUSSION In this paper we studied patterns of information dynamics in the Bitcoin system, describing it with market microstruc- ture observables: price returns, order imbalance, and spread— three measures that quantify the state of market makers and market takers. Our analysis contrasted micro-level informa- tion processing within important Bitcoin trading venues dur- ing two distinguishable states: while price was, on average, ascending, and during the period in which price was, on av- erage, dropping. We found persisting intra-market connec- tivity at the minute level frequency. Furthermore, we found that at high frequency, markets are interconnected via order book spread, and the interconnectivity is enhanced prior to price crash, suggesting a potential regime shift . On the con- trary, the inter-market connectivity via price returns and order imbalance appeared symmetric around the price crash. We also observed the dip in all information dynamic measures at the time of the crash, suggesting that the system was asyn- chronous and unpredictable. We also observed information ﬂow between different market observables. By contrasting the two market regimes, we found that the system shifted from a strongly interlinked state to a sparsely connected one. To supplement these ﬁndings, we analysed several simu- lated econometric models. With the model of auto-regressive non-linearly coupled variables that have time-varying drivers, we found several simpliﬁed mechanism that could explain the empirical observations. With the generalised auto-regressive conditional heteroskedasticity model (GARCH) coupled with spread dynamics, we studied a link between returns and spread, as well as potential of detecting it using means of in- formation transfer. Our ﬁndings suggest that different types of regime changes can be distinguished when a collection of information dynamics measures is used together. All in all, our ﬁndings suggest that prior to a price crash, Bitcoin system was in a strongly coupled state. In particular, this is clear when liquidity marker—spread—is considered. The drop in all forms of information at the point at which the price is maximal suggests a reduction in predictability of the system. It may also indicate that such a system is suscepti- ble to various types of perturbations, however we leave such hypothesis for further research. We also make a note that the results of Fig. 7 (right column) for s are reminiscent of a sec- ond order phase transition [40, 41] and could be a predictor of a ﬁnancial crash [42]. Of course other explanations are pos- sible for this empirical observation and future studies could further clarify its microscopic origin. Our ﬁndings, although interesting, have limited explanatory capacity due to the granularity of order-book data, presence of noise and effects due to unobserved (exogenous) system drivers. We assumed that the minute-level snapshots of the limit order book data are sufﬁciently high-frequency to re- veal true interactions across and within markets. Of course, this data is an approximation of an, in reality, practically continuous-time dynamics of the markets. Finally, since we limited our analysis to Bitcoin traded against USD(T), anal- ysis of larger market microstructure datasets, consisting of a bigger variety of currency pairs and forming larger informa- 12 tion transfer networks would undoubtedly provide richer in- sights as to why we observe increased market co-integration at the time of a price bubble. Lastly, it would be important to repeat our analysis using other similar datasets, concerning market microstructure during price bubbles. Observing sim- ilar results would suggest that information dynamics frame- work may be a generally applicable tool for early warning signals of ﬁnancial crashes. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS All authors designed the research. V .V . conducted experi- ments, analysed the data, and derived mathematical models. F.L. and N.A.F. derived mathematical models and supervised the work. All authors interpreted the results and wrote the manuscript. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work is supported by the European Union – Hori- zon 2020 Program under the scheme “INFRAIA-01-2018- 2019 – Integrating Activities for Advanced Communities”, Grant Agreement n.871042, “SoBigData++: European Inte- grated Infrastructure for Social Mining and Big Data Analyt- ics” (http://www.sobigdata.eu). DATA A V AILABILITY STATEMENT The data that support the analysis of the Section II D and Appendix D, Appendix E of this study have been synthetically generated by the authors and the results can be reproduced using the equations and parameters described in the article. Appendix A: Data alignment As stated in the main text, the limit order books are snap- shots sampled at approximately minute level frequency. How- ever, the exact time of a snapshot is not the zeroth second of a minute, the intervals between consecutive snapshots in one market are not identical, due to different technological rea- sons. Furthermore, for a given minute, the times at which the snapshots are taken in different markets need not be exactly the same. The trading data on the other hand is stored in con- tinuous time, as each trading event is being registered with its exact execution time. Derivatives obtained from each type of data therefore have to be carefully aligned for the consequent analysis to always respect the order of time. To illustrate the data alignment problem, consider some two consecutive LOB snapshots in BTC-e market: the ﬁrst limit order book snapshot is taken on 2017-11-01 at t1 =00:00:03.021 and the second one is taken approximately one minute later, at t2 =00:01:02.798. Further consider Bi- nance market, where the ﬁrst limit order book snapshots are 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Second of a minute 0 20000 40000 60000 80000 100000Number of samples FIG. 10: Histogram of the exact capture second of each minute snapshot of the limit order books used in this paper. taken at t′ 1 =00:00:01.267 and t′ 2=00:01:01.274. One can al- ready see that t1⁄= t′ 1 and that t2−t1⁄= 60s. Let us ﬁrst consider the data alignment for analysis in Sec- tion III A, where we consider information transfer between markets given one observable, e.g. spread. Firstly, for the observable based on trading data, we sim- ply re-sample the trades at the minute level so that the trades that happened between 00:00:00.000 and 00:00:59.999 would represent the order imbalance at time τ=00:01:00.000. For observables based on limit order books, we assume that the snapshot is representative of a limit order book that would be observed at the zeroth second of the minute , namely, at precisely HH:mm:00.000 for every hour HH and minute mm. In Fig. 10 we show the histogram of the exact snapshot sec- onds within a minute of each limit order book. It is clear that the majority of the limit order books were captured at ﬁrst halves of a minute. Since we chose to use information dy- namics that assumes discrete time series, the limit order book snapshot times are ﬁrst ﬂoored to the closest minutes, after which spread and price returns observables are extracted. For the example snapshots we consider here t1 and t2 would be rounded to the closes smaller minutes: τ1 = ⌊t1⌋ =00:00:00.000, τ2 =⌊t2⌋ =00:01:00.000 from where we obtain sτ1,sτ2 and rτ2. We note that the problems would occur only when there is a systematic delay between the exact snapshot times for a given minute in a pair markets. If for some pair of α, β, tα < tβ in the majority of minutes, one may observe a spuri- ous link β→ α. To test whether this could be the case, we computed the differences between the exact snapshot times at each minute between pairs of markets. We report several observed distributions and note that the distributions do not appear skewed and the mean of the distributions is close to 0, see Fig. 11. We could also observe spurious information transfer if map- ping to the closest minute is not done systematically. For in- stance, information transfer from BTC-e (whose ﬁrst snap- shots are taken at t1,t2 and are later rounded to τ1, τ2) to Bi- nance (whose ﬁrst snapshots are taken att′ 1 < t1,t′ 2 < t2 and are 13 FIG. 11: Differences between capture seconds at the same minute for a pair of markets. The title of each subﬁgure indicates α− β for the histogram that shows tα−tβ . The x-axis is in units of 1min. later rounded toτ1, τ2). One may think that TE in the direction from Binance to BTC-e would be spurious because the market representation of Binance at either τ relates to an earlier true date t. However, in estimating transfer entropy, we measure the amount of reduction of uncertainty about the state of some variable α at time τ2, given the state of another variable β at an earlier time τ1, over and above the information about α at time τ2 that is already available from its own past at time τ1. Therefore, issues would arise only if we mapped, e.g., t1 to τ1 and t′ 1 to τ2 but not if we use ﬂooring operator. Note that this type of rounding, overall, ensures that not acausal, spurious links can occur when the system is probed at a frequency of at least 1min. Therefore our results are limited to measuring information dynamics at the inter-minute granularity. For the second part of the analysis, presented in Sec- tion III B, we consider information transfer between differ- ent observables. Therefore we need to ensure that we do not create acausal links. To compare the information ﬂow from spread at t2 to order imbalance within that minute, we must only consider the trades that occurred in the interval (t1,t2], ((00:00:03.021,00:01:02.798] in the example) when calculat- ing O. Similarly, the price returns at t2 must be the price dif- ference between t2 and t1. Therefore we consider the time index of order books, where the frequency is approximately 1min, and aggregate trading data based on that. For results, shown in Fig. 9 where we consider lower frequency data, we take the ﬁrst data point within each interval. Appendix B: Daily order imbalance Tab. III reports the average of the daily sum of realised or- der imbalance, see Eq. (1), expressed in either quote or base currency. The table shows that before the crash date Decem- ber 17th, 2017, the order imbalance was positive and signiﬁ- cantly larger than after the crash date, when it was negative in all markets, except for Coinbase and Binance. Appendix C: Choice of K in K-nearest neighbours At the heart of transfer entropy is estimation of differential conditional mutual information, which in turn relies on the before 17th Dec. after 17th Dec. Exchange⟨O$⟩/105 ⟨O⟩/103 ⟨O$⟩/105 ⟨O⟩/103 sig. KS O$ sig. KS O Kraken -263.08 -0.06 -3242.41 -0.24 ** ** Bitstamp 11106.43 0.9 -2089.27 -0.22 ** ** BTC-e 1153.37 0.13 -623.19 -0.04 ** ** Bitﬁnex 3922.05 0.13 -21530.25 -1.74 ** ** Gemini 5227.95 0.42 -252.24 -0.04 ** ** Poloniex 426.94 -0.0 -3735.7 -0.29 ** ** Bittrex 1371.6 0.14 -1798.24 -0.14 ** ** Coinbase 30597.96 2.77 12309.85 0.85 ** ** Binance 3221.5 0.22 2046.26 0.06 ** ** HitBTC 89.72 0.0 -599.99 -0.04 ** ** TABLE III: Average order ﬂow imbalance before and after Dec 17. The last two columns report p-value of two-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, with the null hypothesis that 2 independent samples are drawn from the same continuous distribution. If p-value is high, then we cannot reject the hypothesis. For the test we considered⟨O⟩ before and after 17th of December, 2017, and similarly for trade imbalance expressed in quote currency. ∗∗ indicates that p-value is below 0.01 and the hypothesis is rejected. quality of probability distributions of our variables. Mutual information involves averages of logarithms of P, the under- lying probability distribution. Since, for small P, log P→ ∞, the ranges of values for our variables X,Y where P is small and hence cannot be sampled and estimated reliably from data contribute disproportionately to the value of information [32]. Information estimators that use continuity of real valued data to overcome issues related to undersampling, have proved to be the most successful for a wide range of datases and ap- plications. Amongst those, one of the most successful such estimators is the Kraskov, Stögbauer, and Grassberger [31], which we will refer to as KSG. The KSG estimates infor- mation transfer based on the statistics of distances between neighbouring data points. To implement this, KSG uses the max(∆x, ∆y, ∆z) metric to deﬁne the distance between two points that are (∆x, ∆y, ∆z) away from each other in the joint space{x,y,z}. For each given test point, nz is the neighbour count strictly within ε in the z marginal space, and nxz and nyz are the neighbour counts strictly withinε in the joint{x,z} and {y,z} spaces, respectively. Conditional mutual information is then deﬁned in terms of these variables [13]: I(X,Y|Z) = ψ(K)− E [ψ(nxz)− ψ(nyz) +ψ(nz)] , (C1) where ψ is a digamma function and averaging is over the sam- ples. As pointed out in [32], for any information estimator, it is essential to ensure that such estimators (there a KSG estima- tor for MI rather than conditional MI was considered) is min- imally biased towards the sample size, and the choice of K is optimal: that is, for independent sub-samples of the dataset the variance of obtained result is minimal. The details of this approach for the choice of K are thor- oughly described in [32]. Here we simply note that we tested 14 several choices of nearest neighbours for a pair of sample time series for which we identiﬁed signiﬁcant transfer entropy with estimator using K = 4 nearest neighbours. As Fig. 12 shows, this choice of K has a small bias for the sample size: even if we slice the time series in 4-5 parts, the value of TE does not increase signiﬁcantly (specify). Furthermore, the variance for values for individual subsamples is also minimal. Note for K = 1 we have a strong sample-size dependent bias as well as large variance. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 N/n 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07T 1 2 3 4 5 FIG. 12: Bias and variance of transfer entropy for subsamples of size n for spread time series from Bitstamp to HitBTC where we identiﬁed a signiﬁcant information transfer of 0 .0052 nats using K = 4 nearest neighbours. Appendix D: Information transfer metrics around regime shifts in auto-regressive time series Here we perform a parameter sensitivity analysis for the results, shown in Fig. 5. Note that we do not consider the parameters α1, α2, β1, β2 as variables and set them to α1 = α2 = 0.2 and β1 = β2 = 1. In all ﬁgures, we also chose d = 0.5. We note that for a deﬁnite conclusion regarding these information dynamical signatures, a thorough analysis of the relation to these parameters should also be conducted. In Fig. 13 we show that a signature of high TE and AIS with no change in MI indicates strong causal coupling, and this statement is robust for a wide range of parameters. It is worth pointing out, however, that at high levels of K, a signiﬁcant amount of MI is also detectable in a weak coupling regime. The case of a shift in the hidden driver (illustrated in Fig. 5(b)) is signed with a high MI value in a strong-coupling regime and vice versa in a weak coupling regime. We ﬁnd that for a wide range of parameter values that characterise the strength and steepness of the regime transition function, as well as the strength of causal coupling, MI is signiﬁcantly larger in the strong coupling regime. Although for some pa- rameter values AIS is anti-correlated with MI, it is not a robust signiﬁer based on the sensitivity analysis. We also note that, not surprisingly, the strength of the coupling is directly related to the magnitude of MI. 0 2 0.0 0.2 0.4 TE 0 2 s 0.05 0.00 0.05 MI 0 2 0.00 0.25 0.50 AIS < tC > tC K(t) = 0.01, C(t) = s (1 + exp( 10(t tc))) + 0.5 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 TE 0.5 1.0 b 0.05 0.00 0.05 MI 0.5 1.0 0.4 0.6 AIS < tC > tC K(t) = 0.01, C(t) = 3 (1 + exp( (t tc)/b)) + 0.5 0 2 0.00 0.25 0.50 TE 0 2 C 0.05 0.00 0.05 MI 0 2 0.4 0.6 AIS < tC > tC K(t) = 0.01, C(t) = 3 (1 + exp( (t tc)/b)) + C 0 2 0.0 0.2 0.4 TE 0 2 c 0.00 0.25 0.50 MI 0 2 0.4 0.6 AIS < tC > tC K(t) = c, C(t) = 3 (1 + exp( 10(t tc))) + 0.5 FIG. 13: Expected values of information dynamical variables when C(t) is a sigmoid functional of time, (17), parameterised by b, s, in the presence of a constant hidden driver of strength c. Information dynamic measures are signiﬁcantly different in the two regimes, as deﬁned by the values of the sigmoid function. Lastly, Fig. 15 shows that a change in overall system’s un- certainty (the amount of uncorrelated random noise) is de- tectable with a signature of having low TE, MI and AIS in a high uncertainty regime, and vice versa in a low uncertainty regime. Appendix E: Modelling the non-linear relationship between price and spread Consider V AR toy example Xt = α1Xt−1 + β1ε1,t + K(t)εt (E1) Yt = α2Yt−1 + β2ε2,t + K(t)εt +C(t) (Xt−1)d , with d = 1 and d = 2. For simplicity, we set α1, α2 = 0, β1, β2 = 0.1, C(t) = 1 and K(t) = 0. In Fig. 16 we show that 15 0 2 0.0 0.1 TE 0 2 s 0.0 0.5 1.0 MI 0 2 0.0 0.2 AIS < tC > tC C(t) = 0.01, K(t) = s (1 + exp( 10(t tc))) + 0.5 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.1 TE 0.5 1.0 b 0.5 1.0 MI 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.2 AIS < tC > tC C(t) = 0.01, K(t) = 3 (1 + exp( (t tc)/b)) + 0.5 0 2 0.0 0.1 TE 0 2 C 0.5 1.0 1.5 MI 0 2 0.0 0.2 AIS < tC > tC C(t) = 0.01, K(t) = 3 (1 + exp( (t tc)/b)) + C 0 2 0.0 0.2 0.4 TE 0 2 c 0.5 1.0 MI 0 2 0.00 0.25 0.50 AIS < tC > tC C(t) = c, K(t) = 3 (1 + exp( 10(t tc))) + 0.5 FIG. 14: Expected values of information dynamical variables when K is a sigmoid functional of time, parameterised by s and b, c. Parameter b quantiﬁes the abruptness of the transition, whereas s quantiﬁes the magnitude of change in the two regimes centered at tC. MI is high in the high-coupling regime, and the reverse is true in the low-coupling regime. when the non-linear relation between the variables is present, KSG estimator can detect a large amount of information trans- fer. In case of linear relation we show a convergence between two measures in the large N limit, while a non-linear relation- ship is only detectable with a KSG estimated TE. A more realistic example considers possibly bidirectional coupling between price returns r and spread s when spread is coupled to volatility (variance) of price. Therefore we have coupled time series of the form (18). Note that in this formulation, a link from price to spread is indirect, and in fact price returns affect spread at the two-step delay. Therefore in the following ﬁgures we will scan through δ∈ [1,2] and choose the delay for which the observed TE is larger. Depending on parameter values b, γ we can have bi- or uni-directional couplings Ts→r or Tr→s. Each datapoint in the 0 2 0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 TE 0 2 C 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 MI 0 2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 AIS < tC > tC 1(t) = 2(t) = 1 1 + exp( 10(t tc)) + C 0 2 0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 TE 0 2 b 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 MI 0 2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 AIS < tC > tC 1(t) = 2(t) = 1 1 + exp( (t tc)/b) + 0.1 0 2 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 TE 0 2 s 0.0 0.5 1.0 MI 0 2 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 AIS < tC > tC 1(t) = 2(t) = s 1 + exp( 10(t tc)) + 0.1 0.25 0.50 0.75 0.0 0.1 0.2 TE 0.25 0.50 0.75 1, 2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 MI 0.25 0.50 0.75 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 AIS < tC > tC 1(t) = 2(t) = 1 1 + exp( 10(t tc)) + 0.1 FIG. 15: Expected values of information dynamical variables when β1, β2 are sigmoid functionals of time, parameterised by s and b, c. Parameter b quantiﬁes the abruptness of the transition, whereas s quantiﬁes the magnitude of change in the two regimes centered at tC. MI, TE, AIS are high in the high-uncertainty regime (high β1, β2 regime), and the reverse is true in the low-uncertainty regime. Here we have C(t) = 1 =cost., and K(t) = 1 =cost. proceeding results is considered at a signiﬁcance level of 0.01, and results are obtained from 100 independent simulations. Parameters α, β ,a,b,c,w, γ affect stationarity and damping in the system therefore we need to choose such parameter val- ues that system would be stationary throughout. To ﬁnd a sta- tionary combination of the parameters, we need to consider the moments of the two processes. First, to compute the unconditional mean values σ 2 and s2 of volatility and spread, let us consider σ 2 = Var[rt ] = E[r2 t ] = E[E[r2 t|Ft−1]] = E[w + αr2 t−1 + β σ2 t−1 + γs2 t−1] = w + (α + β )σ 2 + γs2 16 (1)d = 1 (2) d = 2 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 N 0.325 0.350 0.375 0.400 0.425 0.450 0.475TX Y KSG Gaussian 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 N 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08TX Y KSG Gaussian FIG. 16: (1) d = 1 i.e., linear relationship between X,Y , (2) d = 2, i.e., non-linear relationship between X,Y . and similarly s2 = E[s2 t ] = E[as2 t−1 + bσ 2 t−1 + cε2 t ] = as2 + bσ 2 + c Solving the system we obtain σ 2 = w(1− a) +γc (1− α− β )(1− a)− γb (E2) s2 = bσ 2 + c 1− a (E3) From the ﬁrst equation we see that unconditional volatility in- creases with γ, c, and b, i.e. there is a contribution of illiquid- ity to volatility. From the second equation, for large volatility (σ 2≫ b/c) we obtain the well known proportionality s ∝ σ between liquidity and volatility. The stationary condition is obtained by imposing that these two quantities are positive, hence, since a < 1, it must be (1− α− β )(1− a)− γb > 0. (E4) V olatility can be eliminated from the equations (18) and by recursive substitution we get σ 2 t = w 1− β + α β +∞ ∑ i=1 β ir2 t−i + γ β +∞ ∑ i=1 β is2 t−i s2 t = bw 1− β + as2 t−1 + bγ β 2 +∞ ∑ i=2 β is2 t−i + ba β 2 +∞ ∑ i=2 β ir2 t−i + cε2 t i.e., the volatility is the sum of an Exponentially Weighted Moving Average (EWMA) of past square returns and of an EWMA of past square spreads and the same holds true for squared spread. Squaring the last two equations in (18) and taking expectations one gets E[σ 4] = w2 + 3α2E[σ 4] +β 2E[σ 4] +γ2E[s4] +2wασ 2 + 2wβ σ2 + 2wγs2 +2αβ E[σ 4] +2αγ E[σ 2s2] +2β γE[σ 2s2] and E[s4] = a2E[s4] +b2E[σ 4] +3c2 +2abE[σ 2s2] +2acs2 + 2bcσ 2 where we have used the fact that E[ε4 t ] = E[ε4 t ] = 3 (because they are Gaussian) and we introduced in the equations the un- conditional means σ 2 and s2 in Eq. (E2). In order to close the system we need an expression for E[σ 2s2]. This can be obtained by taking the product of the last two equations in (18) and taking the expectation, obtain- ing E[σ 2s2] = was2 + wbσ 2 + wc + αaE[σ 2s2] +αbE[σ 4] +αcσ 2 + aβE[σ 2s2] +βbE[σ 4] +βcσ 2 + γaE[s4] +γbE[σ 2s2] +γcs2 We now have a system of three equations and three unknowns (E[σ 4], E[s4], and E[σ 2s2]) whose solution gives the second moments. As usual, these moments will be ﬁnite in the pa- rameter region where they are positive. The solutions for fourth moments are cumbersome to write in full form. However, we checked that for the parame- ter combinations that we will study next the expectation of σ 2,s2, σ 4,s4 are all well-deﬁned. In particular, we considered the three following cases: • Information transfer from spread to volatility, and, therefore to price returns; no information ﬂow from price returns to spread: α = 0.1, β = 0.4,a = 0.8,b = 0.0,c = 0.1, γ = 0.9, ω = 0.1 • Information transfer from volatility, and, therefore, price returns, to spread; no information ﬂow from spread to price returns: α = 0.1, β = 0.1,a = 0.1,b = 0.9,c = 0.1, γ = 0.0, ω = 0.1 • Bi-directional coupling from price returns to spread and vice versa: α = 0.1, β = 0.5,a = 0.1,b = 0.5,c = 0.1, γ = 0.5, ω = 0.1. First set of parameter values gives σ 2 ≈ 0.13,s2 = 0.24,σ 4≈ 0.01 + 0.04σ 2,s4≈ 0.04 + 0.02s2 + 0.24σ 2. All values are positive. For the second set of parameters, we get σ 2≈ 1.1, s2≈ 0.5, σ 4≈ 0.2 + 1.4s2 + 0.2σ 2, s4≈ 0.08 + 0.44s2. Lastly, for the third set of parameters, we ﬁnd σ 2≈ 1.27, s2≈ 0.82, and σ 4≈ 0.2 + 1.4s2 + 0.2σ 2, s4≈ 0.08 + 044s2. Therefore all parameter values are suit- able. Expected link r↔ s 0 2500 5000 7500 10000 N 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20Ts r KSG Gaussian 0 2500 5000 7500 10000 N 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20Tr s KSG Gaussian FIG. 17: TE from spread to returns (left) and reverse (right), α = 0.1, β = 0.5,a = 0.1,b = 0.5,c = 0.1, γ = 0.5. 1. Simulation results The three cases of coupling between spread and price re- turns are shown in Fig. 6, and Fig. 17. The ﬁrst case, shown 17 in Fig. 6(top) considers γ = 0.9 and therefore coupling from spread to returns is strong. The ﬁgure shows that Gaussian estimate of TE is always close to zero, whereas KSG estimate of TE is clearly larger in the direction from spread to price returns (left ﬁgure) as opposed to the reverse (right ﬁgure). Note that in some simulations signiﬁcant non-zero coupling is observed, when Gaussian estimate is used. However, on av- erage, the magnitude of information transfer estimated with Gaussian estimate is smaller in contrast with KSG estimated TE. The second case, shown in Fig. 6(bottom) considers a situ- ation where γ = 0.0, therefore the link from spread to returns should not be observed, whereas parameter b, that indicates the strength of a reciprocal coupling is set to a large value b = 0.9. Here transfer entropy detects a signiﬁcant ﬂow only from price returns to spread. Similarly to the previous case, Gaussian estimate is also found signiﬁcant and different from zero in some of the simulations, however the magnitude of TE is smaller than that obtained with KSG estimate. The last ﬁgure, Fig. 17, considers a case when both γ⁄= 0 and b⁄= 0. Although the link from spread to returns is much weaker than the reverse, we nevertheless observe signiﬁcant ﬂow in both directions. In all cases considered, TE estimates show no apparent size-dependent value drift, and therefore we assume there is no sample size-related bias, as long as N≥ 1000. 2. Theoretical values for transfer entropy between price returns and spread The mathematical simplicity of our model (18) allows us to estimate the TE using numerical integration techniques. By comparing the simulation results, obtained using a data- dependent estimator of TE, with the results obtained analyti- cally, we can attest the usability of such estimator for the type of data that could arise from the model considered. a. Information transfer from spread to price returns To proceed, note that transfer entropy from spread to price returns is the difference of two conditional entropy ( H(·|·) terms, namely: Ts→r = H(rt|rt−1)− H(rt|rt−1,st−1). It can also be rewritten in terms of expectation of f (rt|rt−1,st−1) f (rt|rt−1) , where we sample points{rt ,rt−1,st−1},{rt ,st} obtained from (18). Using a natural logarithm log yields a result units of nats, and f (·) denotes probability density function (p.d.f.). First, let us consider the case when b = 0 (Fig. 6) we derive the theoretical distribution densities for model-based transfer entropy from spread to returns. To obtain the p.d.f. f (rt|rt−1,st−1), one can sample values of f (rt|rt−1,st−1, σ ) and integrate over the hidden volatility variable: f (rt|rt−1,st−1) = ∫ f (σ ) f (rt|rt−1,st−1, σ )dσ . Here we assume independence of σ. Further marginalising we obtain the conditional p.d.f. of price returns: f (rt|rt−1) = ∫ ∫ f (σ ) f (s) f (rt|rt−1,s, σ )dσds. a) 100 101 102 103 N 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.2 0.22 0.24TE[s r] TE estimate spread --> return b) 100 101 102 103 N -1 0 1 2 3 4 TE[r s] 10-14 TE estimate return --> spread FIG. 18: Model-based TE from spread to returns (a) and reverse (b), with expected link s→ r. Parameters: α = 0.1, β = 0.4,a = 0.8,b = 0.0,c = 0.1, γ = 0.9. a) 100 101 102 103 104 N -14 -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 TE[s r] 10-14 TE estimate spread --> return b) 100 101 102 103 104 N -0.15 -0.1 -0.05 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 TE[r s] TE estimate return --> spread FIG. 19: Model-based TE from spread to returns (a) and reverse (b) with expected link r→ s. Parameters: α = 0.1, β = 0.1,a = 0.1,b = 0.9,c = 0.1, γ = 0.0. Finally, in case of our model deﬁned in (18), we know the exact probabilistic model: f (rt = x|rt−1,st−1, σt−1) = N (x;0 ,w + αr2 t−1 + β σ2 t−1 + γs2 t−1), where N (x; µ = 0, σ 2 = w + αr2 t−1 + β σ2 t−1 + γs2 t−1)) denote the Normal probability density function parameterised with µ, σ. Now, compute the quantity Ts→r, we perform Monte Carlo sampling: f (rt = x|rt−1,st−1) = Eσi∼ f (σ )[ f (rt = x|rt−1,st−1, σi)] ≈ 1 N N ∑ i=1 N (x;0 ,w + αr2 t−1 + β σ2 i + γs2 t−1). f (rt = x|rt−1) = Eσi∼ f (σ ),si∼ f (s)[ f (rt = x|rt−1,si, σi)] ≈ 1 N N ∑ i=1 N (x;0 ,w + αr2 t−1 + β σ2 i + γs2 i ). On the left panel of Fig. 18 and right panel of Fig. 19 we show agreement between the transfer entropy obtained from such analytical integration, and the result we found in Fig. 6 using a K-nearest neighbour data-driven estimator. b. Information transfer from price returns to spread Similarly to the case before, transfer entropy from returns to spread is the difference of two conditional entropies: Tr→s = H(st|st−1,st−2)]− H(st|st−1,st−2,rt−1,rt−2)], that can also be rewritten in terms of expectation value log f (st|st−1,st−2,rt−1,rt−2) f (st|st−1,st−2) . 18 Here we need to estimate a conditional p.d.f. of spread given last two spread values. We do this again via marginali- sation of hidden variables: f (st|st−1,st−2) =∫ ∫ f (st ,rt−1,rt−2|st−1,st−2)drt−1drt−2. The conditional p.d.f. of spread given last two spread and price return values, f (st|st−1,st−2,rt−1,rt−2), is obtained by marginalising over a hidden volatility variable: f (st|st−1,st−2,rt−1,rt−2) = (E5)∫ f (st , σt−2|st−1,st−2,rt−1,rt−2))dσt−2. (E6) For simplicity, let us denote the conditional density of spread with φ (x) f (st = y|st−1,st−2,rt−2, σt−2) = φ (y). Then the value of spread at time t is connected to the condi- tional variables as s2 t = as2 t−1 + b(w + αr2 t−2 + β σ2 t−2 + γs2 t−2)| {z } c∗t +cε2, where ε2 is chi-square distribution. Note that spread can be rewritten as st = √ c∗t + cε2, where √ cε2 is Nakagami distribution. Then we have φ (x) = 2 √ 0.5 Γ(0.5)√c exp (−x2 2c ) , and c∗ t + cε2 is shifted Gamma distribution. Under the mono- tone transformation of random variable y = g(x) = √ c∗t + x, we can compute the p.d.f. of st as: φ (y) = fx(g−1(y)) ⏐⏐⏐⏐ d dy (g−1(y)) ⏐⏐⏐⏐ , where, fx(x) = 1 Γ(1/2) √ 2c x−1/2 exp ( − x 2c ) , and g−1(y) = y2− c∗ t Finally we get conditional probability density for spread f (st = y|st−1,st−2,rt−2, σt−2) = φ (y) φ (y) = 2y Γ(1/2) √ 2c(y2− c∗t ) exp ( −y2− c∗ t 2c ) 1[ √ c∗t ,∞ )(y), where c∗ t = as2 t−1 + b(w + αr2 t−2 + β σ2 t−2 + γs2 t−2) and 1A stands for an indicator function deﬁned over a subset of real numbers, A . Now we can get a numerical Monte Carlo esti- mate of the model-based transfer entropy as f (st = y|st−1,st−2,rt−1,rt−2) = Eσi∼ f (σt−2)[ f (st|st−1,st−2,rt−1,rt−2, σi)) = 1 N N ∑ i=1 φ (y;c,c∗ t = as2 t−1 + b(w + αr2 t−2 + β σ2 i + γs2 t−2)). and f (st = y|st−1,st−2) is an expectation f (st = y|st−1,st−2) = Eri,r j∼ f (rt−1,rt−2)[ f (st = y|st−1,st−2,rt−1,rt−2)). In Fig. 18 and Fig. 19 we show agreements of transfer entropy obtained from such analytical integration, in comparison to transfer entropy values from returns to spread with KSG esti- mates shown in corresponding panels of Fig. 6. For the case shown in Fig. 17, where we have bidirectional ﬂow, namely, b > 0 and γ > 0, deriving theoretical density distributions re- quires special attention since we need to account for depen- dence between spread and volatility in marginalisation step, (E5), that falls out of the scope of current work. [1] S. Nakamoto, Decentralized Business Review , 21260 (2008). [2] D. G. Baur, K. Hong, and A. D. Lee, Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money 54, 177 (2018). [3] F. Glaser, K. Zimmermann, M. Haferkorn, M. C. Weber, and M. Siering, Revealing Users’ Hidden Intentions (April 15, 2014). ECIS (2014). [4] M. Gronwald, Journal of International Money and Finance 97, 86 (2019). [5] D. G. Baur and T. Dimpﬂ, Available at SSRN 3573367 (2020). [6] J. Donier and J.-P. Bouchaud, PloS one 10, e0139356 (2015). [7] L. R. Glosten and P. R. Milgrom, Journal of Financial Eco- nomics 14, 71 (1985). [8] I. Makarov and A. Schoar, Journal of Financial Economics135, 293 (2020). [9] P. Pagnottoni and T. Dimpﬂ, Digital Finance 1, 139 (2019). [10] C. W. Granger, Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric So- ciety , 424 (1969). [11] T. Schreiber, Physical Review Letters 85, 461 (2000). [12] M. Paluš, V . Komárek, Z. c. v. Hrnˇcíˇr, and K. Št ˇerbová, Physi- cal Review E 63, 046211 (2001). [13] T. Bossomaier, L. Barnett, M. Harré, and J. T. Lizier, An Intro- duction to Transfer Entropy (Springer, 2016). [14] J. T. Lizier, The Local Information Dynamics of Distributed Computation in Complex Systems (Springer Science & Busi- ness Media, 2012). [15] B. Afsharizand, P. H. Chaghoei, A. A. Kordbacheh, A. Tru- fanov, and G. Jafari, Entropy 22, 1038 (2020). [16] T. Bossomaier, L. Barnett, A. Steen, M. Harré, S. d’Alessandro, and R. Duncan, Accounting & Finance 58, 45 (2018). [17] T. D. Peron and F. A. Rodrigues, Europhysics Letters96, 48004 (2011). [18] J. T. Lizier, M. Prokopenko, and A. Y . Zomaya, Artiﬁcial Life, 19 11, 374 (2008). [19] J. T. Lizier, S. Pritam, and M. Prokopenko, Artiﬁcial life 17, 293 (2011). [20] M. Harré and T. Bossomaier, Europhysics Letters 87, 18009 (2009). [21] A. Abeliuk, Z. Huang, E. Ferrara, and K. Lerman, Scientiﬁc reports 10, 1 (2020). [22] T. Dimpﬂ and F. J. Peter, Physica A 516, 543 (2019). [23] Kaiko—a cryptocurrency market data provider for institutional investors and enterprises. See kaiko.com. [24] F. Lillo and R. N. Mantegna, Physical Review E 68, 016119 (2003). [25] J.-P. Bouchaud, J. Farmer, and F. Lillo, Handbook of Financial Markets: Dynamics and Evolution, Handbook of Finance , 57 (2009). [26] F. Lillo, arXiv.org (2021), 2105.00521. [27] A. Ponzi, F. Lillo, and R. N. Mantegna, Physical Review E 80, 016112 (2009). [28] G. Tononi, O. Sporns, and G. M. Edelman, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 91, 5033 (1994). [29] P. L. Williams and R. D. Beer, arXiv.org (2010), arXiv:1004.2515. [30] J. T. Lizier, Frontiers in Robotics and AI 1, 11 (2014). [31] A. Kraskov, H. Stögbauer, and P. Grassberger, Physical Review E 69, 066138 (2004). [32] C. M. Holmes and I. Nemenman, Physical Review E 100, 022404 (2019). [33] M. Wibral, N. Pampu, V . Priesemann, F. Siebenhühner, H. Sei- wert, M. Lindner, J. T. Lizier, and R. Vicente, PloS one 8, e55809 (2013). [34] Y . Benjamini and D. Yekutieli, Annals of Statistics , 1165 (2001). [35] S. E. Said and D. A. Dickey, Biometrika 71, 599 (1984). [36] Note that the results reported in Fig. 5 are local information dynamics values, and each local value is estimated for each individual run. For non-stationary time series, an appropriate treatment would be to obtain each local value from an ensem- ble of time series available [43]. However, in ﬁnancial time se- ries, usually only one trajectory is available. What we aimed to show with our controlled vector auto-regressive experiments of regime shifts in Fig. 5 was that certain regime shifts are de- tectable even from a single time series realisation, and the in- formation theoretic signature is visible for a wide range of such non-stationary time series (see Appendix). [37] T. Bollerslev, Journal of Econometrics 31, 307 (1986). [38] F. Lillo and J. Doyne Farmer, Fluctuation and Noise Letters 5, L209 (2005). [39] J. Farmer, L. Gillemot, F. Lillo, S. Mike, and A. Sen, Quantita- tive Finance 4, 383 (2004). [40] H. Matsuda, K. Kudo, R. Nakamura, O. Yamakawa, and T. Murata, International Journal of Theoretical Physics 35, 839 (1996). [41] L. Barnett, J. T. Lizier, M. Harré, A. K. Seth, and T. Bosso- maier, Physical Review Letters 111, 177203 (2013). [42] A. Johansen, D. Sornette, and O. Ledoit, arXiv.org (1999), cond-mat/9903321. [43] G. Gómez-Herrero, W. Wu, K. Rutanen, M. C. Soriano, G. Pipa, and R. Vicente, Entropy 17, 1958 (2015).