Do fundamentals shape the price response? A critical assessment of linear impact models Michele Vodret∗1,2, Iacopo Mastromatteo 3, Bence T´ oth3, and Michael Benzaquen 1,2,3 1Chair of Econophysics Complex Systems, Ecole polytechnique, 91128 Palaiseau Cedex, France 2Ladhyx, UMR CNRS 7646, Ecole polytechnique, 91128 Palaiseau Cedex, France 3Capital Fund Management, 23-25, Rue de l’Universit´ e 75007 Paris, France December 9, 2021 Abstract We compare the predictions of the stationary Kyle model, a microfounded multi-step linear price impact model in which market prices forecast fundamentals through information encoded in the order ﬂow, with those of the propagator model, a purely data-driven model in which trades mechanically impact prices with a time-decaying kernel. We ﬁnd that, remarkably, both models predict the exact same price dynamics at high frequency, due to the emergence of universality at small time scales. On the other hand, we ﬁnd those models to disagree on the overall strength of the impact function by a quantity that we are able to relate to the amount of excess-volatility in the market. We reveal a crossover between a high-frequency regime in which the market reacts sub-linearly to the signed order ﬂow, to a low-frequency regime in which prices respond linearly to order ﬂow imbalances. Overall, we reconcile results from the literature on market microstructure (sub-linearity in the price response to traded volumes) with those relating to macroeconomically relevant timescales (in which a linear relation is typically assumed). Keywords: Market microstructure, price impact, calibration, multi-scale analysis. Contents 1 Introduction 3 2 Linear models for price impact 4 2.1 The stationary Kyle model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2.2 The propagator model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 3 Price impact function in the stationary Kyle model 7 3.1 High- and low- frequency regimes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 3.2 Universality at high frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 4 Empirical results 9 4.1 Stationary Kyle model and excess-volatility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 4.2 Predictive power of agnostic linear price impact models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 5 Conclusions 12 A Price impact function scaling varying the sampling scale 16 B Linear price impact functions from diﬀerent price dynamics 16 ∗mvodret@gmail.com 1 arXiv:2112.04245v1 [q-fin.TR] 8 Dec 2021 C Datasets, detrending and calibration procedures 16 C.1 Low frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 C.2 High frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 2 1 Introduction Financial markets display very diﬀerent dynamic properties depending on the time window at which they are probed. If markets are observed in a small enough time window, where the price exhibits diﬀusive dynamics, then the slow evolution of fundamentals plays a minor role: in this regime price dynamics is mostly driven by endogenous variables, such as past trades [1]. Conversely, by inspecting the market over larger time scales (e.g. months, years), fundamentals begin to play a more important role, and eﬀects of mean-reversion to some notion of “fair value” start being visible [2, 3]. Although the literature provides several phenomenological models capable of providing a multi-scale view of ﬁnancial markets [3, 4], no unique theoretical scenario is able to accommodate this crossover in a way that is both empirically accurate and economically sound. Seminal contributions in the market microstructure literature [5] include noisy rational expecta- tion models [6, 7] where the price partially reﬂects the underlying fundamental value of the asset, providing an explanation of trade-induced price impact based on a price discovery mechanism. Unfortunately, some assumptions customarily made in this type of models make them unsuitable for calibration in real markets, where several aspects diverge from their idealized counterpart: in real markets no fundamental price revelation is provided at any time and the order ﬂow process exhibits long-range correlations [8]. Some progress has been made in order to bridge the gap be- tween microfounded price impact models and actual markets. In the Speculative Dynamics model (see [9]) the assumption of fundamental price revelation is dropped and a stationary price impact model is obtained. A further extension is provided by the stationary Kyle model [10], which allows to consider arbitrary Gaussian signal and noise processes, de-facto including the empirically rele- vant case of strongly correlated order ﬂow. In Ref. [10] it is also highlighted that the stationarity property allows to capture qualitatively the diﬀerent dynamical regimes discussed above. Interestingly, in the high frequency regime of the stationary Kyle model, where fundamentals are slowly varying and the price is diﬀusive, one recovers a linear equilibrium formally equivalent to that customarily described by the propagator model [11] (see also Ref. [12]), which is an agnostic (i.e., not microfounded) model able to provide a statistically accurate picture of ﬁnancial markets at high frequency. Nevertheless, as we shall see in this paper, from a practical point of view, these two models are very diﬀerent. In fact, the excess-volatility puzzle [13] cannot be solved within the stationary Kyle model. This puzzle is instead avoided by the propagator model, which has no a-priori on what the right price level should be, and is thus allowed to set the level of price response by calibrating the model directly with the empirical price. Although the stationary Kyle model is not able to provide a solution to the excess-volatility puzzle, we shall argue that at small timescales, that has no eﬀect on the qualitative price dynamics, because it only leads to an impact that is oﬀ by a multiplicative factor. Thus, the stationary Kyle model provides a microfoundation for the structure of the price impact shape, even though it misses a magnitude component that relates to the excess-volatility puzzle. We discuss also the importance of the sampling scale at which markets are probed. It is known from the propagator model literature, that if one studies ﬁnancial markets at the trade by trade level, microstructural eﬀects related to order book details (such as selective liquidity taking) are of high relevance. In particular, it is well known [11] that a sub-linear price impact model gives higher predictive power than a linear one. We show that when analyzing coarse-grained data the opposite is true. In doing so, we provide a useful recipe to relate descriptions obtained with linear price impact models when the sampling scale is varied. The outline of the paper is the following. In section 2 we recall the basics of stationary Kyle model and the propagator model. In Section 3 we show how the stationary Kyle model captures the same shape of the price impact function as the propagator model, at high frequency. Section 4 highlights empirically the excess-volatility puzzle which aﬀects the magnitude of the price impact function predicted by the stationary Kyle model and validates the linearity of price impact models if one considers coarse-grained data. Finally, in section 5 we conclude, suggesting an interesting way to reconcile the microfounded model with empirical price volatility. 3 2 Linear models for price impact 2.1 The stationary Kyle model The stationary Kyle (sK) model [10] is a multi-step noisy rational expectations model with asym- metric information, where agents take actions at discrete steps n, and can trade a safe asset (cash) and a risky asset ( stock). A strategic, risk-neutral and forward-looking (with inﬁnite horizon) agent (informed trader, or IT) possesses at each step n privileged information about the funda- mental price pF n of the risky asset and exploits optimally this information by demanding a traded quantityqIT n which maximizes his expected utility. A passive agent ( noise trader or NT) accesses the market for exogenous reasons and trades in a purely stochastic fashion. More precisely, his demand process qNT n at step n is a realization of a zero-mean, stationary Gaussian process with auto-covariance function (ACF) at lagn given by ΩNT n . Informed and noise traders are both mod- eled as liquidity takers. The third agent ( market maker, or MM) is a liquidity provider who sets the transaction price pSK n in a risk-neutral and competitive way observing only the realized excess demand qn =qIT n +qNT n . The fundamental price is related to exogenous factors (e.g., dividends, earnings, market cap- italisation). For the sake of argument, we suppose that the stock provides a stochastic payoﬀ (dividend) µn to the owner at each step n. Since we assume risk-neutrality of rational agents, the presence of a fundamental price pF n can be justiﬁed as arising from the sum of future dividend cash ﬂows: pF n = ∑ m≥n µm. (1) Dividends are modeled as realizations of an exogenous zero-mean, stationary Gaussian process. Details about dynamics and information sets are given below. At the beginning of each time interval (n−1,n ] liquidity takers build demands for the risky asset, i.e.,qi n withi∈{ NT, IT}. The informed trader’s information I IT n is given by realized excess demand qn, dividends µn and NT’s tradesqNT n up to step n− 1 included. Given this information set, the IT calculates an estimate of the fundamental price at each step n as: pIT n = E[pF n|I IT n ]. (2) This estimate is the only new information about the fundamental price that is injected into the market at each stepn. The ACF of this process at lag n is denoted by ΣIT n , which is Gaussian and stationary, due to the fact that dividends are realizations of a Gaussian stationary process. Based on his information set, at each step n, the IT chooses his optimal trading schedule maximizing his expected long-run gains and trades the ﬁrst step of it, given by qIT n . Then, the market maker clears the excess demand executing a trade qMM n =−qn at transaction price pSK n . The transaction price in a competitive market with risk-neutral traders is the optimal estimator of the fundamental price. The MM knows that the only new (unbiased) information about the fundamental price injected into the market at time n is given by pIT n , so the transaction price is equivalently the optimal estimator of it, given the MM’s current information set I MM n , which coincides with realized excess demands up to time n included. In formula: pSK n = E[pIT n|I MM n ]. (3) Both the informed trader and the market maker have exact knowledge about statistical prop- erties related to exogenous processes (dividends and NT’s trades), as well as each other’s strategy and information set structure. Thus, rational agents are endowed with perfect structural knowl- edge. Because of this assumption, the MM knows that the IT is injecting information in the market about fundamentals and he tries to extract it from the observed excess demand, in order to set a transaction price that accurately reﬂects the insider’s private information. The IT, on the other hand, knows that the MM impounds into prices his ﬁltered information about the fundamental 4 price via a price impact function (see below), and decides how to trade while taking this into account. The MM sets the price in a competitive way, i.e., he doesn’t earn money on average, while the NT accepts to lose money in favor of the IT. In change, the NT completes his trades at a transaction price that reﬂects optimally the underlying fundamental value. The equilibrium arises endogenously as the result of agents’ actions and is completely charac- terized by exogenous ACFs related to signal and noise (given by ΣIT n and ΩNT n ). The risk-neutrality assumption of rational agents and the restriction to Gaussian signal and noise implies an equilib- rium where the pricing rule pSK n is linear in realized excess demand. In formula: pSK n = ∑ m≤n GSK n−mqm. (4) The price impact function GSK n can be found by numerically solving a functional equation that we investigated in Ref. [10]. The interpretation of GSK n that came out from that analysis is that the price impact function is the stationary Kalman ﬁlter related to the fundamental information injected in the market by the informed trader. In what follows we show that, even though one has to resort to an iterative numerical procedure in order to compute GSK n directly from the deﬁnition of the equilibrium (see Ref. [10] for details), it is possible to derive the shape of it by exploiting two equilibrium properties related to the price set by the MM and the excess demand. At equilibrium, price and excess demand processes are Gaussian processes, with zero mean and stationary ACF, given respectively by Σ SK n and Ωn. The temporal structure of ACFs related to excess demand and price set by the MM are characterized by [10]: Ωn∝ ΩNT n +Aδn, (5a) ΣSK n ∝ ΣIT n . (5b) The ﬁrst property (Eq. (5a)) is linked to the IT’s intention to hide his own trades in the excess demand in order to maximize his proﬁts. In particular, the informed trader chooses his own optimal trading schedule such that the temporal structure of the excess demand ACF resembles that created by the NT alone, apart from an overall amplitude prefactor and a positive delta contribution at lag zero. The amplitude prefactor can be higher or smaller than one, depending on the degree of predictability of the NT’s trade process. Because of the delta contribution, we called this property quasi-camouﬂage. When the total order ﬂow process exhibits some autocorrelation, perfect camouﬂage (A→ 0) is recovered in the regime where mean-reversion time scales of both fundamental price and NT’s trades are large compared to the trading time-scale [10]. This is the empirically relevant case for sampling scales as large as few hours. Note that obviously also a non-correlated NT’s trade process (Ω NT n ∝ δn) implies perfect camouﬂage. The second property (Eq. (5b)), that we called price eﬃciency, shows that the price set by the MM correctly reﬂects the statistical structure of the fundamental price process estimated by the IT up to an amplitude factor. This amplitude factor is smaller than one because of the assumptions of perfect structural knowledge, noisy environment and risk-neutrality of the MM. In fact, from Eq. (3):pIT n =pSK n +ϵn, where E[pSK n ϵn] = 0, due to the orthogonality property of optimal estimors. So, the following inequality holds: Σ IT 0 = ΣSK 0 + E[ϵ2 n]≥ ΣSK 0 . This means that the variance of the price set by the MM is smaller than that related to the IT’s estimate of the fundamental price. In the empirical section (Subsec. 4.1) we give more details about this drawback of the model. Before moving on, let us show how one can use the two properties above to derive a simple equation that gives the price impact function shape starting from the two input ACFs. From Eqs. (4) and (5) one can derive a relation between the ACF of excess demand, Ω n, the ACF of the price, Σ SK n , and the impact function, GSK n . In the case where perfect camouﬂage holds, this relation simpliﬁes to: ΣIT n ∝ ∑ r≤m ∑ s≤m+n GSK m−rGSK m+n−sΩNT s−r. (6) For example, in the case of a Markovian market (which will be of interest in what follows) where ΣNT n ∝δn and ΣIT n ∝ exp(−n/nIT) one can see that GSK n ∝ exp(−n/nIT). 5 2.2 The propagator model Here we focus our attention on links and diﬀerences between Eq. (4), and the equation that deﬁnes the propagator model [11]. While the sK model is microfounded in terms of noisy heterogeneous agents where the price is the optimal estimator of thefundamental price (pF n), the phenomenological linear price impact model known as propagator model is meant to explain theempirical price (pemp n ) in terms of past order ﬂows. The equation that deﬁnes the linear propagator model is simply given by pP n = ∑ m≤n GP n−mqm. (7) One ﬁnds that, besides its simplicity, the propagator model is able to explain a large fraction of price volatility, meaning that a large fraction of price moves is not related to exogenous shocks. In order to test the stationary Kyle model, in the following we confront it with the propagator model. The calibration of the stationary Kyle and of the propagator model require diﬀerent input processes. The input processes needed for the calibration of the stationary Kyle model are given by ACFs related to signal and noise, i.e., Σ IT n and ΩNT n . On the other hand, the propagator model, which is not microfounded, is calibrated using only publicly observable processes. In particular, the excess demand ACF Ωn and the response functionRemp n = E[qn(pemp m+n−pemp m−1)] are needed [11]. In the regime where the price is diﬀusive, the shape of the price impact function is the same as that given by the sK model, since it solely depends on the total order ﬂow ACF (see Sec. 3). The only diﬀerence in terms of prediction of these two models, if calibrated in a regime where the price is diﬀusive, is given by the magnitude of the price impact function. In particular, GP 0≥GSK 0 , since empirical prices are far more volatile than fundamental values [13, 14] , as further discussed in Subsec 4.1. As a ﬁnal remark, note that the propagator model proposed in Ref. [11] is not implemented in the linear form given by Eq. (7). In fact, the calibration in that work was made using trade by trade data, and the predictive power was maximized using a sub-linear function of signed volumes of past trades. In Subsec. 4.2, where aggregated data on sampling scale τ≥ 1 minute are analyzed, we calibrate assuming the propagator to be a linear function of signed volumes of past trades in Eq. (7), showing how the predictive power increases with respect to a propagator model extremely concave in past total traded volumes (i.e., linear in the sign of the trades). In order to conduct this analysis it will be interesting to compare linear price impact models’ outcomes when the sampling scale of the dataset varies. In the following we detail how one can relate predictions coming from calibrations conducted with data aggregated over diﬀerent time windows. Scaling relations as the sampling scale varies In order to relate the prediction of a discrete model with well-known time dependent quantities (such as the mean-reversion time scale of the de-trended fundamental price) we need to specify the real-time counterpart τ of 1 lag, i.e., the discretization time step (or the sampling scale ). In practice, this timescale is set by the time resolution τ of the dataset at hand. For this reason it will be convenient to introduce a notation that makes this detail explicit. For example, if the price comes from a dataset with a one-minute resolution,τ = 1 minute, then we deﬁne p(τ ) n=1 as the price at time 1 minute. This notation will be handy when comparing predictions coming from calibration performed on diﬀerent coarse-grained version of the same dataset. In the following we will be interested in comparing objects, like the price impact function, constructed from processes deﬁned at diﬀerent sampling scales. In those cases the dependence on the sampling scale τ will be made explicit. If, in a given equation, no mention to a scale τ is made, it means that all the objects that appear are constructed with the same sampling scale τ. Suppose we have a dataset related to prices and total excess demand with a given sampling scale τshort. We can calibrate the linear propagator model on it. Then, starting from the original dataset, 6 one can construct a coarse-grained version of it with a sampling scale τlong =rτshort>τ short. The relations between excess demand and price variables at diﬀerent sampling scales are given by: q(τlong) n = ∑nr m=(n−1)r+1q(τshort) m , (8a) p(τlong) n = p(τshort) nr . (8b) Below we discuss the relations between total order ﬂow ACF and response function calibrated at diﬀerent sampling scales. Taking into account Eq. (8a), a power law decay with exponent β for the excess demand ACF (similar to the one empirically found in [8]) and starting from the deﬁnition of excess demand auto-covariance, one obtains the following relation between total order ﬂow ACFs at diﬀerent sampling scales: Ω(τlong) n ≈ Ω(τshort) n (τlong/τshort)(2−β). (9) In the diﬀusive regime, a similar calculation for the empirical response function gives: R(τlong) n ≈R(τshort) n (τlong/τshort)1/2+(2−β)/2. (10) In the following, for the sake of argument, we shall consider also total order ﬂow processes following a non-correlated noise, instead of a strongly correlated one. Note that in this case the two equations above still holds, using β = 1. Due to the linearity of the price impact models we are working with, it is easy to understand the price impact function behavior when coarse-graining. We ﬁnd that (see App. A) G(τlong) n ≈ 1 r nr∑ m=(n−1)r+1 G(τshort) m , (11) i.e., the price impact function on sampling scale τlong is roughly the price impact function at sampling scale τshort averaged over a time window of length τlong. 3 Price impact function in the stationary Kyle model 3.1 High- and low- frequency regimes The price eﬃciency property (Eq. (5b)) allows us to identify two diﬀerent dynamical regimes according to the mean-reversion time scale related to the IT’s estimate of the fundamental price, given by τ F. In fact, the variogram V SK n = E[(pSK n+m−pSK m )2] calculated with a sampling scale τ can be expressed (in non-pathological cases) as V SK n = 2ΣSK 0 ( 1− ΣIT n ΣIT 0 ) = { σ2n n ≪τ F/τ 2ΣSK 0 n≫τ F/τ , (12) for some positive σ, implying that the behavior of the price at time step n is diﬀusive when innovations in the fundamental price process are long-lived with respect to nτ and mean-reverting in the opposite case. These two regimes can be equivalently characterized by the response functionRSK n = E[qn(pSK m+n− pSK m−1)], which is constant forn≪τ F/τ as a consequence of price diﬀusion, and decays forn≫τ F/τ as a consequence of price mean reversion. The model is thus consistent with the roughly ﬂat empir- ical price response function reported in studies about high-frequency dynamics [11] for nτ smaller than few days, since τ F is of the order of several months/few years [3]. Understanding the behavior of the price impact function GSK n in the high-frequency regime is trickier, as its shape depends on the NT’s order ﬂow ACF. Let us consider two cases. (a) If the noise trader’s order ﬂow is uncorrelated, the informed trader also trades in an uncorrelated fashion 7 n (years) 0.26 1.00Vn/Vemp 0 3.42.6 pemp pF 0 2 4 6 8 10 0.95 1.00 1.05Gn/G0 0 10 20 30 40 0.8 1.0Gn/G0 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 0.75 1.00Gn/G0 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 0.5 1.0Gn/G0 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 n (days) 0 1Gn/G0 Figure 1: Universal time-dependence at high frequency and non-universal time-dependence at low fre- quency, for the case of a Markovian market with independent order ﬂow. (Left) Variograms from synthetic data that comes from a Markovian market with parameters given by Table 1. The diﬀerent time windows used in the calibration (right panel) are highlighted by diﬀerent shades of yellows. (due to the camouﬂage, Eq. (5a)). In this case the shape of the response and impact functions is identical in the high-frequency regime, because only a permanent price impact function ensures diﬀusive prices in case of uncorrelated trade ﬂow. (b) Now, let us consider a noise trader’s order ﬂow auto-correlated over a time window given byτ NT. In this case, in order for the response function to be ﬂat at high frequency, the impact function has to be a decreasing function [11], meaning that the price response to the ﬁrst trade anticipates the correlated ﬂow in the same direction. The impact function will then relax to a non-zero quasi-permanent value, even though the ﬂat behavior of the response function will be preserved thanks to a stream of correlated orders of length ∼τ NT. We call this impact quasi-permanent because it appears as a permanent one to any observer probing the market at scales n≪τ NT/τ≪τ F/τ. Obviously, at long times, i.e., n≫τ F/τ≫τ NT/τ, all impact functions will decay to zero by construction due to the mean-reverting nature of the IT’s estimate of the fundamental price. The qualitative picture in real markets at high frequency is very similar to case (b). In fact, the order ﬂow displays long-term correlations. More precisely, the order ﬂow ACF is not integrable (auto-covariance is measured to slowly decay even across days). Because of this, in order to have diﬀusive prices and a ﬂat response at high frequency, the impact function should slowly decay to zero in a precise non-integrable way in order to compensate for the persistence of the order ﬂow [11]. Graphical details about cases (a) and (b) in the high and in the low frequency regime are provided in App. B. 3.2 Universality at high frequency The discussion above hints to the fact that a kind of universality emerges in the sK model: the speciﬁc dynamics of the fundamental price process aﬀects the short-term price dynamics only through the diﬀusion constant σ, but does not shape the short-term impact function. This statement is tested with synthetic data as follows. We generate two synthetic datasets, with sampling scale τ = 1 day, that mimic Markovian price dynamics (with mean-reversion timescales and price volatility in line with those that will be presented in Table 1, i.e., τ emp = 250× 3.4 and τ F = 250× 2.6 days and V F ∞/V emp ∞ = 0.26), while order ﬂow data are realizations of a non-correlated stochastic process. Variograms associated to these price processes are shown in 8 the left panel of Figure 1. We then calibrate these data with diﬀerent time windows, graphically identiﬁed by diﬀerent yellow bands: regions where the price undergoes pure diﬀusive dynamics are highlighted by an intense shade of yellow, and as the dynamics becomes aﬀected by price mean reversion, the yellow band is lighter. One can observe from the right panel of Figure 1 that, modulo a global prefactor (absorbed by dividing the propagator function by its value at lag zero), the two price dynamics that we used (pF andpemp) induce the same behavior fornτ≪ min{τ emp,τ F} given approximately by a constant (or quasi-permanent) price impact function. On the other hand, we see that as we approach a time window comparable with τ emp or τ F, price impact functions start to drift away from each other, because they become sensitive to the diﬀerent mean-reversion price dynamics. Even though the collapse between price impact functions at high frequency, resulting from calibration made on diﬀerent price processes but the same order ﬂow process, takes place by construction (apart from an amplitude related to price volatility), the non-trivial thing that we are able to predict is up to which point the collapse holds, and relate it to eﬀects linked to price mean-reversion dynamics at low frequencies. Therefore, the shape of the price impact function at high frequency is only aﬀected by the shape of the order ﬂow ACF, i.e., it is completely determined by the dynamics of ﬂow anticipation. 4 Empirical results 4.1 Stationary Kyle model and excess-volatility Our ﬁrst empirical question is the following: how literally should the sK model be taken? More speciﬁcally, our construction relates the price impact kernel with properties of the fundamental price, predicting that even at high frequency the magnitude of trade-induced price jumps should be related to some notion of fundamental information that is propagated all the way down from low frequencies to high frequencies. The stationary Kyle model implies in particular that it should be possible to deduce the price impact function from a proxy of the fundamental price of a stock (e.g., via dividends, earnings) and the properties of the signed order ﬂow, without ever measuring the market price. We tested this approach on a sample of monthly data (i.e., with sampling scale τ = 1 month), related to empirical prices ( pemp) and dividends (from which we constructed a proxy of the fun- damental price pF) of the S&P-500 index over ∼ 150 years. The presentation of this dataset, the de-trending and the calibration procedures are described in detail in App. C.1. Note that we assume a Markovian dynamics for the fundamental price process (deﬁned by a decay time scale τ F and an amplitude Σ F 0 ) and an independent order ﬂow, which are a good approximation for such a large sampling scale τ. The left panel of Table 1 contains the estimations for the mean-reversion time scale of the diﬀerent prices. We ﬁnd that the mean-reversion time scale of the fundamental price τ F is roughly in line with that deduced by the long-term behavior of the empirical market price τ emp, although the empirical market price seems to be slightly more persistent with respect to the fundamental price. Note that the price eﬃciency condition (Eq. (5b)) implies that the mean-reversion time scale of the price implied by the sK model τ SK is equal to that related to the fundamental price, i.e., τ SK =τ F. This means that the persistence ampliﬁcation exhibited by the empirical price cannot be captured with the simple setting of the stationary Kyle model. The second ﬁnding of this calibration is related to price volatility. The price volatility explained via the sK model is much smaller than that measured empirically as reported in the right panel of Table 1. We see that the squared ﬂuctuations of both the fundamental price Σ F 0 and of the price set by the market maker Σ SK 0 in the sK model are much lower than the squared ﬂuctuations of the empirical price Σ emp 0 . This should come as no surprise in light of well-known results on excess-volatility [13]. In fact the market price exhibits higher volatility with respect to what would 9 τ emp (years) τ F (years) 3.4± 0.3 2.6± 0.3 V F ∞/V emp ∞ V SK ∞ /V emp ∞ 0.26± 0.02 0.15± 0.03 Table 1: Empirical results based on monthly recorded data about S&P-500 index. (Left) Mean-reversion time scale of de-trended empirical price, fundamental price and price set by the MM in the stationary Kyle setting. (Right) Price variance ratios as measures of explained empirical price volatility. be implied by any reasonable proxy for price fundamentals. In our approach, the excess-volatility reported in that body of work is automatically inherited by the price impact function, due to the fact that the price is the optimal estimator of the fundamental price (see Eq. 3). Moreover, as explained above, the price set by the risk-neutral MM in a noisy environment always reveals less information than the fundamental price so that we have the following chain of inequalities: ΣSK 0 < ΣF 0 < Σemp. This last result shows that if one was to literally believe to the sK model, the price predictions that it implies would only account for a rather small portion of the volatility of the empirical market price. That is at odds with many empirical results concerning the predictive power of the propagator model, which is able to account for a very large portion (up to 60-70% if calibrated using trade by trade data) of the empirical market price variation. The source of this diﬀerence relies on the fact that the propagator model’s input is the empirical price, and not the fundamental price as in the stationary Kyle model. In this way the propagator model is not aﬀected by the excess-volatility puzzle, because there is not an explicit link to a notion of fundamental price. This implies that markets responds to the order ﬂow as if it wasn’t trying to anticipate the fundamental value of the risky asset, but something that would be much more in line with the market price. 4.2 Predictive power of agnostic linear price impact models Here we investigate the predictive power of the linear version of the propagator model given by Eq. (7), showing that for sampling scale τ≥ 1 minute the results are satisfactory. Our dataset contains order ﬂow and price time-indexed data at the trade resolution for a variety of stocks for a time range of 8 years (see details about data, de-trending and calibration procedures can be found in App. C.2). In Figure 2 we show the order ﬂow covariance, the price response and the price impact function at sampling scales of 1, 5, 30, 65, 130 or 250 minutes. Note that for each calibration, the analyzed time window is such that the price undergoes diﬀusive dynamics. Order ﬂow ACFs show a slow decay, compatible with a power law, with exponent lower than one. We ﬁnd the power law exponent to be β≈ 0.7. A good collapse of the curves is obtained using the scaling given by Eq. (9). The unit for the covariance is fraction of the average daily volume (ADV) squared. As known from the literature, the price response has step-like shape, with a very quick increasing period and a plateau afterwards. This ﬂattening out of the response is a sign of the diﬀusivity of the prices: no trivial future price prediction can be made from observing the trade ﬂow. A good collapse of the curves is obtained using the scaling given by Eq. (10). The unit for the price response is basis points of the price times fraction of the average daily volume (ADV). For the propagators at diﬀerent sampling scales, we do not apply any rescaling, consistent with Eq. (11). We see that, the propagator curves are comparable and quite similar at diﬀerent sampling, validating the scaling found above. Furthermore, the relation between the exponents related to power laws that ﬁts the order ﬂow ACF (β) and the propagator (γ) [11] holds, i.e., γ = (1−β)/2≈ 0.15. The units are basis points of the price for a fraction of the average daily volume (ADV). The price impact function at lag zero GP 0 suggests that a trade ﬂow imbalance of 1% of the average daily volume (ADV) leads to a price move of 26, 24, 18, 16, 14 or 13 basis points if executed in 1, 5, 30, 65, 130 or 250 minutes respectively. This decay of GP 0 for increasing τ is of importance. In fact, even though the total exchanged volume dominates the overall price impact 10 0 1 10 100 1000 n 10 5 10 4 10 3 10 2 10 1 ( ) n / (2 ) Rescaled total order flow ACFs in unit of 1%ADV2 = 0.7 0 100 200 300 400 500 n 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 Remp, ( ) n / 1/2 + (2 )/2 Rescaled response functions in unit of bp×1%ADV = 1 = 5 = 30 = 65 = 130 = 250 0 1 10 100 1000 n (minutes) 101 6 × 100 2 × 101 3 × 101 GP, ( ) n Rescaled total order flow ACFs in unit of bp/1%ADV = 0.15 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Figure 2: Rescaled inputs and output of propagator model calibrations with diﬀerent coarse-grained high frequency data, averaged across stocks. Sampling scales τ related to diﬀerent coarse-grained data are given in the legend, in units of minutes. Volumes are measured in units of 1% of average daily volume (ADV), while prices are measured in basis points (bp). (Top) Signed order ﬂow ACFs, rescaled according to Eq. (9) and taking as a reference the total order ﬂow ACF with sampling scale τ = 1 minute. (Middle) Response functions, rescaled according to Eq. (10) and taking as a reference the response function with sampling scale τ = 1 minute. (Bottom) Price impact functions. The dashed black lines in middle and bottom panel refers to decreasing power law function with exponents β and γ, respectively, whose value are reported in the legends. of a sequence of trades, the way in which the order ﬂow is realized at the trade by trade level has a measurable eﬀect, since the impact function is in fact decaying (albeit, at a small rate) and thus the concentration of trades plays a role. The problem of optimal order execution (see, e.g., Refs. [15–19]) deals precisely with the minimization of price impact induced costs under an exogenous constraint for the total size of the trade. It is known in that context that it is possible to decrease transaction costs by exploiting the decay of the propagator function, and that such decrease is moderate whenever the decay of the impact function is slow. In case of a power-law decreasing Gn∝ n−γ, the price impact related cost of an execution at constant rate φ during a period T scales as T−γ [20]. This is explicitly shown in Fig. 3, where GP,(τ ) 0 is taken as a proxy for execution costs with diﬀerent execution time ( τ playing the role of T ). In the remaining part of the section we study how much price volatility can be explained by the linear version of the propagator model calibrated at diﬀerent sampling scales. We deﬁne the 11 100 101 102 (minute) 2 × 101 3 × 101 Gp, ( ) 0 (bp/1%ADV) = 0.15 Figure 3: Instantaneous price move in bp for a trade of 1%ADV executed in a time-window of size τ. ratio between predicted and empirical price variograms as ΦP n = V P n V emp n . (13) Figure 4 shows the metric Φ P,(τ ) at a lag corresponding to ∼ 4 days. We show two curves. The blue one (q) corresponds to a calibration using the sum of signed trade ﬂow in the bin as before. The orange one (ϵ) corresponds to a calibration using the sum of the signs of the trades in a bin. Let’s ﬁrst concentrate on the blue curve (q). We ﬁnd that the explained variance increases initially as the bin size increases, ﬂattening out for longer sampling scales of a few tens of minutes. Most importantly, for all values of τ the explained variance is well above the ratio of Σ F 0/Σemp 0 = 0.26 that can be found in Table 1. This means that necessarily we have excess price response, which implies excess-volatility. This carries a very important message: the total trade ﬂow imbalance is indeed of high relevance to explain price moves when considering aggregated data. Let’s now look at the orange curve ( ϵ), for which, interestingly, one observes a better explanatory power than the (q) model for short τ scales. Indeed, at the microstructural level, the actual traded volume is very much conditioned on the available liquidity in the limit order book, and the sign of the trade is more informative than the trade itself. In fact, it is rare that a trade penetrates more than one price level. This means that agents condition the size of their transactions on liquidity, making large transactions when liquidity is high and small transactions when it is low. Thus, the information content is not related to the volume traded, but rather on the trade’s sign. This eﬀect undergoes the name of selective liquidity taking [21]. When one considers aggregated data, however, the relation ﬂips: as τ increases, the information contained in q becomes more valuable. An heuristic argument for this phenomenon is that the easier to manipulate a market variable, the less it should carry information: manipulating q, the exchanged volume, means taking actual risk. Forϵ, on the other hand, manipulation is much less risky: it can be done for example by placing many small trades in the market instead of few large trades. 5 Conclusions In this paper we compared two diﬀerent linear price impact models very diﬀerent in nature. The ﬁrst one is a microfounded one (the stationary Kyle model), which explains why price impact arises based on an asymmetric information induced mechanism, and where the market price is the optimal estimator of the fundamental price. The second one is instead a phenomenological model (the propagator model), aimed at reconciling the diﬀusive price dynamics with the long-range correlation of order ﬂows, which is able to capture a large fraction of market price volatility solely taking into account past trades. With an empirical analysis we highlighted the impossibility to solve the excess-volatility puzzle in the stationary Kyle model. This implies that the price impact function calibrated with the 12 1 5 30 65 130 250 (minutes) 0.275 0.300 0.325 0.350 0.375 0.400 0.425 0.450 ( ) q Figure 4: Ratio between predicted and empirical variograms at lag∼ 4 days, as a function of the sampling scale τ. Two linear propagator models are analyzed: price impact linear in signed order ﬂows (blue line) and linear in the sum of trades signs (orange line). stationary Kyle model will attain lower values than the one obtained by calibrating the propagator model. Nevertheless, the shape of the two obtained price impact functions is the same at high frequency, where the price is diﬀusive. This is explained by the microfounded model narrative by saying that the slow evolution of fundamentals does not shape the high frequency dynamics of the price process, but only aﬀects the magnitude of the price impact function via the diﬀusion constant related to the price. We stress-tested the linearity assumption of the analyzed price impact models, demonstrating that the propagator model has a high predictive power if the sampling scale is larger than the typical trading timescale, because eﬀects related to order book dynamics (such as selective liquidity taking) can be neglected. In order to check the robustness of our ﬁndings we applied scaling arguments to obtain relationships between price impact functions at diﬀerent sampling scales. Note that the excess-volatility puzzle can be solved in a setting with asymmetric information, like the stationary Kyle model, if assumptions such as risk-neutrality and/or perfect structural knowledge are relaxed. The accuracy of the microfounded model will increase if, for example, risk-aversion [22, 23] and/or learning dynamics [24–27] are introduced. We look forward to explore this research direction. Acknowledgments We thank J.-P. Bouchaud for many insightful discussions on these topics. This research was conducted within the Econophysics & Complex Systems Research Chair, under the aegis of the Fondation du Risque, the Fondation de l’Ecole polytechnique, the Ecole polytechnique and Capital Fund Management. References [1] X. Gabaix and R. S. J. Koijen. In search of the origins of ﬁnancial ﬂuctuations: The inelastic markets hypothesis. Working Paper 28967, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2021. [2] J. M. Poterba and L. H. Summers. Mean reversion in stock prices: Evidence and implications. Journal of Financial Economics , 22(1):27–59, 1988. [3] J.-P. Bouchaud, S. Ciliberti, Y. Lemperiere, A. Majewski, P. Seager, and K. Ronia. Black was right: Price is within a factor 2 of value. SSRN Electronic Journal, 11 2017. 13 [4] A. Majewski, S. Ciliberti, and J.-P. Bouchaud. Co-existence of trend and value in ﬁnan- cial markets: Estimating an extended Chiarella model. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 112(C), 2020. [5] M. O’Hara. Market Microstructure Theory. Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 1998. [6] A. Kyle. Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica, 53(6):1315–35, 1985. [7] L. R. Glosten and P. R. Milgrom. Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist market with heterogeneously informed traders. Journal of Financial Economics , 14(1):71–100, 1985. [8] F. Lillo and J. Farmer. The long memory of the eﬃcient market. Studies in Nonlinear Dynamics Econometrics, 8(3):1–35, 2004. [9] D. Bernhardt, P. Seiler, and B. Taub. Speculative dynamics. Economic Theory, 44(1):1–52, 2010. [10] M. Vodret, I. Mastromatteo, B. T´ oth, and M. Benzaquen. A stationary kyle setup: micro- founding propagator models. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment , 2021 (3):033410, 2021. [11] J.-P. Bouchaud, Y. Gefen, M. Potters, and M. Wyart. Fluctuations and response in ﬁnancial markets: the subtle nature of ‘random’ price changes. Quantitative Finance, 4(2):176–190, 2004. [12] J. D. Farmer, A. Gerig, F. Lillo, and S. Mike. Market eﬃciency and the long-memory of supply and demand: is price impact variable and permanent or ﬁxed and temporary? Quantitative Finance, 6(2):107–112, 2006. [13] R. Shiller. Do stock prices move too much to be justiﬁed by subsequent changes in dividends? American Economic Review, 71:421–36, 01 1981. [14] L. H. Summers. Does the stock market rationally reﬂect fundamental values? The Journal of Finance, 41(3):591–601, 1986. [15] R. Almgren and N. Chriss. Optimal execution of portfolio transactions. Journal of Risk, pages 5–39, 2001. [16] D. Bertsimas and A. Lo. Optimal control of execution costs. Journal of Financial Markets , 1 (1):1–50, 1998. [17] A. Cartea and S. Jaimungal. Incorporating order-ﬂow into optimal execution. Mathematics and Financial Economics , 10(3):339–364, 2016. [18] J. Gatheral. No-dynamic-arbitrage and market impact. Quantitative Finance, 10(7):749–759, 2010. [19] A. Alfonsi, A. Fruth, and A. Schied. Optimal execution strategies in limit order books with general shape functions. Quantitative Finance, 10(2):143–157, 2010. [20] I. Mastromatteo, B. T´ oth, and J.-P. Bouchaud. Agent-based models for latent liquidity and concave price impact. Phys. Rev. E , 89:042805, 2014. [21] J.-P. Bouchaud, J. D. Farmer, and F. Lillo. How markets slowly digest changes in supply and demand. Handbook of Financial Markets: Dynamics and Evolution , 2008. [22] A. Subrahmanyam. Risk Aversion, Market Liquidity, and Price Eﬃciency.Review of Financial Studies, 4(3):416–441, 1991. [23] M. Guo and A. Kyle. Dynamic strategic informed trading with risk-averse market makers. Working Paper, Duke University, 2005. 14 [24] A. G. Timmermann. How learning in ﬁnancial markets generates excess volatility and pre- dictability in stock prices. The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 108(4):1135–1145, 1993. [25] A. G. Timmermann. Excess Volatility and Predictability of Stock Prices in Autoregressive Dividend Models with Learning. The Review of Economic Studies , 63(4):523–557, 10 1996. [26] C. Hommes and M. Zhu. Behavioral learning equilibria. Journal of Economic Theory , 150: 778–814, 2014. [27] W. A. Branch. Imperfect knowledge, liquidity and bubbles. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 62(C):17–42, 2016. 15 A Price impact function scaling varying the sampling scale Consider a slowly varying kernel G(τshort) n (assumption which will be realized empirically at small enough sampling scalesτshort). One can ‘zoom-out’ in time, by deﬁning a new coarse-grained model with sampling scale τlong =rτshort > τshort. We show how the impact function changes when the sampling scale is changed. The argument goes as follows: p(τshort) nr = ∑ m≤n ( G(τshort) (n−m)rq(τshort) mr +G(τshort) (n−m)r−1q(τshort) mr−1 +··· +G(τshort) (n−m)r−r+1q(τshort) mr−r+1 ) ≈ ∑ m≤n 1 r (G(τshort) (n−m)r +G(τshort) (n−m)r−1 +··· +G(τshort) (n−m)r−r+1) | {z } G (τlong) n−m (q(τshort) mr +q(τshort) mr−1 +··· +q(τshort) mr−r+1| {z } q (τlong) m ) = p(τlong) n . Equations above indicate that when downsampling the model to scale τlong, the price is linear -at a ﬁrst approximation- in the total imbalance over bins of size equal to τlong. The price impact function at scale τlong is the arithmetic mean over a time window equal to τlong of the price impact function deﬁned at scale τshort. Even though one has exact equality only in the case of a perfectly constant kernel or a perfectly constant order ﬂow imbalance, the approximation will still retain a good explanatory power as long as G(τshort) n is smooth enough. B Linear price impact functions from diﬀerent price dynamics Here, analyzing synthetic data, we provide graphical details about cases (a) and (b) mentioned in Subsec. 3.1. Two calibrations with diﬀerent sampling scales (τshort andτlong) are analyzed for each case. The calibration with τlong is done on a time window that encompasses the low-frequency regime. Because of this, fundamental price mean reversion needs to be taken into account and we calibrate the sK model (with the numerical scheme detailed in Ref. [10]) starting from NT’s order ﬂowqNT and IT’s fundamental price estimatepIT ACFs. Conversely, the calibration with sampling scale τshort is restricted only to the high-frequency regime (mimicking what is done usually when analyzing empirical data at high frequency). In this case, the numerical scheme used to solve the sK model cannot be applied because the model is not properly regularized, because ACFs do not have enough time to decay to zero. Because of this, we calibrate the model deﬁned at sampling scale τshort with the technique usually employed in the propagator model literature (details about it are given in App. C.2). Figure 5 shows that if the price and the order ﬂow processes obtained at scale τlong are compatible with those deﬁned at sampling scale τshort, the results of the two calibrations are compatible (via the coarse-graining argument explained in Subsec. 2.2). In particular, the price impact functions calibrated with the two diﬀerent sampling scales are compatible (see the bottom-left panels in Fig. 5). As a consistency check, note that calibrations related to case (b), where excess demand ACF’s shape is a power law, validate the well-known constraint between the exponents of the power laws related to the excess demand ACF ( β) and to the price impact functions (γ), given by γ = (1−β)/2 [11]. C Datasets, detrending and calibration procedures C.1 Low frequency Presentation of the data The dataset used for the calibration is about the S&P500 index and is publicly available online at github.com/datasets/s-and-p-500. These data include information about monthly (τ = 1 month) prices (P emp n ) and dividends (Mn) from January 1871 until March 2018, but do not include information about order ﬂows. 16 102 103 n (days) 102 103 n (days) 102 103 n (days) 102 103 n (days) 0 10 20 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 G( ) n 30 0 10 20 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 R( ) n 30 0 5 n 0.0055 0.0060 0.0065 R( ) n / 0 10 20 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 V( ) n 30 0 20 n (days) 0.000 0.025 V( ) n 0 10 20 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 ( ) n 30 0 20 n 0.000 0.025 ( ) n / (a) Independent order ﬂow. Informed trader’s estimate of the fundamental price are Markovian, with mean-reversion time scale τF = 50 days. At sampling scale τlong, the variance of the IT’s estimate of the fundamental price is ﬁxed to one, as well as the variance of the NT’s order ﬂow. 102 103 n (days) 0 1 10 100 1000 n (days) 10 4 10 3 10 2 10 1 100 ( ) n 30 = 0.7 0 1 10 100 1000 n (days) 10 2 10 1 G( ) n 30 = 0.15 102 103 n (days) 0 10 20 30 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 R( ) n 0 1 10 n 10 4 10 3 10 2 R( ) n / 1/2 + (2 )/2 0 10 20 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 V( ) n 30 0 20 n (days) 0.000 0.025 0.050 V( ) n 0 1 10 n 10 4 10 3 10 2 ( ) n / 2 (b) Power law order ﬂow. Informed trader’s estimates of the fundamental price are Markovian, with mean-reversion time scale τF = 50 days and NT’s order ﬂow ACF is a combination of exponentials that mimics a decreasing power law function with exponent β = 0.7. At sampling scale τlong, the variance of the IT’s estimate of the fundamental price is ﬁxed to one, as well as the variance of the NT’s order ﬂow. Dashed grey lines in top-right and bottom-left panels refer to decreasing power law functions with exponent β and γ, respectively. Figure 5: Calibrations related to cases (a) and (b) mentioned in Subsec. 3.1, on synthetic datasets. For each case, we consider two models with diﬀerent sampling scale, i.e. τ equal toτshort = 1 day andτlong = 30 days. We identify the high-frequency regime as the interval [0,τ long] (orange band). The set of input ACFs that specify the sK model at sampling scale τlong are related to NT’s trades and to IT’s fundamental price estimates (red lines). Details about them are given in sub-captions. Once the sK model is solved, we obtain V (τlong) n , Ω(τlong) n ,G (τlong) n and R(τlong) n (blue lines). The model with sampling scale τshort, is calibrated with new input ACFs related to price and excess demand, and with the associated response function (green lines). Note that in this case the response function is not an output of the model and so it is again presented as a green line. These new ACFs are such that, after a proper rescaling (see Subsec. 2.2), the variogram, the excess demand ACF and the response function match the one at low frequency, as shown in insets. Results of calibrations with sampling scale τshort are given by price impact functions (orange lines), i.e., G(τshort) n . 17 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000 2020 n (years) 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500Xn ($) X = Pemp X = trend(Pemp) X = PF X = trend(PF) 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000 2020 n (years) 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5xn = Xn/trend(X)n X = Pemp X = PF Figure 6: De-trending procedure applied to S&P500 index data. (Left) Empirical price and estimated fundamental price. In the legend, trend(X) refers to the inverse of the exponential factor in Eq. 14. (Right) Stationary version of empirical price and estimated fundamental price. From data about dividends, an estimate of the fundamental price can be constructed as P F n = Mn⟨P emp n /Mn⟩1. The price and the fundamental price cannot be described by a stationary process, as one can see from the left panel of Figure 6: a clear trend is exhibited by both processes. Thus, we cannot calibrate the stationary Kyle model on these raw data. One needs to de-trend them. The de-trending procedure’s goal is to retrieve a stationary empirical price and fundamental price processes, so that the calibration of the sK model, which is a stationary model, becomes possible. We deﬁne de-trended quantities as: xn = Xn X0 exp ( − n∑ m=0 ηX m ) , (14) where the trend ηX n > 0 is estimated in a causal way as follows. De-trending For each time series Xn we deﬁne the trend in a causal way, as follows: ηX n = 1 T/τ log ( Xn Xn−T/τ ) , (15) where we choose T = 20 years in order to be able to capture phenomena which occur on time scales as large as few years, such as the mean-reversion of the fundamental price. The right panel of Figure 6 shows the de-trended version of price and fundamental price pro- cesses calculated using Eqs.(14) and (15). From the right panel of Fig. 6 one can see that the de-trended fundamental price errs less than the de-trended price. This is the cause of price excess- volatility, as emphasized in the main text. Information about order ﬂows is necessary to obtain a complete calibration, but in the dataset we are working with, no information is given about it. As we shall see in what follows, we can still partially calibrate the model, and obtain a complete description of the price process. Calibration via the stationary Kyle model In this section we detail the calibration proce- dure, given the de-trended time series we obtained above. Firstly, we remove the mean price level from the empirical de-trended price, assuming that it is common knowledge so that price impact it’s insensitive to it. 1Let us note that this prescription for the fundamental price is not causal since the mean price-dividend ratio ⟨Pn/Mn⟩ is calculated with all the data provided by the dataset. 18 Let us now detail how we can completely characterize the price process without information about the excess demand. Suppose that the signal and the noise ACFs are given by: ΣIT n = Σ IT 0 αn (16a) ΩNT n = Ω NT 0 δn (16b) where 0<α< 1 andδn is the Kronecker’s delta. The ﬁrst equation states that the estimate of the IT of the (de-trended) fundamental price follows an auto-regressive process of order 1, which is a ﬁrst approximation widely used in the literature (see, e.g., [3]). The second assumption states that on the scale of months the NT’s order ﬂow is not correlated, which is a good ﬁrst approximation at very low frequency. We have been able to characterize analytically the stationary equilibrium that arise within the stationary Kyle model in this case [10]. Interestingly, in the linear stationary equilibrium, the variance of the price set by the MM is given by: ΣSK 0 ΣIT 0 = 1− √ 1−α2 α2 , (17) which interpolates between the outcome of the original Kyle model if the signal becomes very short-lived (α→ 0) and the case of fully revealing price if the signal becomes permanent (α→ 1). Moreover, in this case, information about the excess demand is not needed to specify completely the price process. The calibration procedure goes as follows: from the fundamental price shown in the right panel (red line) of Fig. 6 one can calculate the associated empirical ACF. Then, we ﬁt this empirical ACF with an exponential function, as prescribed by Eq. (16a). Although it’s not possible to ﬁx the amplitude of the price impact function GSK because we lack information about the excess demand’s variance Ω0, it’s still possible to completely specify the price process by Eqs. (5b), (16a) and (17). The results of this calibration are reported in Table 1. C.2 High frequency Presentation of the data We analyzed data about some of the most traded stocks, during the period January 2013 - December 2020. The tick size of all the stocks is 0.01 USD. We reshaped the data removing eﬀects coming from stock splitting. The bid-ask spread of a large tick stock is most of the times equal to one tick, whereas small tick stocks have spreads that are typically a few ticks. There exist also a number of stocks in the intermediate region between large and small tick stocks, which have the characteristics of both types. We choose 5 diﬀerent stocks and we placed them all in the same pool. Data are indexed by a time label with precision at the microsecond (τ = 1µs), where information about the precise timing of the transaction is stored. The empirical mid price P emp n is calculated as the mean between the bid and the ask. At the transaction level, we constructed order-signs by labelling trades for which the transaction price is above the mid-price by ϵn = +1 and all trade below as ϵn =−1. Trades exactly at the mid-price were discarded. Signed order ﬂow qn are then constructed multiplying the trade’s sign by the quantity traded. Data about volumes are normalized by a rolling mean of the total daily volume exchanged over a time window∼ 50 days. The empirical price exhibits a positive trend (as one can see from the left panel of Figure 7), thus a de-trending procedure has to be implemented in order to meet the assumptions on which the stationary Kyle model is constructed. The de-trending procedure is discussed in detail below. 19 emp 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 n(years) 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4pn emp Figure 7: High frequency empirical data about AMZN stock. The sampling scale is equal to τ = 1µs. (Left) The raw empirical price is shown (blue line). The trend in the mean of the raw empirical price is removed if we remove overnight jumps (orange line). (Right) We show the mid after the multiplicative de-trending procedure. The de-trended price doesn’t exhibit trend nor in the mean, nor in the volatility. De-trending data at high frequency In order to proceed further, let us note that the main contribution to the trend in the price level is realized during the overnight, as the left panel of Figure 7 shows. Removing overnight jumps is not enough to make the price stationary. In fact, as one can see from the orange line in the left panel of Fig. 7, we still have a trend in volatility. In order to deal with this, we start from the price with overnights and we apply a logarithmic transformation. In doing this we obtain: log (P emp n ) = log(P emp 0 ) + n∑ m=0 ηm + log(pemp n ), (18) where pemp n is the residual part of the price, after the trend ηn is removed. After this logarithmic transformation, we remove the overnight jumps, removing -eﬀectively- the trending component which depends on ηn. We do this by considering the trading activity in the period 9:30-16:00 in all days under analysis. For each stock we concatenate the data on diﬀerent trading days. Then, we apply an exponential transformation in order to get back to the de-trended price. The result of this operation on the AMZN stock is shown in the right panel of Figure 7. Calibration via propagator model In what follows we detail the calibration procedure for the linear version of the propagator model, deﬁned by Eq. (4). From data about excess demands qn and returns remp n = pemp n+1−pemp n we can measure the empirical return-response function Semp n =⟨qmremp n+m⟩ and the empirical order ﬂow ACF Ωn. These two functions are related through: Semp m = ∑ n≥0 GP nΩn−m. (19) The equation above can be inverted in order to obtain the price impact function GP n. The relation between the response function Remp n and the return-response function is given by: Remp n = ∑ 0≤m<n Semp m (20) allowing to recover the response function from its diﬀerential form. 20