Complexity and Persistence of Price Time Series of the European Electricity Spot Market Chengyuan Han,1, 2 Hannes Hilger,2 Eva Mix,2 Philipp C. Böttcher,1 Mark Reyers,3 Christian Beck,4, 5 Dirk Witthaut,1, 2 and Leonardo Rydin Gorjão1, 2, 6, 7,∗ 1Forschungszentrum Jülich, Institute for Energy and Climate Research - Systems Analysis and Technology Evaluation (IEK-STE), 52428 Jülich, Germany 2Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Cologne, 50937 Köln, Germany 3Institute for Geophysics and Meteorology, University of Cologne, 50937 Köln, Germany 4School of Mathematical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, London E1 4NS, United Kingdom 5Alan Turing Institute, London NW1 2DB, United Kingdom 6German Aerospace Center (DLR), Institute of Networked Energy Systems, Oldenburg, Germany 7Department of Computer Science, OsloMet – Oslo Metropolitan University, N-0130 Oslo, Norway The large variability of renewable power sources is a central challenge in the transition to a sustainable energy system. Electricity markets are central for the coordination of electric power generation. These markets rely evermore on short-term trading to facilitate the balancing of power generation and demand and to enable systems integration of small producers. Electricity prices in these spot markets show pronounced ﬂuctuations, featuring extreme peaks as well as occasional negative prices. In this article, we analyse electricity price time series from the European EPEX market, in particular the hourly day-ahead, hourly intraday, and 15-min intraday market prices. We quantify the ﬂuctuations, correlations, and extreme events and reveal diﬀerent time scales in the dynamics of the market. The short-term ﬂuctuations show remarkably diﬀerent characteristics for time scales below and above 12 hours. Fluctuations are strongly correlated and persistent below 12 hours, which contributes to extreme price events and a strong multifractal behaviour. On longer time scales, they get anti-correlated and price time series revert to their mean, witnessed by a stark decrease of the Hurst coeﬃcient after 12 hours. The long-term behaviour is strongly inﬂuenced by the evolution of a large-scale weather patterns with a typical time scale of four days. We elucidate this dependence in detail using a classiﬁcation into circulation weather types. The separation in time scales enables a superstatistical treatment, which conﬁrms the characteristic time scale of four days, and motivates the use ofq-Gaussian distributions as the best ﬁt to the empiric distribution of electricity prices. I. INTRODUCTION Human reliance on electric power has fostered the de- velopmentofalargesetoftechnologicaladvances[1].The need to mitigate climate change has, on the one hand, greatly increased the need for low or zero-emission power generation [2], and on the other, opened up the electricity markets to small renewable energy power producers [3– 8]. Particularly, the short-term markets facilitated the integration of the smaller power producers [9], and have introduced considerable changes to the economic aspects and regulations of electricity markets [10, 11]. For most power systems, electricity markets are used to trade gen- erated power and guarantee that the consumed power is matched at every point in time [12]. Particularly in open electricity markets – and for our study here, the Euro- pean market – the price of electricity is settled on the Electricity Power Exchange (EPEX SPOT) [13]. In the European electricity exchange markets, several diﬀerent products can be traded, with very diﬀerent delivery tar- gets and duration. Particularly on the time scale of days to minutes, there are the day-ahead and intraday mar- kets [14], where most renewable energy producers partic- ∗ Corresponding author: leonardo.rydin@gmail.com ipate. On the day-ahead market, auction-type products can be traded up to 12 hours before the delivery of power. On the intraday markets, continuous-type products are traded up to 5 minutes before delivery [15, 16]. Electric- ity prices are intrinsically coupled in these markets. The day-ahead markets set an initial value for trading elec- tricity in the intraday market. From their launch at the beginning of 2010, sev- eral studies on the inﬂuence, beneﬁts and drawbacks, and impact of short-term electricity markets have been made [7, 9, 17]. The need for more accurate forecasting models has also lead to a recent, more close examination of the intraday market prices [15, 18–22]. In this study, we consider a complex systems approach to price dynam- ics in the purview of stochastic process and examine the interplay between quarter-hourly and hourly price time series, as well as their connection to large weather pat- terns [23]. We aim at unveiling the characteristic time scales of electricity price time series from a data-driven perspective. In this, we focus on price dynamics as a com- plex stochastic process and analyse characteristic metric in the context of complex systems [24, 25]. Particularly, we try to answer the questions: what probability dis- tributions do time series show, and to what extent do they diﬀer from Gaussian processes? What are the rea- sons for these deviations? Are price time series station- arXiv:2112.03031v1 [q-fin.ST] 2 Dec 2021 2 ary processes? If not, do they show distinct time scales? What about stochastic memory and multifractality? Can we quantify those and link them back to how each dis- tinct market works? And how are they inﬂuenced by the weather? In this work we will address some of these ques- tions, particularly attempting to link the various complex behaviours that price time series exhibit – such has mul- tifractality and long-range dependence – to three distinct time scales that we extract from the data. One should note that electricity prices, unlike most other commodities prices, are distinct in, for example, having not-so-infrequent negative values, being mean- reverting, i.e. returning to some base price after ﬂuc- tuations, and having pronounced cycles coupled to the generation/consumptionofenergy,particularlyday-night cycles, and other human activities [18, 26]. Being distinc- tively diﬀerent from other prices, electricity prices, espe- cially intraday prices, have not been extensively anal- ysed from a complex systems’ perspective [27]. An exam- ination of the multifractal properties of electricity price time series is also scarce in the literature [28, 29]. We employ the model-free Hilbert–Huang transform (empir- ical mode decomposition) to remove non-stationarities from price time series [30]. We use multifractal detrended ﬂuctuation analysis [31–34] to explain: (i) the time scale separation of the quarter-hourly market below 12 hours and diﬀerent persistence in the prices; (ii) the anchor- ing of fast transitions by the day-ahead hourly market at the time scale of12 to 48 hours and the coalescence of precision of all time series [35, 36]. We also employ su- perstatistical methods [37–39] to unveil the longer time scale of prices equilibrium at roughly96 hours and ob- tain the entropic indices of each time series – a measure of the strength of non-stationarities – which all diﬀer from 1[40–42].Theseresultssupportthatthestatisticsof electricity price time series follow aq-Gaussian distribu- tion [43–45]. The methods employed aim to extract the various mentioned features and time scales solely from the price data, without any other exogenous information. As a ﬁnal step, we examine circulation weather types data [46, 47], which comprise an objective measure of the state of the ﬂow over Central Europe, particularly describing the strength of the wind. We show that the prices are inextricably related to large weather param- eters, and their statistics change considerably between calmer and strong wind conditions, further justifying our superstatistical approach to price dynamics. This article is organised as follows: Section II provides a short background on the European electricity mar- kets. Section III is comprised of ﬁve subsections: Sub- section IIIA discusses the aspects of non-stationarity in price time series and how to deal with them; Subsec- tion IIIB explains the statistics of price time series and introduces a candidate model to explain these; Subsec- tion IIIC discusses simultaneously the intrinsic correla- tion and persistence in price time series, unveiling our short-termtimescale,aswellastherapidjumpsinprices, unveiling our mid-term time scale; Subsection IIID ad- dresses the change of statistics over time, unveiling our long-term time scale in price time series, and oﬀers a justiﬁcation for the aforementioned candidate model for price time series statistics; Subsection IIIE covers an analysis of the connection between large-scale weather patterns and the changes in statistical properties of the price time series. Section IV provides a set of concluding comments on the results. II. BACKGROUND A major portion of the Continental European electric- ity is traded at the European Energy Exchange (EEX). For the case of Germany and Austria, electricity spot market and over-the counter trading takes place at the European Power Exchange (EPEX SPOT) [13], which is a subsidiary of the EEX. This market is used particularly to balance the daily changes of power in Continental Eu- rope, as well as the very short quarter-hourly and hourly imbalances in power generation and consumption [48]. On futures markets, electricity is often traded weeks, months, or even years before the actual delivery of elec- tricity [49]. In contrast to other markets, the supply and demand of electricity has to be met at each point in time to guarantee a stable power system. While the future de- mand can be approximated by experience using, for ex- ample, the standard load proﬁles, some deviations might become apparent when getting closer to the date of de- livery [50]. Additionally, due to the weather-dependent nature of the increasing share of wind and solar energy resources, it is not possible for a producer to precisely predict the amount of electricity that will be produced at a time in the future [51, 52]. Thus, shorter-term trad- ingisneededandtakesplaceonthespotmarkets,making these markets essential instruments for renewable energy source producers. In Europe, the trading on these shortest time scales is done on the day-ahead and intraday market. The time series of three intrinsically connected electricity prices from the spot markets are studied in this article: the day- ahead hourly price time series, the intraday hourly price time series, and the intraday quarter-hourly price time series. Two distinct markets schemes are present here: (i) the day-ahead or auction market, on which oﬀers can be placed up to 12:00 (noon) prior to the day of eﬀect for the hourly products. (ii) the intraday or continuous market, on which oﬀers for the subsequent day may be placed from 15:00 (16:00 for quarter-hourly products) of the prior day up to 5 minutes before the respective trad- ing block. While the last successful bid determines the market clearing price that has to be paid by everyone in the case of the day-ahead market, the intraday market prices are given by a pay-as-bid principle. In this sense, the intraday market is intrinsically coupled with the day- ahead market, as the day-ahead clearing price serves as a ﬁrst price reference for the prices in the intraday market. Since the trading on the intraday market exists to clear 3 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 t [year] −100 0 100 200p [EUR/MWh] Day Ahead 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 t [year] −150 0 150 300 Intraday Hourly 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 t [year] −200 0 200 400 600 Intraday Quarterly FIG. 1. The three electricity price time series examined in this study, from January 2015 to December 2019. The average ﬂuctuations around a mean value are visible, as well as occasional jumps into either very large or possibly negative prices. The three black curves display the three slowest intrinsic mode functions (IMFs) obtained via the Hilbert–Huang transform, which are subtracted from the data to remove the long-term non-stationarity. Data from EPEX, 2015–2019 [13]. Figures generated with python’s Matplotlib [53]. the mismatch that remains after trading on the day- ahead market is ﬁnished, it is a smaller market in volume but still an essential one in ensuring the stable operation of the power system. The volume of trade in 2019 of the day-ahead market totalled 501.6TWh and of the intra- day market totalled83.2TWh [54]. The implementation of the quarter-hourly blocks of trading in 2011 for intraday trading, and extended in 2014 to day-ahead trading, were designed to deal with the increase in renewable energy source input, such as solarandwindenergies,whichintroducesstrongerﬂuctu- ations in power-grid systems. Likewise, these short win- dow markets invited various smaller energy producers, particularly of renewable energies, to participate in the market, as they can now trade in time margins wherein theyknowtheycangeneratethenecessaryelectricpower. Furthermore, the introduction of short trading periods contributes to the improvement of power-grid frequency stability [55–57]. III. ELECTRICITY PRICE TIME SERIES ANALYSIS A. Long-term non-stationarity The dynamics of electricity prices is closely connected to the dynamics of the load and the renewable genera- tion. In fact, a rough estimate for the pricep at a time t can be obtained from the balance equation of gener- ation and demand,Gr(t) +Gd(p) = D(t). Here, Gd(p) denotes the supply curve of the dispatchable generation, also called the merit-order curve [6, 58, 59]. The demand D(t) and the renewable generationGr(t) vary strongly in time, whereas the dependence on the price is negligible, i.e. the demand is inelastic. Solving for the average price yields ¯p(t)≈G−1 d [D(t)−Gr(t)], i.e. the price dynamics is mainly driven by the load minus the intermittent renew- able generation, commonly referred to a the residual load (Fig. 2). The residual load shows pronounced weekly and seasonal pattern and a strong variability on the synoptic scale [60]. It must be kept in mind that this is only a rough estimate, which cannot explain many details, such as the occurrence of negative prices. Electricity prices in any exchange market are inﬂu- enced by both short and long-term trends, particularly those reliant on renewable energy sources. In a single day, electricity prices tend to be lower at night. The price is also often lower during weekends due to lower consump- tion [61]. When looking at a longer time period, a more distinct scale emerges: a seasonal and yearly scale [62]. The average price of electricity ﬂuctuates at the level of months, usually culminating in the largest average prices occurring by the end of the year. These ﬂuctua- tions make the average of price time series change slowly over the years, e.g., the day-ahead market has seen a variation of the average price from 31.6EUR/MWh in 2015, 29.0EUR/MWh in 2016,34.2EUR/MWh in 2017, 44.5EUR/MWh in 2018, to37.7EUR/MWh in 2019. In this work, we will deal with variations of price time series on diﬀerent time scales, from scales of∆t < 12 hours to scales of ∆t∼ 4 days and longer. Long-term changes, as those described above, aﬀect the statistics of the time series [63]. These changes are well understood, yet present a diﬃcult task if we are interested in under- standing the fundamental nature and statistics of price time series. Take the simple example of the variation of the average of the day-ahead price: this implies that ex- amining an aggregated probability distribution of all ﬁve years of data will not capture the changes of the average price values that happen yearly. In order to investigate the short-term variability, long- term trends and periodicities must be separated from the time series. To this end, we employ a model-free detrend- ing method to remove the slowest trends in the data. We use the model-free Hilbert–Huang transform (empir- ical mode decomposition) method to extract these varia- tions [30, 64, 65]. The Hilbert–Huang transform extracts 4 20 40 60 Residual load [GWh] −60 0 60 120 180p [EUR/MWh] 1 2 5 10 20 50 100 200 Events Day Ahead FIG. 2. The electricity price strongly depends of the residual load. The ﬁgure shows a joint histogram of the pricep(t) in the day-ahead hourly market and the residual load, i.e. the diﬀerence of load and renewable generationD(t)−Gr(t) in a colormap plot with a logarithmic scale. Assuming a perfect market equilibrium, prices would be given by the function ¯p(t)≈ G−1 d [D(t)−Gr(t)], which can be approximated by a linear function (dotted red line). The ﬂuctuations, i.e. devia- tions from the line, are evident, as well as occasional extreme events. Data from EPEX, 2015–2019 [13]. a set of intrinsic mode functions (IMFs) from the (non- stationary) price time series. This is achieved via an it- erative process of obtaining the set of local minima and maxima of the data and connecting each set via cubic splines, forming an envelope around the time series. Sub- sequently, ﬁnd the middle curve equidistant to the up- per (maxima) and lower (minima) envelope. This is the ﬁrst IMF. Subtract this to the actual time series and repeat the procedure to uncover the subsequent IMFs, until the data is solely left with a single residual trend. One of the main advantage of using the Hilbert–Huang transform is that it can handle non-stationary and non- periodic trends, unlike a Fourier decomposition. In Fig. 1, the full set of ﬁve years of data of the three examined time series is displayed, alongside the three slowest IMFs, i.e. the larger wavelength IMFs, which we use to remove the long-term trend. The data of the day-ahead hourly price, intraday hourly, and intraday quarter-hourly price shows small diﬀusive-like ﬂuctua- tions as well as large excursions or jumps. From hereon, we will work with the detrended data from which the three lowest IMFs have been removed unless stated oth- erwise. B. Statistics of electricity price and electricity price increment time series Having removed the long-term trends of the data, we will now examine the statistics of the data in more detail. In Fig. 1, we observe large excursions of the prices, some- times even leading to negative prices for all considered time series. A common method to quantify the dynamics of price time series is to examine the probability distribu- tion or probability density function, as shown in Fig. 3. One can clearly observe that the data is not described by a Gaussian distribution. To examine the impact of the heavy tails of the price distributions, we examine the fourth central moment of the price probability distribu- tions, the kurtosis. The kurtosis of a random variable, or in our case, a price time seriesX is given by κX = E [(X−µX σX )4] = E [ (X−µX)4] (E [(X−µX)2])2, (1) with E[·] denotes the expected value,µX the mean value of X, andσ2 X the variance ofX. For example, a Gaus- sian or normal distribution has a kurtosis ofκX = 3. Any distribution with a kurtosisκX > 3 is considered heavy- tailed and is called leptokurtic. Conversely, if a distribu- tion has a kurtosisκX < 3, it is called platykurtic. The electricity price time series feature pronounced jumps clearly visible in the data (Fig. 1). Hence, the statistics of the electricity prices can not be expected to be well described by a Gaussian. Instead, we expect the distribution to be leptokurtic, i.e. to have a kurtosisκX larger than 3. In Fig. 3 we display the probability den- sity functionρ(p) of the three detrended price time series (here with a mean close to zero given the detrending per- formed previously). The heavy tails are clearly visible on a semi-logarithmic scale, where a Gaussian distribution would look like an inverted parabola. This ﬁnding raises the question of what statistics is more suitable to capture the statistical features of electricity prices. A description of the price time series as a Gaussian process is therefore not suitable, as the empirical distri- butions of the price time series are highly leptokurtic. As there is no a priori model for these type of data, we will begin by examining the adequacy of describing the data’s distribution via two classical distributions: Lévy α-stable distributions [68] and q-Gaussian distri- butions [69]. These two are chosen for being potentially very leptokurtic distributions, just like the empirical dis- tribution of the data suggests. The symmetric Lévy α-stable distribution has no closed formula for the probability density function Lα,c,µ(x), but it can be expressed via its characteristic function (the Fourier transform of its probability density function) via Lα,c,µ(x) = 1 2π ∞∫ −∞ ϕα,c,µ(t)e−ixt dt, with ϕα,c,µ(t) = exp (itµ−|ct|α). (2) Here we will focus only on symmetric (and zero meanµ = 0) α-stable distributions, but more general asymmetric α-stable distributions exist [70]. A q-Gaussian distribution is a three-parameter distri- bution with a probability density functionGq,c,µ(x)given by [69, 71] Gq,c,µ(x) = √c Nq eq(−c (x−µ)2), (3) 5 −100 0 100 p [EUR/MWh] 10−4 10−2 ρ(p) µ = −0.54 σ = 14.6 s = −0.82 κ = 11.14 Day Ahead q-Gaussian α-stable −200 −100 0 100 200 p [EUR/MWh] 10−4 10−2 µ = 0.22 σ = 15.7 s = −0.27 κ = 16.3 Intraday Hourly q-Gaussian α-stable −200 −100 0 100 200 p [EUR/MWh] 10−4 10−2 µ = 0.24 σ = 18.71 s = 0.22 κ = 25.17 Intraday Quarterly q-Gaussian α-stable FIG. 3. Empirical distributions of the detrended price time series. Each empirical distribution is ﬁtted via a maximum likelihood algorithm [66, 67] with aq-Gaussian and a symmetricα-stable distribution, given by Eq. (3) and Eq. (2), respectively. The q-Gaussian distributions yield a better ﬁt than theα-stable distributions. The Kullback–Leibler divergence of the empirical and ﬁtted distributions are given in Tab. I, where one can see that theq-Gaussian is the best at describing the empiric price time series. Meanµ, standard deviationσ, skewnesss, and kurtosisκ of the empiric data are given in each ﬁgure. where eq(·) is theq-exponential eq(·) given by eq(x) = [1 + (1−q)x]1/1−q (4) and a normalisation constantNq given by Nq = √π Γ ( 3−q 2(q−1) ) √q− 1 Γ ( 1 1−q ), for 1<q < 3, (5) where Γ(·) is the Gamma function, Γ(n) = (n− 1)!, if n∈ N. Note that these two distribution converge to a normal distributionN when q→ 1 or α→ 2, respec- tively, i.e.L2,c,0 = G1,c,0 =N (0, 1/c). Here we have ex- pressed these two distributions in a comparable way. The main interest for us is to ascertain the heavy-tailedness of the distribution, which is described by the value of q > 1 for theq-Gaussian distribution, and the value of α <2 for theα-stable distribution. The parameterc is the scale, somewhat related to the variance. Note that Lévy α-stable distributions do not have a well-deﬁned variance forα <2 and q-Gaussian distributions have a well-deﬁned variance only ifq <5/3. Lastly,µ is the cen- tre of the distribution, which equals the expected value as long as it exists. In order to discern which probability distribution func- tion best ﬁts the distribution of our data we evaluate the Kullback–Leibler divergence. The Kullback–Leibler divergenceDKL(r|s) of two probability density functions r and s, is given by DKL(r|s) = ∞∫ −∞ r(x) ln (r(x) s(x) ) dx. (6) This, not surprisingly, resembles an entropy formulation, which in this case is the relative entropy ofr in relation tos. To be more precise, the Kullback–Leibler divergence DKL(r|s) should be deﬁned over a setX with any mea- sure µ such thatr = dR/dµ, s = dS/dµ, withR and S continuous random variables drawn fromr ands, respec- tively. In Tab. I we show the Kullback–Leibler divergence DKL(p|·) of the empiric distributions of the three time series in relation to aα-stable distribution, as given in Eq. (2), and to a q-Gaussian distribution, as given in Eq. (3). Aq-Gaussian distribution oﬀers a better ﬁt for allthethreepricetimeseries.Foreachoftheﬁts,weshow as well the calculatedα andq values for theα-stable and q-Gaussian distributions, respectively. Theq values will be re-evaluated later in Sec. IIID and compared with the entropic indices derived from the data. It is worth men- tioning that for both proposed distributions we observe large deviations from usual Gaussian distributions. We have thus far concerned ourselves with the statis- tical properties of the data, detailing a candidate dis- tribution that can capture the heavy tailedness of the leptokurtic distribution of the data. An equivalently im- portant question relates to the correlations of the time series, in particular, their persistence behaviour, which we address subsequently. α-stable q-Gaussian DKL(p|·) α DKL(p|·) q Day Ahead 0.013 1.61 0.012 1.46 Intraday Hourly 0.016 1.54 0.014 1.50 Intraday Quarterly 0.012 1.61 0.011 1.46 TABLE I. Kullback–Leibler divergenceDKL(p|·) of the empir- ical distributions of the three price time series relative to the two candidate distributions: Lévy symmetricα-stable distri- butionLα,c,µ given in Eq. (2) and theq-Gaussian distribution Gq,c,µ given in Eq. (3). Theq-Gaussian distribution minimises the Kullback–Leibler divergenceDKL for all price time series, indicated by a bold font. Theα and q values of the distribu- tions are given as per the best ﬁt. 6 C. Persistence and fractality in price time series Separately from time series statistics, the examination of the correlations – at diﬀerent temporal scales – allows us to uncover which phenomena are recurring in a statis- tical sense. That is, is the time series persistent and thus repeats itself? Or is it anti-persistent, and thus follows an opposite tendency in comparison to past events? In other words, we are interested in studying the long-term mem- ory or long-range correlations of the data. When studying stochastictimeseries,suchaspricetimeseries,acommon method to evaluate the long-range dependency is to esti- mate the Hurst exponentH [72]. The Hurst exponentH of a time series with uncorrelated increments isH = 0.5. One can roughly picture this as imagining that at any point of the time series, the subsequent price is as likely to be higher as it is likely to be lower than the present price. In this manner, Hurst exponentsH >0.5 indicate that the increments of the price time series have positive correlations, i.e. are persistent, and thus if we witnessed an increase (decrease) in the price, it is more likely that the price will keep increasing (decreasing). Conversely, Hurst exponents H < 0.5 indicate anti-persistence or anti-correlation. Thus a price increase (decrease) is more likely followed by a price decrease (decrease) just after. This is a vital metric in order to understand whether hedging is possible in electricity markets [73]. A time series can have various Hurst exponents at dif- ferent scales, telling us, for example, that the price is pos- itively correlated at some very short time scale and neg- atively correlated at some much larger time scale. This, in fact, is what we will see below. Compounding this, we have also seen in Fig. 1 the large excursions to very high or negative prices, which we quantiﬁed by proposing a suitable candidate distribution for the data. We will also examine the strength of their ﬂuctuations as we change between time scales in our time series, and in that sense examine the spectrum of multifractality. A common method to estimate the Hurst exponent, as well as the multifractal spectrum, is Multifractal De- trended Fluctuation Analysis (MFDFA) [31, 33, 34, 74]. As the name suggest, MFDFA studies the ﬂuctuation of one-dimensional time series around a smooth trend. First, deﬁne the functionF (v,s ) over the integrated time series Yi =∑i k=1 (Xk−µX), for i = 1, 2,...,N as F (v,r ) = 1 r r∑ i=1 [Y(v−1)r+i−y(v−1)r+i]2, (7) for v = 1, 2,...,N s. Here,Yr is the segmentation of the time series into non-overlapping segments of sizer, and yr is a polynomial ﬁt to this segment of the data. It is particularly well adapted to data with trends. The algo- rithm ﬁrst removes the trends of sequential segments of the data by subtracting local polynomial ﬁts to the time series via least-squares and only subsequently calculates the variance of each segment. We will utilise polynomials of order one. 1 2 3 4 6 12 24 48 168 744 r [hour] 100 101 102 Fq=2(r) H > 0.6 H < 0.4 t >48 h12 h< t <48 ht <12 h Day Ahead Intraday Hourly Intraday Quarterly 4 5 6 8 12100 101 FIG. 4. Fluctuation functionFˆq=2(r) over the scaler of the three price time series in a double-logarithmic plot. By ﬁt- ting the curves we can extract the Hurst exponent as given in Eq. (9). Noticeable is the change from persistence to anti- persistence at the 12 hour mark, which is present for the hourly markets but not the quarter-hourly one. The separa- tion into three disjoint time ranges of< 12h, 12h<t< 48h, andt> 48h is discussed in the multifractal analysis in Fig. 5. Subsequently, to extract the multifractal spectrum of the time series, a set of diﬀerent powers are taken over the average of all segments. From this, we deﬁne the ﬂuc- tuation functionFˆq(s), which depends on a time scales of the process and the aforementioned powersˆq Fˆq(r) = { 1 Nr Nr∑ v=1 [F (v,r )]ˆq/2 }1/ˆq . (8) This is similar to considering a set of equivalent norms with diﬀerent powers, e.g.,L1,L 2,L 3, etc. This is the function we will study here onward. We note that the index ˆq is not related to theq-parameter in the distribu- tion in (3). The ﬂuctuation functionFˆq(r) captures the increase of the variance of the segments of the time series, i.e. Fˆq(r)∼rh(ˆq) (9) where h(ˆq) is known as the generalised Hurst exponent, which for the case ofˆq = 2 reduces to our aforementioned Hurst exponentH =h(ˆq = 2). We expect the price time series are not monofractal processes, i.e. processes that are quantiﬁed by solely a single Hurst exponent H. In order to quantify the in- ﬂuence of the jumps in the time series, we turn to the dependence ofh(ˆq) on ˆq. From this, we can construct the singularity spectrumf(α) and the singularity strengthα as the Legendre transform given by ˆα =h(ˆq) + ˆqh′(ˆq), (10) and f(ˆα) = ˆq[ˆα−h(ˆq)] + 1, (11) with h′(ˆq) = dh(ˆq)/dˆq. This leads to the iconic shape of the singularity spectrumf(ˆα) as one half of an inverted 7 parabola with maximum atˆα = 0 [74]. Similarly as be- fore, we note that singularity strengthˆα is not related to the α for α-stable distributions in (2). a. Persistence of price time series First, we turn to the question of long-range dependence, i.e. persistence. In Fig. 4, we show the ﬂuctuation functionFˆq=2(r) for ˆq = 2. We plotFˆq=2(r) versus the scaler in a double logarithmic scale, as we are interested in the exponents of Eq. (9), i.e. the Hurst exponent H. The exponent, in a double-logarithmic plot, is simply the slope of the curves, which we extract by ﬁtting a straight line. Im- mediately, two phenomena are striking: First of all, for timescaleslargerthan 12hours,alltimeserieshavevirtu- ally identical anti-correlations, withH≈ 0.16. Moreover, at time scales smaller than12 hours, the larger hourly markets become positively correlated, withH≈ 0.63 for the day-ahead hourly price andH ≈ 0.61 for intraday hourly price, whereas the intraday quarter-hourly price does not show a change from correlated (r < 12h) to anti-correlated (r> 12h) behaviour, havingH≈ 0.31. b. Fractality of price time series We have already mentionedthenecessitytoproperlyquantifytheeﬀectsof the jumps in the time series, and we have introduced the singularity spectrumf(α). Moreover, already in Fig. 4, we have found at least two separate time scales for the hourly markets:< 12h and> 12h. We will now further divide the larger time scale again into periods of12h< t< 48h and periods larger thant> 48h and study these three time scales and their multifractal spectrum. In Fig. 5, we display the singularity spectrum for ˆq ∈ (0, 10], i.e. the positive half of f(α) for the three aforementioned time scales. We cannot evaluate the neg- ative ˆq powers here due to the limited precision of the data. To evaluate the meaning of the singularity spec- trum, we focus on the widths ofˆα for the diﬀerent time series, i.e. ∆ˆα = argmax(f(ˆα))− min(ˆα). (12) This yields a measure of “how many fractal scales” are present in each time series, which is commonly denoted as multifractal spectrum width. If our time series had a single scale, i.e. a single Hurst exponentH, then∆ˆα = 0, and we would classify it as monofractal. The meaning of ∆ˆα is thus straightforward to understand. If the data is multifractal, i.e. it shows a range of small and large ﬂuctuations and jumps, then∆ˆα >0. In Tab. II we re- port all ∆ˆα, as given in Eq. (12), as well as∆f(ˆα) = max(f(ˆα))− min(f(ˆα)). These values give us a notion of which scales show rougher behaviours and which are milder. Again here, as before in Fig. 4, at large scales, the time series coalesce to having identical fractal behaviour and comparably small ∆ˆα≈ 0.50. All Fˆq=2 curves overlay for t> 48h, i.e. all have the same Hurst indexH. They all similarly show the same multifractal spectrum. The very short time scales oft <12h show the largest∆ˆα, indicating the strongest multifractal behaviour. This is very much in line with the rare, sudden price increases −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 ˆα −1 0 1 2 f ( ˆα) ∆ f ( ˆα)∆ f ( ˆα) ∆ ˆα∆ ˆα t >48 h 12 h< t <48 h t <12 h Day Ahead Intraday Hourly Intraday Quarterly FIG. 5. Singularity spectrumf(ˆα) and singularity strength ˆα for three distinct time scales of the three price time se- ries: t < 12h, 12h< t <48h, andt > 48h. The horizontal width, i.e. the multifractal spectrum width∆ˆα, indicates the strength of the ﬂuctuation and jumps at the indicated time scales. The data shows larger∆ˆα at short time scales, indicat- ing that within these windows, very large price variations are seen and are reverted back to their mean value. The eﬀects become milder as the time scales increase, telling us that the market shows weaker jumps at large time scales and always reverts back to its mean value. Finally, at scalest> 48h, the three markets become indistinguishable, as we had also seen in Fig. 4 at the same scales. Results in Tab. II or decreases to extreme values, which very quickly correct themselves and return to their average price. Interestingly, there are considerable diﬀerences be- tween the markets in the range 12h< t < 48h. The day-ahead hourly market shows the smallest∆ˆα, i.e. it shows the weakest multifractality. The day-ahead mar- ket constitutes the largest share of the electricity mar- kets in volume, and thus ensures that electricity prices must all coalesce to the mean behaviour within the time scale 12h∼ 48h. It is therefore likely that, due to the large volume of trade in the day-ahead market and the small ∆ˆα in the range 12h< t < 48h, the day-ahead market serves as an anchor for the other smaller markets and their prices, guaranteeing that, in the long run, very large prices ﬂuctuations return to normal price ranges within time scales smaller than48h. > 48h 12 h<t< 48h t< 12h ∆ˆα ∆f(ˆα) ∆ˆα ∆f(ˆα) ∆ˆα ∆f(ˆα) Day Ahead 0.29 0.82 0.14 0.59 0.99 2.05 Intraday Hourly 0.27 0.82 0.50 1.35 0.71 1.20 Intraday Quarterly 0.24 0.72 0.47 1.46 0.84 2.21 TABLE II. Multifractal spectrum width∆ˆα and ∆f(ˆα) for three distinct time scales of the three price time series:t < 12h, 12h< t <48h, andt >48h. The smallest time scales show the largest values of∆ˆα. Overall, the day-ahead hourly market shows the smallest multifractal spectrum width∆ˆα at the time scales12 h< t <48h, which we propose oﬀers a kind of “anchor” for the prices to coalesce around. 8 D. Obtaining local equilibria in leptokurtic electricity price time series Wehavethusfargivenanaccountofthecorrelationbe- haviour in the three electricity price time series, unveiling diﬀerent persistence behaviour between the hourly mar- kets and the quarter-hourly one. We have also seen that roughly at scales larger thant >48 hours, the markets coalesce to a single identical behaviour, both in their dif- fusive behaviour, seen in Fig. 4 as well as in their multi- fractal behaviour, e.g., the presence of jumps in the data, as seen in Fig. 5. Given that all price time series eventu- ally return to an average price value, and that intrinsic periods are present in the data, a time scale at which an equilibrium is reached must exist. This is the time the price statistics balances out before it is again aﬀected by its various intrinsic changes and large price variations. The most straightforward way to examine the typical time scale of local relaxation of a time series of a stochas- tic process is to study its auto-correlation function. The auto-correlation of a time series is given by C(t−t′) = E[(X(t)−µX)(X(t′)−µX)]. (13) For t− t′ = 0 , i.e. C(0) = σ2 X we recover the vari- ance of the process. For t ⁄= t′ we obtain the covari- ance, which yields the self-correlation of the process with itself, that is, its memory. In Fig. 6, we show the auto- correlation functionC(t′)/C(0) for our three price time series. Along with an exponential-like decay, one can ﬁnd well deﬁned peaks that indicate the usual periods known in these time series:12 hours, due to the day-night cycle, 24 hours, 48 hours, etc. Although there are several peaks, the auto-correlation shows a decay which has a minimum at roughly 90 hours. This indicates that this is the time scale at which the process loses its memory. In order to more precisely ascertain what the intrinsic time scale is for which the price time series attain a local equilibrium, we turn to a superstatistical description [37, 38]. We have already seen that the probability distribution functions of each price time series had very large kurto- sis, i.e. they are leptokurtic distributions (see Fig. 3). We further identiﬁed theq-Gaussian distribution in Eq. (3) as a good candidate to model the large kurtosis. Along similar lines as discussed above, we now propose that the underlyingstochasticprocessthatgivesrisetothesecom- plicated distributions of price time series is a composite process with a probability density functionρ(p) given by ρ(p) = ∞∫ 0 f(β)Π(p|β)dβ, (14) where Π(p|β)is a conditional distribution dependent on a volatility parameterβ which has the probability density function f(β). What we are considering here is that price time series consists of two processes: One fast process of the actual 0 24 48 72 96 t′ 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 C(t′)/C(0) Cp(t′) Cβ(t′) f -parameter Day Ahead Intraday Hourly Intraday Quarterly FIG. 6. Auto-correlation functions C(t′)/C(0) of the price time series and their respective volatilities. The short super- statistical timesτ for each price time series is extracted from the initial exponential decay ofCp(t′). The results are given in Tab. III. Shown as well is the auto-correlation of thef- parameter, discussed in Sec. IIIE. price time series, with local temporal properties, i.e. a certain level of ﬂuctuations and an average price, and another far slower process, which changes the strength of the ﬂuctuations and/or the average price at a larger tem- poral scale. The description above in Eq. (14) accounts for the distribution of the price time seriesρ(p) being a convolution of these two processes. Stemming from a physical understanding of the price of stocks in other markets outside power systems [43, 75, 76], a common assumption is to takeΠ(p|β) as a Gaus- sian distribution. This assumption would mean that fun- damentally price time series obey locally Gaussian statis- tics, which is then aﬀected by a superstatistical change given byf(β). In this work, we will relax this constraint and propose thatΠ(p|β) need not necessarily be a Gaus- sian distribution, but instead, simply restrictΠ(p|β) to be a symmetric distribution. This proposal means that in principle Π(p|β) can be, for example, a symmetricα- stable distribution, or aq-Gaussian, or possibly another symmetric distributions (or even just a Gaussian distri- bution). To evaluate if a distribution is symmetric, one can eval- uate its skewnesss, i.e. sX := E [(X−µX σX )3] = E [ (X−µX)3] (E [(X−µX)2])3/2, (15) which is vanishing if the distribution is symmetric. As mentioned before, we are interested in ﬁnding an aver- age time scale at which the price attains equilibrium. By this, we mean that we are interested in a point in time where,onaverage,asegmentofthepricetimeserieshasa skewnesss = 0. This point tells us, statistically, that the distribution of events around a local price average bal- ances to be symmetrically distributed. So, in some sense, this is the point in time where the markets average out their electricity price, and they are as likely to see a sub- sequent increase as a subsequent decrease of the price, 9 1 2 3 5 8 12 24 48 96 168 −0.2 0.0 0.2 sp(δt) Day Ahead Intraday Hourly Intraday Quarterly 1 2 3 5 8 12 24 48 96 168 δt [hour] 1 3 5 7 κp(δt) FIG. 7. Estimating the long superstatistical timeT from the vanishingofthelocalskewness s(δt)giveninEq.(16).Thetop panel shows thes(δt) for increasing segments of time length δt. At approximately4days, indicated with the circular mark- ers, all price time series show a vanishing local skewness. We deﬁne this as marking the long superstatistical timeT. The lowerpanelshowsthelocalkurtosis κp(δt).Indicatedaswellis the kurtosis of a Gaussian distribution, i.e.κ = 3, for compar- ison. We see that the time series attain an equilibrium at the vanishing skewnesss, but they do so with diﬀerent kurtosis, implying that their equilibrium distributions are not Gaussian distributions, possibly apart from the day-ahead hourly price time series. Each long superstatistical timeT can be found in Tab. III. statistically speaking. This time is referred to as the long superstatistical timeT. We can estimate the long super- statistical time T by taking segments of the price time series with a given time rangeδt sp(δt) = ⟨ 1 δt ∑jδt i=(j−1)δt+1(pi− ¯pi)3) ( 1 δt ∑jδt i=(j−1)δt+1(pi− ¯pi)2)3/2 ⟩ δt (16) where T is the deﬁned as the particularδt value such that s(δt = T ) = 0 . Previous methods used the kurto- sis κ rather than the skewness s to estimate the long superstatistical timeT, but we think that for electricity prices the skewness is a particularly well suited observ- able, given that electricity prices show both small and large deviations to high or low (and negative) prices at diﬀerent points in time. Atδt =T both positive and neg- ative tails are equally pronounced, indicating a symmetry of high and low extremes. In Fig. 7, we display the local skewness sp(δt) (top panel) as a function of the time rangeδt. For comparison, we also show the local kurtosisκp(δt) (bottom panel), calculated similarly as in Eq. (16) but considering the kurtosis κ as in Eq. (1). Interestingly, we see that all three electricity markets attain a skewness ofs = 0, i.e. become symmetrical, at a scale of roughly4 days or 96 hours. In Fig. 7, top panel, we indicate these times with the circular markers. For comparison, we indicate as well, on the bottom panel, the long superstatistical time and the kurtosis of each of the local distributions. The dot- ted line indicates the kurtosisκ = 3 of a Gaussian dis- tribution. Although the larger, day-ahead market has a kurtosis very close to that of a Gaussian distribution, the other markets deviate from this and show a large kurtosis κ >3. We also note a second transition in the intraday quarter-hourly market at roughly4 hours, indicated with a triangular marker, which is yet another point with zero skewness. Thus, we have found the long superstatistical timeT for the three price time series by assuming that these can have a rather general distribution locally, for as long as it is symmetric. All the markets seem to have a very similarlongsuperstatisticaltime T,pointingtothisbeing the local balancing value for all time series, i.e. this is a common feature of all the markets, likely due to their coupled structure. The exact long superstatistical times T for each price time series can be found in Tab. III. From this point, we can proceed further and analyse the volatilitiesβ that give rise to the superstatistical dis- tributions for the given time series. Having unveiled the long superstatistical timeT of each time series, we can study the stochastic process of volatilities β, which is given by, β(t) = 1 ⟨p2⟩T−⟨p⟩2 T , (17) i.e. it is given by the inverse of the local variance of the segments with a time length ofT. Strictly speaking,β−1 is the volatility, as it is proportional to the variance, but for brevity, we will simply denoteβ as volatility. We can picture this in a simple way: if no changes were hap- pening at a larger time scale (at the long superstatisti- cal time scale) in our time series, then the variance of each segment of time lengthT would be the same, and thus the volatilityβ would be a constantβ0. This would also mean that in Eq. (14) the distributionf(β) of the volatilityβ would by a delta Dirac distribution and there would be no superstatistical change in the time series (ρ(p)≡ Π(p|β0)). The distributions of the volatilities for our data can be found in App. A. Before we proceed, we need to ensure our supersta- tistical approach is justiﬁed. Just as discussed before, is it true that we can separate two time scales from the time series? For our superstatistical description of the leptokurtic distributions of price time series to be jus- tiﬁed, we need to evaluate the correlations of both the time series themselves and of the volatilities. We need to evaluate what is the typical correlation length of the time seriesp(t). This we can do by considering the initial exponential decay of the auto-correlation function of the price time series, such thatC(τ) = e−1C(0), as given in Fig. 6. For superstatistics to be justiﬁed, the correlation time τ, denoting the short superstatistical time scaleτ, 10 needs to be smaller than the long superstatistical time T. This restriction ensures that a local equilibrium is achievedonatimescaleshorterthanthelongsuperstatis- tical time scaleT. Fig. 6 shows the auto-correlation func- tions, i.e.C(t′)/C(0), for the three price time seriesp(t) and their respective volatilitiesβ(t). In Tab. III we can see that the short superstatistical timesτ are all smaller than the long superstatistical timeT. In a similar man- ner, we can see that the auto-correlation functions of the volatilitiesCβ(t′) decay slower than the normalised auto- correlation functions of their respective price time series, telling us the superstatistical changes happen slower than the changes in the time series themselves, as required by the superstatistical modelling approach. We have thus far shown that our description of the probability density function as a superposition of sym- metric (yet unspeciﬁed) distributions is justiﬁed and seem to indicate that all price time series attain an equi- librium after roughly 4 days (96 hours). We will now evaluate the strength of the changes of the volatilities β. Since we assumed a general description ofΠ(p|β) as simply being a symmetric distribution, and given that we have not detailed speciﬁcally the distributionf(β) of the volatilitiesβ, we cannot evaluate Eq. (14) explicitly. We can nevertheless consider the integration in Eq. (14) for small ﬂuctuations ofβ around β0 =⟨β⟩. For small varianceσ2 =⟨β2⟩− β2 0 we obtain ρ(p) =⟨Π(p|β)⟩ = Π(p|β0)⟨Π(p|(β−β0)⟩ = Π(p|β0) ( 1 + 1 2σ2p2 +O(σ3) ) = Π(p|β0) ( 1 + 1 2(¯q− 1)β2 0p2 +O(σ3) ) , where we introduce the entropic index¯q [38, 77] ¯q =⟨β2⟩ ⟨β⟩2. (18) The entropic index ¯q accounts for the variations of the volatilites. It is a rather elegant measure for the existence of non-stationarities or non-extensive properties in the data. As described before, if there were no changes in the variance of the price time series,¯q = 1, and Eq. (18) would collapse to the case whereρ(p)≡ Π(p|β0). If, on the other hand, entropic index¯q diﬀers from1, then we necessarily have some variation of the volatilitiesβ. In Tab. III we report the entropic indices ¯q of the three price time series, which all diﬀer strongly from1. Naturallyasubsequentquestionisrelatedtoourchoice of ﬁttingq-Gaussian distributions toρ(p) in Sec. IIIB, seen in Fig. 3, and the relation of that ﬁtting parameter q with the entropic index¯q. One way aq-Gaussian arises is if chooseΠ(p|β) as a Gaussian distribution andf(β) a Gamma distribution. From this choice, one ﬁndsq = ¯q. From a theoretical point-of-view, without detailing the distribution of the volatilitiesf(β), it is not possible to ascertain ifρ(p) is justiﬁably given by aq-Gaussian dis- tribution. This nevertheless does not preclude comparing T τ ¯q Day Ahead 95h 13.5h 1.55 Intraday Hourly 108h 11.8h 1.61 Intraday Quarterly 104h 7.6h 1.46 TABLE III. Long and short superstatistical timesT and τ, and the entropic indices¯q of the three price time series. In all cases the short superstatistical time is substantially smaller than the long superstatistical time, i.e.τ≪T. the entropic indices¯q with theq-values of the best ﬁtting q-Gaussian distributions. In Tab. III, we indicate the entropic indices¯q of the volatilities of each price time series. We see that these very closely resemble theq-values of theq-Gaussian dis- tributions in Tab. I. We have for the day-ahead hourly price time seriesq = 1.46 and ¯q = 1.55; for the intraday hourly price time seriesq = 1.50 and ¯q = 1.61; and for theintradayquarter-hourlypricetimeseries q = 1.46and ¯q = 1.46. These stark similarities oﬀer a justiﬁcation for the choice ofq-Gaussian distribution as the descriptors for the distribution of price time series. Note that for all three electricity price time series the extracted¯q values are considerably bigger than for other ﬁnancial time se- ries, such as, e.g., share price indices or foreign currency exchange rates [77]. This is understandable, given the complexity of the demand dynamics of electricity mar- kets. E. The impact of weather on electricity prices Fluctuations in renewable energy production on diﬀer- enttimescalesarestronglyinﬂuencedbyweatherregimes and systems, like e.g., blocking regimes, low pressure sys- tems, and the passage of fronts [78–80]. Inherently, so are electricity prices because of the merit-order eﬀect. As previously shown in Fig. 2, the prices generally in- crease with the residual load. This general dependency is well approximated by a linear function except for the extreme cases of very small residual load (i.e. a large por- tion of power being generated by renewable sources) or the opposite case of very large residual load (i.e. full con- ventional generation). We now examine in more detail the impact of large-scale weather regimes and systems on the statistics of electricity prices. An objective method to characterise the large-scale circulation in the lower atmosphere is the circulation weathertype (CWT)approach[46],whichhasturnedout to be particularly suitable for wind energy applications in Central Europe [47, 60, 81, 82]. In this approach mean sea level pressure (MSLP) ﬁelds around a central point in CentralEurope(here:10 °Eastand50 °NorthnearFrank- furt/Main, Germany) are assigned to one out of eight di- rectional and/or two rotational weather types. Further, the strength of the ﬂow is calculated and provided as the f-parameter. Low values of the f-parameter represent weak pressure gradients across Central Europe and are 11 −10 −5 0 5 mean µ Day Ahead Intraday Hourly Intraday Quarterly −5 0 5 skewness s 12 16 20 std. dev. σ 0 20 40 60 kurtosis κ 0 7 14 21 f -parameter 0 100 200# hours pr < 0 raw prices 0 7 14 21 f -parameter 0 10 20 # hours pr > µr+3σr raw prices FIG. 8. Impact of large-scale weather regimes on the statis- tics of electricity prices. We sort all time intervals accord- ing to thef-parameter, that represents the strength of the ﬂow over Central Europe, and evaluate the statistics of the resulting subsets of the time series. We observe that lowf- parameter values (calm wind conditions) are associated with a large meanµ, small standard deviationσ, positive skewnesss, and somewhat large kurtosisκ. These are the weather periods with low renewable generation in Germany, which is domi- nated by wind generation. When examining the raw prices (bottom plots), there are no periods of negative price (i.e. number of hours of negative prices), and a maximum of ‘high’ price events (where the raw pricespr > µr + 3σr, r for raw). As thef-parameter value increases (windier conditions over Central Europe) the meanµ and skewnesss turns negative, the standard deviation σ increases, and the kurtosis κ de- creases slightly. Likewise, negative (raw) price events increase and ‘high’ (raw) prices vanish. The top four plots utilise the processed price data, the bottom plots use the actual raw prices, to best showcase the ‘true’ negative price events. thus associated with weak winds, while highf-parameter values are related to strong pressure gradients and high wind speeds. In this study we use hourly MSLP ﬁelds of the latest reanalysis dataset of the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ERA5 [83]). In Fig. 8 the relationship between the hourly f- parameter and diﬀerent statistics of the electricity price time series is shown. To this end, we condition the price time series to diﬀerent intervals of thef-parameter and evaluate the statistical moments separately for each seg- ment. A distinct impact of thef-parameter is revealed for the meanµ and the skewnesss, which are both posi- tive for lowf-parameter values and become negative for high values. This indicates that under calm wind condi- tions elevated average prices with a skewed distribution towards high price events occur. In contrast, high pres- sure gradients and the associated strong surface winds re- sult in reduced average prices with a skewed distribution towards negative price events. This is valid for all three electricitymarkets.Thestandarddeviation σ (kurtosisκ) tends to increase (decrease) with increasingf-parameter, thus being characteristic of prices during periods of high renewable penetration, but the trends are less clear when compared to meanµ and the skewnesss. The change of the meanµ from positive to negative values for increas- ing f-parameter agrees well with the merit-order eﬀect, indicating a fundamental change in the shape of the dis- tribution of prices as the weather changes. Further, we found a maximum of ‘high’ price events and a minimum of negative electricity prices during calm wind conditions (f-parameter almost zero), while negative price events increase and ‘high’ prices vanish during windy periods (high f-parameter). Interestingly, it is mainly the strength and not the direction of the ﬂow that dominates the statistical mo- ments of the electricity price time series. An agreeing yet small correlation in the statistics of prices were found when analysing the directional CWT West (associated with a strong zonal ﬂow over Central Europe) and the rotational CWT Anticyclonic (associated with a stable high-pressure system) separately (see App. B). Lastly, we are left with the question of whether intrin- sic memory in price time series (as observed in Fig. 6) is in line with the intrinsic changes of the atmospheric ﬂow over Central Europe. In Fig. 6 we show the auto- correlation of thef-parameter, which falls in line with the typical decay of the auto-correlation of price time series. Hence, the changes in large-scale weather regime may provide a physical justiﬁcation for the adequacy of a superstatistical treatment and the typical time scales of synoptic circulation patterns like high and low pressure systems may explain the observed superstatistical time scale T. We should nevertheless note that price time se- ries statistics also changes due to the workweek-weekend changes in generation and consumption, which falls out- side the scope of this article. IV. CONCLUSION In this article, we have examined three price time se- ries from the German and Austrian electricity market, in- dexed in the European Power Exchange (EPEX SPOT), from 2015 to 2019. We analysed spot market prices: the day-ahead hourly electricity price, the intraday hourly electricity price, and the intraday quarter-hourly elec- tricity price. We focused particularly on explaining and justifying the very heavy tails evidence in the distribu- tions of all price time series. The three examined price time series are intrinsically correlated as they reﬂect the trade of electricity futures in an open market, associated with an identical initial evaluation of electricity price in Europe. The four central questions addressed in this ar- 12 ticle were: 1) What is an adequate model to describe the leptokurtic distribution of the price time series? 2) What characteristics and time scales of the data give rise to these distributions? 3) Can we determine these time scales from the data and ﬁnd a physical explanation for these? 4) How is the above related to weather changes? To tackle the ﬁrst question, we started by address- ing the presence of strong non-stationarities in the data. Upon examining these time series, one is immediately noticing the strong non-stationary eﬀects. This is ev- idenced across several time scales: the average annual priceisdiﬀerenteveryyear;itvariesoverthemonths,and is often higher at the last month of each year; it varies between weekdays and weekends, and day and night. To pursue a statistical examination of the prices, we pro- posed a simple, purely data-driven detrending of the data via the Hilbert–Huang transform, with which we sub- tracted the slower trends of the price time series. We then turned to ﬁnding an adequate distribution for the price time series data. After removing the long term non-stationarities, we presented two general distri- butions to describe the heavily leptokurtic distributions of the price time series:q-Gaussians and symmetric Lévy α-stabledistributions.Weevaluatedthequalityoftheﬁts of these two distributions by examining the Kullback– Leibler divergence between the proposed distributions and the empirical distributions of the price time series. We found thatq-Gaussian distributions oﬀer, for all time series, the best ﬁt, and from these ﬁts extracted theirq value (all roughlyq = 1.5). Large values ofq imply heavy tailed distributions, which are also observed in other ﬁ- nancial market time series [43, 45, 75, 77, 84, 85]. This led us to the second and third question, what are the intrinsic time scales of these time series? We uncovered the correlations in the price time series, i.e. their persistence and long-range dependence. We found that all three price time series are highly anti-correlated on time scales > 12 hours, having a Hurst coeﬃcient H = 0.1∼ 0.2. Moreover, we also unveiled a small scale phenomenon for the period< 12 hours, where prices in both hourly markets become positively correlated with H ≈ 0.6, whereas the quarter-hourly market remains anti-correlated. We note here that these markets show strong anti-persistence in periods> 12 hours, rendering it conceptually possible to hedge prices [86]. Statistically speaking, this trend means if the price is decreasing at a given moment, the price is very likely to increase in the next moment and vice versa. This is a ﬁrst intrinsic time scale we extract from the price time series, which relates to internal correlations of prices. Subsequently, we examined the multifractal character- istics of the data. We found a clear separation of the mul- tifractal spectrum, described by∆ˆα⁄= 0 for the diﬀerent time series, resulting in large widths at small time scales. This indicates that very large deviations happen and cor- rectthemselvesinaveryshortmanner,under < 12hours. Moreover, at the intermediate scale, the largest market, the day-ahead hourly market, shows the smallest mul- tifractal spectrum width ∆ˆα≈ 0.5, pointing to a time scale that “anchors” the price ﬂuctuation – i.e. a scale where fast price changes and jumps are not seen. This serves as an base for the price of the other markets and ensures that no extreme events extend beyond this pe- riod. This agrees with the common understanding that electricity prices can see very sharp peaks in prices, but this behaviour is unsustainable for long periods of time – i.e. any fast change to extreme prices is very quickly corrected. This constitutes the second time scale, from 12 to 48 hours, where extreme prices can happen but are corrected. We returned to the overarching question of non- stationarity in price time series, proposing to describe the price time series distribution via a superposition of symmetric yet unspeciﬁed simple distributions. Using su- perstatistical analysis, we showed that by assuming the underlying fundamental distributions to be symmetric, one can uncover a unique long time scale – the long su- perstatistical time – at roughly96 hours, for all three markets.Thisconstitutesthethirdintrinsictimescaleex- tracted in this article, and it relates to the slow-changing non-stationarity eﬀects in price time series. Having un- covered the large time scale of changes in price time se- ries we returned to our initially proposedq-Gaussian dis- tributions of price time series. From the superstatistical analysis, we extracted the entropic indices¯q – a measure of the “changes of statistics” – of each price time series, all roughly ¯q = 1.5, which agree well with the ﬁts from the aforementionedq values of theq-Gaussian ﬁts. Hence, we oﬀered an explanation for the largely leptokurtic dis- tributions of price time series as a combination of the changing local statistics. As a ﬁnal step with respect to question 4, we exam- ine Circulation Weather Types, and in particular the ‘f-parameter’, which is a measure for the strength of the large-scale near-surface ﬂow over Central Europe. We found that European electricity price time series are highly dependent on the strength of the ﬂow (rather than on the direction of the ﬂow). In particular, wind energy generation – which depends on the pressure gradient over Europe – is the main renewable energy generation type in Germany, and thus highly inﬂuences electricity prices. We observe a clear relation between strength of the ﬂow and the change in price dynamics: ‘calm’ wind conditions (lowf-parameter values) lead to price distributions with higher mean and positive skewness (i.e. more high-price events). Similarly, these show a lower standard devia- tion, characteristic of a reliance on conventional gener- ation. On the opposite spectrum, strong pressure gradi- ents (highf-parameter values) with windier conditions lead to low prices on average, negative skewness, and in- creased standard deviation. We also observe a congru- ent auto-correlation decay of the electricity price and the f-parameter, which strongly suggest that the vanishing memory in the prices being induced by a change in the weather conditions, as we have observed in the super- statistical analysis. Hence, we found a possible physical 13 mechanism that explains the long superstatistical time of ∼ 96 hours for the price time series. The analysis presented in this article provides some powerful and novel tools for a better understanding of spot market electricity price time series, which we inves- tigated in this study for data from Germany and Aus- tria, from 2015 to 2019. Particularly, our methods may help to pave the way forward to enable modelling price timeserieswiththecorrectstatisticalpropertiesinfuture studies, by considering relevant characteristics like non- stationarities, adequate local distributions, and intrinsic correlations. Our methods may also help in extracting information on the relevant time scales of transitions in given data and clarify their relation to weather changes. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We are grateful for discussions with Benjamin Schäfer, Sonja Germscheid, and Eike Cramer. P.C.B., D.W., and L.R.G. gratefully acknowledge support from the Helmholtz Association via the grantUncertainty Quan- tiﬁcation – From Data to Reliable Knowledge (UQ)with no. ZT-I-0029. C.H. and D.W. gratefully acknowledge support from the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research with grant no. 03EK3055B. This work was performed by L.R.G. as part of the Helmholtz School for Data Science in Life, Earth and Energy (HDS-LEE). Appendix A: Distributions of the volatilitiesβ of the price time series We present here the empirical distributions of the volatilitiesβ as drawn from Eq. (17), alongside with two 0.002 0.005 0.01 0.02 0.05 β 100 101 102 f (β) log-normal inverse-gamma Day Ahead Intraday Hourly Intraday Quarterly 0.00 0.02 0.04 0 100 FIG. 9. Distributionsf(β) of the volatilitiesβ, in double log- arithmic scale, of the three price time series and the two best- ﬁtting log-normal and inverse-Gamma distributions, given in Eq. (A1) and Eq. (A2) minimising the Kullback–Leibler di- vergenceDKL as given in Eq. (6). Inset shows a linear scale. candidate distributions, the log-normal distribution flogN (β) = 1√ 2πsβ exp ( −(lnβ−µ)2 2s2 ) , (A1) and the inverse-Gamma distribution finvΓ(β) = bc Γ(c) 1 βc+1 exp ( −b β ) . (A2) In Fig. 9 the empirical distributions and these two best- ﬁtting distributions are shown. We also tested ﬁttings with Gamma and F-distributions, by minimising the Kullback–LeiblerdivergenceDKL asgiveninEq.(6).The log-normal and inverse-Gamma distribution provide the best ﬁts. These results must be judged as illustrative, as the data is insuﬃcient in size to clearly single out a par- ticular form of f(β). We can nevertheless see that the volatilitesβ vary in a wide range of values, as described by an entropic indices¯q that deviates substantially from 1. Appendix B: Dependence of price time series on atmospheric ﬂow direction The circulation weather typing approach, as discussed in Sec. IIIE, also enables a separation of the atmospheric −20 −10 0 10 20 mean µ Day Ahead Intraday Hourly Intraday QuarterlyDay Ahead Intraday Hourly Intraday Quarterly 0 10 20 30 std. dev. σ g >12 hours g >24 hoursg >12 hours g >24 hours West. Anti. West. Anti. West. Anti. Weather Type −1 0 1 skewness s FIG. 10. Impact of particular weather types on the statistics ofpricetimeseries.Weconditionthepricetimeseriestoeither Westerly or Anticyclone states, for segments longer than 12 hours (g >12) and for segments longer than 24 hours (g > 24). For each we calculate the meanµ, standard deviationσ, and skewnesss of the prices. A weak separation in agreement with the price relation with thef-parameter given in Fig. 8 can be seen. Westerly weather types are associated with a negative mean, more elevated standard deviation, and slightly negative kurtosis. In opposition, Anticyclone are associated with positive mean, smaller standard deviation, and slightly positive skewness. 14 ﬂow into eight directional and/or two rotational types. Following the work by Wohlandet al. [81], we focused on two of these weather types in this study: Anticyclonic and westerly weather types (note that for both weather types the full spectrum of potentialf-parameter values is considered). The Anticyclonic weather type is typi- cally associated with stable and steady weather, while the westerly type often comes along with strong pressure gradients and thus strong winds, and with the passage of lows and fronts. We conditioned the price time se- ries to these two weather types. To exclude situations where the atmospheric ﬂow is strongly alternating on very short time scales, we select only the cases where the Anticyclonic and the westerly weather types prevail for longer than 12 hours and for longer than 24 hours, re- spectively. Subsequently we analyse various statistics of prices for each separate segment of the price time series. In Fig. 10 we summarise the results, were we show the mean µ, standard deviationσ, and skewnesss for each price time series, conditioned to either Westerly or An- ticyclone states for longer than12 or 24hours, which we denote as g > 12hours and g > 24hours, respectively. We do not include the kurtosis, as estimating the kurto- sis requires a larger set of data points. In general, west- erly weather types are rather associated with a negative mean, a slightly negative skewness, and a higher standard deviation when compared to the anticyclonic weather type. These statistics reﬂect the typical characteristics of the westerly weather types with ﬂuctuating strong wind speeds. In contrast, the mean and the skewness tend to positive values for the anticyclonic weather types, and the standard deviation is smaller than for the westerly weather types. These results generally agree with what we obtained for the f-parameter in Sec. IIIE, yet the eﬀect is considerably smaller than for thef-parameter. [1] U.S. Energy Information Administration, Annual Energy Outlook 2021 (2021), accessed August, 2021. [2] REN21 Secretariat, Renewables 2021 Global Status Re- port (REN21, 2021). [3] R. J. Green and D. M. Newbery, Competition in the British electricity spot market, Journal of Political Econ- omy 100, 929 (1992). [4] D. M. Newbery, Competition, contracts, and entry in the electricity spot market, The RAND Journal of Economics 29, 726 (1998). [5] C. K. Woo, I. Horowitz, J. Moore, and A. Pacheco, The impact of wind generation on the electricity spot-market price level and variance: The Texas experience, Energy Policy 39, 3939 (2011). [6] J. Cludius, H. Hermann, F. C. Matthes, and V. Graichen, The merit order eﬀect of wind and photovoltaic electric- ity generation in Germany 2008–2016: Estimation and distributional implications, Energy Economics 44, 302 (2014). [7] K. Mayer and S. Trück, Electricity markets around the world, Journal of Commodity Markets9, 77 (2018). [8] D. Inﬁeld and L. Freris,Renewable Energy in Power Sys- tems, 2nd ed. (John Wiley & Sons, Wiltshire, UK, 2020). [9] C. Koch and L. Hirth, Short-term electricity trading for system balancing: An empirical analysis of the role of in- tradaytradinginbalancingGermany’selectricitysystem, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews113, 109275 (2019). [10] O. Edenhofer, L. Hirth, B. Knopf, M. Pahle, S. Schlömer, E. Schmid, and F. Ueckerdt, On the economics of renew- able energy sources, Energy Economics40, S12 (2013). [11] D. P. Macedo, A. C. Marques, and O. Damette, The im- pact of the integration of renewable energy sources in the electricity price formation: is the merit-order eﬀect occur- ring in Portugal?, Utilities Policy66, 101080 (2020). [12] J. Rodríguez-Molina, M. Martínez-Núñez, J.-F. Martínez, and W. Pérez-Aguiar, Business models in the smart grid: Challenges, opportunities and pro- posals for prosumer proﬁtability, Energies 7, 6142 (2014). [13] European Power Exchange (EPEX SPOT) (2021), Mar- ket data https://www.epexspot.com/en/market-data. [14] P. Spodniak, K. Ollikka, and S. Honkapuro, The impact of wind power and electricity demand on the relevance of diﬀerent short-term electricity markets: The Nordic case, Applied Energy283, 116063 (2021). [15] M. Narajewski and F. Ziel, Estimation and simulation of the transaction arrival process in intraday electricity markets, Energies12, 4518 (2019). [16] E. S. Mix,Persistence Statistics of Electricity Price Time Series, B.Sc. Thesis, University of Cologne (2020). [17] F. Ocker and K.-M. Ehrhart, The “German Paradox” in the balancing power markets, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews67, 892 (2017). [18] I. Oksuz and U. Ugurlu, Neural network based model comparison for intraday electricity price forecasting, En- ergies 12, 4557 (2019). [19] T. Janke and F. Steinke, Forecasting the price distribu- tion of continuous intraday electricity trading, Energies 12, 4262 (2019). [20] G. Marcjasz, B. Uniejewski, and R. Weron, Beating the naïve–combining LASSO with naïve intraday electricity price forecasts, Energies13, 1667 (2020). [21] E. Abramova and D. Bunn, Forecasting the intra-day spread densities of electricity prices, Energies 13, 687 (2020). [22] C. Kath, W. Nitka, T. Seraﬁn, T. Weron, P. Zaleski, and R. Weron, Balancing generation from renewable energy sources: Proﬁtability of an energy trader, Energies13, 205 (2020). [23] H. Geman and A. Roncoroni, Understanding the ﬁne structure of electricity prices, The Journal of Business 79, 1225 (2006). [24] C. Beck and F. Schögl,Thermodynamics of Chaotic Sys- tems: An Introduction, 1st ed., Cambridge Nonlinear Sci- ence Series (Cambridge University Press, 1993). [25] C. Tsallis,Introduction to Nonextensive Statistical Me- chanics: Approaching a Complex World, 1st ed. (Springer Science & Business Media, 2009). 15 [26] S. Voronin, J. Partanen, and T. Kauranne, A hybrid elec- tricity price forecasting model for the Nordic electricity spot market, International Transactions on Electrical En- ergy Systems24, 736 (2014). [27] Q. Fan and D. Li, Multifractal cross-correlation analysis in electricity spot market, Physica A: Statistical Mechan- ics and its Applications429, 17 (2015). [28] P. Norouzzadeh, W. Dullaert, and B. Rahmani, Anti- correlation and multifractal features of Spain electricity spot market, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 380, 333 (2007). [29] J. Alvarez-Ramirez and R. Escarela-Perez, Time- dependent correlations in electricity markets, Energy Economics 32, 269 (2010). [30] N. E. Huang, Z. Shen, S. R. Long, M. C. Wu, H. H. Shih, Q. Zheng, N.-C. Yen, C. C. Tung, and H. H. Liu, The empirical mode decomposition and the hilbert spec- trum for nonlinear and non-stationary time series analy- sis, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 454, 903 (1998). [31] C.-K. Peng, S. V. Buldyrev, S. Havlin, M. Simons, H. E. Stanley, and A. L. Goldberger, Mosaic organization of DNA nucleotides, Physical Review E49, 1685 (1994). [32] C. Peng, S. Havlin, H. E. Stanley, and A. L. Goldberger, Quantiﬁcation of scaling exponents and crossover phe- nomena in nonstationary heartbeat time series, Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science5, 82 (1995). [33] J. W. Kantelhardt, S. A. Zschiegner, E. Koscielny-Bunde, S. Havlin, A. Bunde, and H. Stanley, Multifractal de- trended ﬂuctuation analysis of nonstationary time series, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 316, 87 (2002). [34] L. Rydin Gorjão, G. Hassan, J. Kurths, and D. Witthaut, MFDFA: Eﬃcient multifractal detrended ﬂuctuation anal- ysis in python (2021), arXiv 2104.10470. [35] F. Wang, G. Liao, J. Li, X. Li, and T. Zhou, Multifractal detrended ﬂuctuation analysis for clustering structures of electricity price periods, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications392, 5723 (2013). [36] F.Wang,G.-p.Liao,X.-y.Zhou,andW.Shi,Multifractal detrended cross-correlation analysis for power markets, Nonlinear Dynamics72, 353 (2013). [37] C. Beck, Dynamical foundations of nonextensive sta- tistical mechanics, Physical Review Letters87, 180601 (2001). [38] C. Beck and E. G. D. Cohen, Superstatistics, Physica A 322, 267 (2003). [39] R. Rak, S. Drożdż, and J. Kwapień, Nonextensive sta- tistical features of the Polish stock market ﬂuctuations, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 374, 315 (2007). [40] P. Gopikrishnan, V. Plerou, L. A. Nunes Amaral, M. Meyer, and H. E. Stanley, Scaling of the distribu- tion of ﬂuctuations of ﬁnancial market indices, Physical Review E60, 5305 (1999). [41] S. M. D. Queirós and C. Tsallis, On the connection be- tween ﬁnancial processes with stochastic volatility and nonextensive statistical mechanics, The European Physi- cal Journal B - Condensed Matter and Complex Systems 48, 139 (2005). [42] S. M. D. Queirós, On the emergence of a generalised gamma distribution. application to traded volume in ﬁnancial markets, Europhysics Letters (EPL)71, 339 (2005). [43] L. Borland, Option pricing formulas based on a non- Gaussian stock price model, Physical Review Letters89, 098701 (2002). [44] L. Borland, Exploring the dynamics of ﬁnancial markets: from stock prices to strategy returns, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals88, 59 (2016). [45] P. Zhao, B. Zhou, and J. Wang, Non-Gaussian closed form solutions for geometric average Asian options in theframeworkofnon-extensivestatisticalmechanics,En- tropy 20, 71 (2018). [46] P.Jones,M.Hulme,andK.Briﬀa,AcomparisonofLamb circulation types with an objective classiﬁcation scheme, International Journal of Climatology13, 655 (1993). [47] M. Reyers, J. G. Pinto, and J. Moemken, Statistical- dynamical downscaling for wind energy potentials: Eval- uation and applications to decadal hindcasts and climate change projections, International Journal of Climatology 35, 229 (2015). [48] J. Märkle-Huß, S. Feuerriegel, and D. Neumann, Con- tract durations in the electricity market: Causal impact of 15 min trading on the EPEX SPOT market, Energy Economics 69, 367 (2018). [49] S. Wilkens and J. Wimschulte, The pricing of electricity futures: Evidence from the european energy exchange, Journal of Futures Markets27, 387 (2007). [50] D. Peters, R. Völker, F. Schuldt, and K. von Maydell, Are standard load proﬁles suitable for modern electricity grid models?, in2020 17th International Conference on the European Energy Market (EEM)(2020) pp. 1–6. [51] F. Borggrefe and K. Neuhoﬀ, Balancing and intraday market design: Options for wind integration, in DIW Berlin Discussion Paper(2011) p. 1162. [52] C. Behm, L. Nolting, and A. Praktiknjo, How to model european electricity load proﬁles using artiﬁcial neural networks, Applied Energy277, 115564 (2020). [53] J. D. Hunter, Matplotlib: A 2D Graphics Environment, Computing in Science Engineering9, 90 (2007). [54] European Power Exchange (EPEX SPOT), Annual Report 2019 (2020), https://www.epexspot.com/ sites/default/ﬁles/download_center_ﬁles/Epex-spot- 2019 _200703_Planche.pdf accessed 17/04/2021. [55] T. Weissbach and E. Welfonder, Improvement of the performance of scheduled stepwise power programme changes within the european power system, IFAC Pro- ceedings Volumes 41, 11972 (2008), 17th IFAC World Congress. [56] L. Rydin Gorjão, M. Anvari, H. Kantz, C. Beck, D. Wit- thaut, M. Timme, and B. Schäfer, Data-driven model of the power-grid frequency dynamics, IEEE Access8, 43082 (2020). [57] J. Kruse, B. Schäfer, and D. Witthaut, Revealing drivers and risks for power grid frequency stability with explain- able AI, Patterns2, 100365 (2021). [58] F. Sensfuß, M. Ragwitz, and M. Genoese, The merit- order eﬀect: A detailed analysis of the price eﬀect of re- newable electricity generation on spot market prices in Germany, Energy Policy36, 3086 (2008). [59] Y. He, M. Hildmann, F. Herzog, and G. Andersson, Mod- eling the merit order curve of the European Energy Ex- change power market in Germany, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems28, 3155 (2013). 16 [60] J. Weber, J. Wohland, M. Reyers, J. Moemken, C. Hoppe, J. G. Pinto, and D. Witthaut, Impact of cli- matechangeonbackupenergyandstorageneedsinwind- dominated power systems in Europe, PLOS ONE13, 1 (2018). [61] S. M. Braun and C. Brunner, Price sensitivity of hourly day-ahead and quarter-hourly intraday auctions in ger- many, Zeitschrift für Energiewirtschaft42, 257 (2018). [62] S. Halbrügge, P. Schott, M. Weibelzahl, H. U. Buhl, G. Fridgen, and M. Schöpf, How did the German and other European electricity systems react to the COVID- 19 pandemic?, Applied Energy285, 116370 (2021). [63] R. Weron, I. Simonsen, and P. Wilman, Modeling highly volatile and seasonal markets: evidence from the nord pool electricity market, in The Application of Econo- physics, edited by H. Takayasu (Springer Japan, Tokyo, 2004) pp. 182–191. [64] Z. Wu and N. E. Huang, A study of the characteristics of white noise using the empirical mode decomposition method, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Se- ries A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 460, 1597 (2004). [65] S. Lahmiri, Comparing variational and empirical mode decomposition in forecasting day-ahead energy prices, IEEE Systems Journal11, 1907 (2017). [66] P. Virtanen, R. Gommers, T. E. Oliphant, M. Haber- land,T.Reddy,D.Cournapeau,E.Burovski,P.Peterson, W. Weckesser, J. Bright, S. J. van der Walt, M. Brett, J. Wilson, K. J. Millman, N. Mayorov, A. R. J. Nel- son, E. Jones, R. Kern, E. Larson, C. J. Carey, İ. Po- lat, Y. Feng, E. W. Moore, J. VanderPlas, D. Laxalde, J. Perktold, R. Cimrman, I. Henriksen, E. A. Quintero, C. R. Harris, A. M. Archibald, A. H. Ribeiro, F. Pe- dregosa, P. van Mulbregt, and SciPy 1.0 Contributors, SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientiﬁc Com- puting in Python, Nature Methods17, 261 (2020). [67] C. R. Harris, K. J. Millman, S. J. van der Walt, R. Gom- mers, P. Virtanen, D. Cournapeau, E. Wieser, J. Tay- lor, S. Berg, N. J. Smith, R. Kern, M. Picus, S. Hoyer, M. H. van Kerkwijk, M. Brett, A. Haldane, J. Fernán- dez del Río, M. Wiebe, P. Peterson, Pearu andGérard- Marchant, K. Sheppard, T. Reddy, W. Weckesser, H. Ab- basi, C. Gohlke, and T. E. Oliphant, Array programming with NumPy, Nature585, 357 (2020). [68] B. Mandelbrot, The Pareto–Lévy law and the distribu- tion of income, International Economic Review 1, 79 (1960). [69] C. Tsallis, Possible generalization of Boltzmann-Gibbs statistics, Journal of Statistical Physics52, 479 (1988). [70] D. Applebaum,Lévy Processes and Stochastic Calculus, 2nd ed. (Cambridge University Press, 2011). [71] S. Umarov, C. Tsallis, and S. Steinberg, On aq-central limit theorem consistent with nonextensive statistical mechanics, MilanJournalofMathematics 76,307(2008). [72] H. E. Hurst, Long-term storage capacity of reservoirs, Transactions of the American Society of Civil Engineers 116, 770 (1951). [73] R. Weron and B. Przybyłowicz, Hurst analysis of elec- tricity price dynamics, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications283, 462 (2000). [74] E. Ihlen, Introduction to Multifractal Detrended Fluctu- ation Analysis in Matlab, Frontiers in Physiology3, 141 (2012). [75] L. Borland, A theory of non-Gaussian option pricing, Quantitative Finance2, 415 (2002). [76] E.VanderStraetenandC.Beck,Superstatisticalﬂuctua- tions in time series: Applications to share-price dynamics and turbulence, Physical Review E80, 036108 (2009). [77] C. Beck, Generalised information and entropy measures in physics, Contemporary Physics50, 495 (2009). [78] K. van der Wiel, H. C. Bloomﬁeld, R. W. Lee, L. P. Stoop, R. Blackport, J. A. Screen, and F. M. Selten, The inﬂuence of weather regimes on European renewable en- ergy production and demand, Environmental Research Letters 14, 094010 (2019). [79] C. M. Grams, R. Beerli, S. Pfenninger, I. Staﬀell, and H. Wernli, Balancing Europe’s wind-power output throughspatialdeploymentinformedbyweatherregimes, Nature Climate Change7, 557 (2017). [80] A. Dalton, B. Bekker, and A. C. Kruger, Wind power variability during the passage of cold fronts across South Africa, Journal of Energy in Southern Africa 30, 52 (2019). [81] J. Wohland, M. Reyers, C. Märker, and D. Witthaut, Natural wind variability triggered drop in German redis- patch volume and costs from 2015 to 2016, PLOS ONE 13, 1 (2018). [82] J. Weber, M. Reyers, C. Beck, M. Timme, J. G. Pinto, D. Witthaut, and B. Schäfer, Wind Power Persistence Characterized by Superstatistics, Scientiﬁc Reports9, 19971 (2019). [83] H. Hersbach, B. Bell, and P. B. et al., The ERA5 global reanalysis, Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 146, 1999 (2000). [84] W. O. Sosa-Correa, A. M. Ramos, and G. L. Vasconce- los, Investigation of non-Gaussian eﬀects in the Brazilian option market, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 496, 525 (2018). [85] F. Alonso-Marroquin, K. Arias-Calluari, M. Harré, M. N. Najaﬁ, and H. J. Herrmann,q-gaussian diﬀusion in stock markets, Physical Review E99, 062313 (2019). [86] H.BessembinderandM.L.Lemmon,Equilibriumpricing and optimal hedging in electricity forward markets, The Journal of Finance57, 1347 (2002).