Received March 2, 2022. Digital Object Identiﬁer The Recurrent Reinforcement Learning Crypto Agent GABRIEL BORRAGEIRO , NICK FIROOZYE AND P AOLO BARUCCA Department of Computer Science, University College London, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT Corresponding author: Gabriel Borrageiro (e-mail: gabriel.borrageiro.20@ucl.ac.uk). ABSTRACT We demonstrate a novel application of online transfer learning for a digital assets trading agent. This agent uses a powerful feature space representation in the form of an echo state network, the output of which is made available to a direct, recurrent reinforcement learning agent. The agent learns to trade the XBTUSD (Bitcoin versus US Dollars) perpetual swap derivatives contract on BitMEX on an intraday basis. By learning from the multiple sources of impact on the quadratic risk-adjusted utility that it seeks to maximise, the agent avoids excessive over-trading, captures a funding proﬁt, and can predict the market’s direction. Overall, our crypto agent realises a total return of 350%, net of transaction costs, over roughly ﬁve years, 71% of which is down to funding proﬁt. The annualised information ratio that it achieves is 1.46. INDEX TERMS online learning, transfer learning, echo state networks, recurrent reinforcement learning, ﬁnancial time series I. INTRODUCTION Financial time series provide many modelling challenges for both researchers and practitioners. In some circumstances, data availability is sparse, and the datasets are vast in other circumstances; this impacts the choice of model and the learning style. In addition, ﬁnancial time series are typically both autocorrelated and nonstationary, requiring approaches such as integer or fractional differencing [1] to remove these effects and facilitate correct feature selection; this is pre- viously identiﬁed by Granger and Newbold [2] as leading to spurious regressions if not mitigated. Another approach to coping with nonstationarity is to allow models to learn continuously. Against this backdrop, we extend our earlier work [3] where we combine sequential learning with transfer learn- ing [4] and reinforcement learning [5]. More concretely, we novelly transfer the learning of an echo state network [6] to a direct, recurrent reinforcement learning agent [7] who must learn to trade digital asset futures, speciﬁcally the XBTUSD (Bitcoin versus US Dollar) perpetual swap on the BitMEX exchange. Our transfer learner beneﬁts from an ample, dynamic reservoir feature space and can identify and learn from the different sources of impact on proﬁt and loss, including execution costs, exchange fees, funding costs and price moves in the market. Perhaps the main beneﬁt of this paper will be for ﬁnancial industry practitioners. In the numerous papers we researched on machine learning applications to ﬁnancial trading, the researchers’ emphasis tends to be on the novelty of the machine learning model, which inevitably has a high learning capacity. In practically all cases, good risk-adjusted returns are claimed, yet when one digs into the results in more detail, one invariably ﬁnds that trading costs are not fully accounted for. Such papers usually assume the execution of trades on the closing prices of sub-sampled data with certainty. However, only a price taker can obtain certainty of ﬁll by crossing the bid/ask spread. The price taker then observes an immediate loss equal to the execution time half bid/ask spread. We barely see this cost accounted for, and even when it is, such as with the seminal work of Moody et al. [7], a ﬁxed execution cost is assumed. This ﬁxed execution cost is never observed in reality; see, for example, ﬁgure 4 of Borrageiro et al. [3], which shows that the bid/ask spread varies by time of day. For many assets, especially in tradi- tional ﬁnance, the bid/ask spread varies by day of the week as well; Dacorogna et al. [8] demonstrate and discuss various examples of such stylised facts. Another approach commonly taken by academic ﬁnancial trading researchers is to use supervised learning and sub-sample the high-frequency data into monthly time series. The main reason for doing this is to ameliorate excessive trading and thus high execution cost. Inevitably, we see the caveat emptor of a lack of experimental VOLUME X, 2022 1 arXiv:2201.04699v4 [cs.LG] 21 May 2022 Borrageiro et al.: The Recurrent Reinforcement Learning Crypto Agent data and its impact on the generalisation performance of their chosen model. Furthermore, the down-sampling of data into lower frequencies typically makes bearable the slow training times of many models, such as deep q-learning networks. We complete this section with a summary of the main contributions of this paper. Our meta-model can process data as a stream and learn sequentially; this helps it cope with the nonstationarity of the high-frequency order book and trading data. Furthermore, by using the vast high-frequency data, our model, which has a high learning capacity, avoids the kind of overﬁtting on a lack of data points that occurs with down-sampled data. We escape the problem of over-trading that is typically seen with the supervised learning model by learning the sensitivity of the change in risk-adjusted returns to the model’s parameterisation. Stated another way, our model learns from the multiple sources of impact on proﬁt and loss and targets the appropriate risk position. Finally, the scientiﬁc experiment that we conduct is representative of the conditions that would be observed in live trading; thus, we are conﬁdent that the resulting performance can realistically be transferred to industry use. II. PRELIMINARIES This section provides a brief overview of the related ideas that we use in our experimentation, namely transfer learning, reservoir computing with echo state networks, and a form of policy gradients reinforcement learning. Finally, we conclude the section with a literature review of recent publications that apply reinforcement learning in cryptocurrency trading. A. TRANSFER LEARNING Transfer learning refers to the machine learning paradigm in which an algorithm extracts knowledge from one or more application scenarios to help boost the learning performance in a target scenario [4]. Typically, traditional machine learn- ing requires large amounts of training data. Transfer learning copes better with data sparsity by looking at related learning domains where data is sufﬁcient. Even in a big data scenario such as streaming high-frequency data, transfer learning can beneﬁt from learning immediately, where data is initially sparse, and a learner must begin providing forecasts when asked to do so. An increasing number papers focus on online transfer learning [9, 10, 11]. Following Pan and Yang [12], we deﬁne transfer learning as: Deﬁnition 1 (transfer learning). Given a source domainDS and learning taskTS, a target domainDT and learning task TT , transfer learning aims to help improve the learning of the target predictive function fT (.) inDT using the knowledge inDS andTS, whereDS⁄=DT , orTS⁄=TT . B. ECHO STATE NETWORKS Echo state networks are a form of recurrent neural network. They consist of a large, ﬁxed, recurrent reservoir network, from which the desired output is obtained by training suitable output connection weights. Determination of the optimal out- put weights is solvable analytically, for example, sequentially with recursive least squares [6]. Echo state networks are an example of the reservoir computing paradigm of understand- ing and training recurrent neural networks, based on treating the recurrent part (the reservoir) differently than the readouts from it [13]. Following Jaeger [6], the echo state property states that: Deﬁnition 2 (echo state property) . If a network is started from two arbitrary states x0, ˜x0 and is run with the same input sequence in both cases, the resulting state sequences xT , ˜xT converge to each other. If this condition holds, the reservoir network state will asymptotically depend only on the input history, and the network is said to be an echo state network. The echo state property is guaranteed if the dynamic reser- voir weight matrix Whidden is scaled such that its spectral radius ρ(Whidden), that is, its largest absolute eigenvalue, satisﬁes ρ(Whidden) < 1. This ensures that Whidden is contractive. The mathematically correct connection between the spectral radius and the echo state property is that the latter is violated if ρ(Whidden) > 1 in reservoirs using the tanh function as neuron nonlinearity and for zero input [14]. Murray [15] states that the criteria for plausible modelling on how the brain might perform challenging time-dependent computations are locality and causality. As the echo state network uses a ﬁxed, dynamic reservoir of weights, whose update depends on local information of inputs and activa- tions, with ﬁxed and random feedback, the model offers a plausible model of biological function. These biological aspects are explored by Maass and Markram [16] concerning liquid state machines and more generally with spiking neural networks in Samadi et al. [17]. Numerous articles demonstrate echo state networks within a reinforcement learning context. For example, Szita et al. [18] propose a novel method that uses echo state networks as function approximators in reinforcement learning. They emphasise that echo state networks are promising candidates for partially observable problems where information about the past may improve performance, such as with k-order Markov processes. Since echo state networks are effectively linear function approximators acting on the internal state representation built from the previous observations, Gordon’s [19] results about linear function approximators can be trans- ferred to the echo state networks architecture. Building on this, they provide proof of convergence to a bounded region for echo state network training in the case of k-order Markov decision processes. Shi et al. [20] seek to model the optimal energy manage- ment of an ofﬁce. Time series inputs such as the real-time electricity rate, renewable energy and energy demand are made available to an echo state network q-learning model, which determines the optimal charging/discharging/idle strategies for the battery in the ofﬁce so that the total cost of electricity from the grid can be reduced. Chen et al. [21] develop a fault-tolerant adaptive tracking 2 VOLUME X, 2022 Borrageiro et al.: The Recurrent Reinforcement Learning Crypto Agent FIGURE 1. A schematic of the echo state network (ESN), combined with the direct, recurrent reinforcement learning agent (DRL). The ESN part is inspired by the schematic of Lukoševiˇcius [22] and the DRL part is inspired by the McCulloch-Pitts schematic of Bishop [23]. control method fused with an echo state network, driven by reinforcement learning for Euler-Lagrange systems subject to actuation faults. Speciﬁcally, the echo state network imple- ments an associative search network, a control gain network and an adaptive critic network, resulting in enhanced learning capabilities and stronger robustness against external uncer- tainties or disturbances, thus better controlling performance. C. POLICY GRADIENT REINFORCEMENT LEARNING In this section, we summarise our previous preliminary overview of the policy gradients method [3]. Williams [24] introduced policy gradient methods in a reinforcement learn- ing context. Whereas the majority of reinforcement learning algorithms tend to focus on action value estimation, learning the value of and selecting actions based on their estimated action values, policy gradient methods learn a parameterised policy that can select actions without the use of a value function. Williams also introduced his reinforce algorithm ∆wij =ηij(r−bij) ln(∂πi/∂wij), (1) where wij is the model weight going from the j′th input to the i′th output and wi is the weight vector for the i′th hidden processing unit in a network of such units, whose goal it is to adapt in such a way as to maximise the scalar reward r. The learning rate is ηij and the weight update of equation 1 is typically applied with gradient ascent. The reinforcement baseline bij, is conditionally independent of the model outputsyi, given the network parametersw and in- puts xi. The characteristic eligibility ofwij is ln(∂πi/∂wij), where πi(yi = c, wi, xi) is the probability mass function determining the value ofyi as a function of the parameters of the unit and its input. Baseline subtraction r−bij plays an important role in reducing the variance of gradient estimators and Sugiyama [25] shows that the optimal baseline is given as b∗ = Ep(r|w) [ rt‖∑T t=1∇ lnπ(at|st, w)‖2] Ep(r|w) [ ‖∑T t=1∇ lnπ(at|st, w)‖2] , where the policy functionπ(at|st, w) denotes the probability of taking action at at time t given state st, parameterised by w. The main result of Williams’s paper is Theorem 1. For any reinforce algorithm, the inner product of E[∆w|w] and∇E[r|w] is non-negative and if ηij > 0, then this inner product is zero if and only if∇E[r|w] = 0. If ηij is independent ofi andj, then E[∆w|w] =η∇E[r|w]. This result relates∇E[r|w], the gradient in weight space of the performance measure E[r|w], to E[∆w|w], the aver- age update vector in weight space. Thus for any reinforce algorithm, the average update vector in weight space lies in a direction for which this performance measure is increasing and the quantity (r−bij) ln(∂πi/∂wij) represents an unbi- ased estimate of∂E[r|w]/∂wij. 1) Policy Gradient Methods in Financial Trading Moody et al. [7] propose to train trading systems and portfo- lios by optimising objective functions that directly measure trading and investment performance. Their model tries to target a position directly, and the model weights are adapted to maximise the performance measure. The performance function that they primarily consider is the differential Sharpe ratio. The annualised Sharpe ratio [26] is sr = 2520.5× µ−rf σ , where µ is the strategy’s return, σ is the standard deviation of returns, andrf is the risk-free rate. The differential Sharpe ratio is deﬁned as dsrt dτ = bt−1∆at− 0.5at−1∆bt (at−1−a2 t−1)3/2 , where the quantities at and bt are exponentially weighted estimates of the ﬁrst and second moments ofrt at =at−1 +τ∆at =at−1 +τ(rt−at−1) bt =bt−1 +τ∆bt =bt−1 +τ(r2 t−bt−1), withτ∈ (0, 1]. They consider a batch gradient ascent update ∆θT =ηdsrT dθ , where dsrT dθ = 1 T T∑ t=1 dsrT drt { drt dft dft dθ + drt dft−1 dft−1 dθ } = 1 T T∑ t=1 { bT−aTrt (bT−a2 T )3/2 }{ drt dft dft dθ + drt dft−1 dft−1 dθ } . (2) The reward rt = ∆ptft−1−δt|∆ft| depends on the change in reference price pt, previous po- sition ft−1 and transaction costs δt which are applied only if there is a change in position |ft− ft−1| > 0. The position function is typically differentiable and bounded VOLUME X, 2022 3 Borrageiro et al.: The Recurrent Reinforcement Learning Crypto Agent −1≤ ft≤ 1. This position function depends on the model inputs and parameters ft ≜ f(xt; θt). The right half of equation 2 shows the dependency of the model parameters on the past sequence of trades. To correctly compute and optimise these total derivatives requires the use of recurrent algorithms such as backpropagation through time [27, 28] or real-time recurrent learning [29]. An undesirable property of the Sharpe ratio is that it penalises a model that produces returns larger than r∗ t = bt−1 at−1 , which is counter-intuitive relative to most investors’ notions of risk and reward [7]. Gold [30] extends Moody et al. [7] work and investigates high-frequency currency trading with neural networks trained via recurrent reinforcement learning. He compares the performance of linear networks with neural networks containing a single hidden layer and examines the impact of shared system hyper-parameters on performance. In general, he concludes that the trading systems may be effective but that the performance varies widely for different currency markets, and simple statistics of the markets cannot explain this variability. D. REINFORCEMENT LEARNING WITHIN CRYPTOCURRENCY TRADING This section provides a brief literature review of reinforce- ment learning applied to cryptocurrency trading. Before per- forming this review, it is helpful to describe how returns net of transaction costs are generated when trading on an exchange. For example, assume that a single instrument is traded, such as Bitcoin versus the US Dollar. This instrument may be a cash or futures instrument. A gross proﬁt (loss) is generated when Bitcoin is sold higher (lower) than its initial purchase price. Similar logic is applied for short positions, albeit with directions swapped. A net proﬁt is observed by deducting various costs from the gross proﬁt. These costs vary depending on the execution-style and are differentiated between price makers and price takers. A price maker inserts quotes into an exchange limit order book and executes when a price taker removes the price maker’s liquidity. The price maker captures half the bid/ask spread at the time of execution; the execution price is evalu- ated against the prevailing transaction mid-price (0.5×[bid+ ask]), where bid < mid < ask. Bid/ask spreads in crypto tend to be as competitively priced as traditional ﬁnancial instruments, although the exchange fees, usually a percentage of the notional traded, tend to be much higher. The price maker’s ﬁlls are probabilistic, not inevitable. To compensate the market maker for the uncertainty incurred by providing liquidity and the risk of adverse selection, they capture half the bid/ask spread. The price taker obtains the certainty of immediate ﬁll, subject to competing with other price takers for the same quoted liquidity. This certainty of ﬁll comes at a cost, as the price taker must pay half the bid/ask spread and usually much higher exchange fees than price makers when trading crypto. A ﬁnal cost that must be considered is funding. If one buys cash crypto without leverage, then it is plausible to consider no funding cost, and one can consider the pur- chase as self-funded. However, if one wants to sell cash crypto short, one needs to borrow the inventory; this attracts a funding cost. Furthermore, transacting in cryptocurrency futures on an exchange or contracts for difference in the over- the-counter market attracts a funding cost similar to what brokers charge for traditional ﬁnancial instruments. Even if one trades futures directly on an exchange without a broker, some crypto derivatives contracts attract funding like tradi- tional foreign exchange instruments do. For example, trading overnight foreign exchange exposes one to the interest rate differential between two currency pairs. Similarly, perpetual crypto swaps attract an intraday funding proﬁt or loss, which ensures that the swap tracks the underlying cash instrument within tolerance. We now proceed with the literature review. Jiang and Liang [31] supply a convolutional neural net- work with historical prices of a set of crypto assets as its input, outputting portfolio weights of the set of assets. The network is trained on less than a year of price data from the Poloniex cryptocurrency exchange. The training is done in a reinforcement learning manner, maximising the accumu- lated return as the reward function of the network. Using 30 minutely sampled closing prices, they conduct backtests which achieve ten-fold returns. In addition, they set exchange trading transaction fees of 25 basis points (25e-4) times the notional value traded of the base cryptocurrency. However, since they use closing prices to execute with a certainty of ﬁll without applying half the observable bid/ask spread cost at the time of execution, the empirically observed backtest results do not represent the actual cost of trading and are thus more sanguine than reality. Lee et al. [32] present a novel method to predict Bitcoin price movement using inverse reinforcement learning [33] and agent-based modelling. Their approach predicts the price by reproducing synthetic yet realistic behaviours of rational agents in a simulated market. Inverse reinforcement learning provides a systematic way to ﬁnd the behavioural rules of each agent from Blockchain data by framing the trading behaviour estimation as a problem of recovering motivations from observed behaviour and generating rules consistent with these motivations. Once the rules are recovered, an agent- based model creates hypothetical interactions between the recovered behavioural rules, discovering equilibrium prices as emergent features through matching the supply and de- mand of Bitcoin. Their model is used to forecast the market’s direction, and their results show that their proposed method can predict short-term market prices while outlining overall market trends. However, their experiments do not include the impact of holding risk, transaction or funding costs. Lucarelli and Borrotti [34] apply deep reinforcement learning to trading Bitcoin. More precisely, double deep q- learning [35] and duelling double deep q-learning [36] net- works are trained in batch mode using 80% of the four years of data that they have available. The remaining 20% of the 4 VOLUME X, 2022 Borrageiro et al.: The Recurrent Reinforcement Learning Crypto Agent data is used for out of sample testing. Two reward functions are also tested: Sharpe ratio and proﬁt reward functions. They ﬁnd that the double deep q-learning trading system based on the Sharpe ratio reward function is the most proﬁtable approach for trading Bitcoin. We note that the authors collect their data from Kaggle rather than from an actual crypto exchange and that they use minutely sampled open-high- low-close prices rather than actual order book bids and asks. As such, accurate transaction costs cannot be used in their experiment. Furthermore, no indication is made in their paper that they use any form of funding or exchange trading fees in their returns calculations. Zhang et al. [37] note that portfolio selection is difﬁcult as the nonstationarity of ﬁnancial time series and their com- plex correlations make the learning of feature representation challenging. They propose a cost-sensitive portfolio selection method with deep reinforcement learning. Speciﬁcally, a novel two-stream portfolio policy network is devised to ex- tract price time series patterns and asset correlations, while a new cost-sensitive reward function is developed to maximise the accumulated return and constrain costs via reinforcement learning. They empirically evaluate their proposed method on real-world datasets from the Poloniex crypto exchange. Promising results demonstrate the effectiveness and superi- ority of the proposed method in terms of proﬁtability, cost- sensitivity and representation abilities. Once more, however, transaction costs are not fully accounted for in their experi- ment. For example, they assume a ﬁxed transaction cost of 25 basis points times the notional value traded of the base cryptocurrency; however, they also use open-high-low-close prices, sampled every 30 minutes. The closing prices they use assume that execution is immediate. In reality, however, immediate execution may only be achieved by crossing the spread; this additional cost must be modelled, which usually turns a theoretically proﬁtable strategy that executes at the closing price or mid-price into a loss-making one. III. THE RESEARCH EXPERIMENT We begin with a discussion of the research data we use in our experiment, followed by an elucidation of the research methods and a description of the experiment results. As a high-level summary, our experiment aims to explore transfer learning using a source model, an echo state network and a target model, a direct, recurrent, reinforcement learning agent. The objective of this meta-model is to learn to trade digital asset futures, speciﬁcally perpetual contracts on the BitMEX crypto exchange. Finally, the dynamical reservoir of the echo state network acts as a powerful nonlinear feature space; this is fed into the upstream recurrent reinforcement learner, who is aware of the various sources of impact on proﬁt or loss and learns to target the desired position. A. THE BITMEX XBTUSD PERPETUAL SWAP The data that we experiment with is from the BitMEX cryp- tocurrency derivatives exchange. In 2016 they launched the XBTUSD perpetual swap, where clients trade Bitcoin against the US Dollar. The perpetual swap is similar to a traditional futures contract, except there is no expiry or settlement. It mimics a margin-based spot market and trades close to the underlying reference index price. A funding mechanism is used to tether the contract to its underlying spot price. In contrast, a futures contract may trade at a signiﬁcantly different price due to the basis basist =futurest−indext. The basis means different things in different markets. For example, in the oil market, the demand for spot oil can outpace the demand for futures oil, especially if OPEC with- holds supply, leading to a higher spot price; this results in a futures curve in a state of backwardation. The crypto futures normally trade in a state of contango, where the futures prices trade at a higher rate than the spot prices. Backwardation or contango in crypto markets does not represent supply and demand shortages in an economic sense but rather reﬂects risk appetite for crypto. Similar effects happen in the equity markets. As with the equity markets, crypto market partici- pants can take risks in the futures market more easily. The spot markets typically do not offer leverage, and the trader must have inventory in the exchange to trade. In contrast, futures allow traders to sell assets short with leverage and without borrowing the underlying asset. However, what is required is a margin or deposit to fund the position. Figure 2 shows the basis in relative terms for the XBTUSD perpetual swap during the bear market of 2018. The mid-price of the perpetual swap is compared against the underlying index it tracks, .BXBT. The relative basis is computed as rbasist = futurest−indext indext . (3) Before this bear market, Bitcoin hit a then all-time high of $20,000, and the 100-day exponentially weighted moving average of relative basis was very positive in late 2017. For most of 2018 and 2019, the basis was largely negative, reﬂecting the cash market sell-off from all-time highs to circa USD 3,000. 1) Funding The funding rate for the perpetual swap comprises two parts: an interest rate differential component and the premium or discount of the basis. We denote this funding rate as κt. The interest differential reﬂects the borrowing cost of each currency involved in the pair et = equote t −ebase t T . For example, with the XBTUSD perpetual swap, the interest rate of borrowing in US Dollars is denoted by equote t and the interest rate of borrowing in Bitcoin is represented by ebase t . As funding occurs every 8 hours, T = 8 . The basis premium/discount component is computed in a manner simi- lar to equation 3, with some subtleties applied to minimise VOLUME X, 2022 5 Borrageiro et al.: The Recurrent Reinforcement Learning Crypto Agent FIGURE 2. XBTUSD basis during the bear market of 2019 market manipulation, such as the use of time and volume weighted average prices. The funding rate is ﬁnally κt =bt +max(min[ζet−bt],−ζ), (4) whereζ is a basis cap, typically 5 basis points (0.05%). When the basis is positive, traders with long positions (buy XBT, sell USD) will pay those with short positions (sell XBT, buy USD). Reciprocally, shorts pay longs when the basis is negative. B. THE RECURRENT REINFORCEMENT LEARNING CRYPTO AGENT We begin with a description of the dynamic reservoir fea- ture space, the resultant learning of which is transferred to the direct, recurrent reinforcement learner, which targets the desired risk position. It is worth highlighting where our approach deviates from the traditional use of echo state networks within a reinforcement learning context. Figure 1 demonstrates visually that the target labels, the so-called teacher signal, can be fed back into the dynamic reservoir. Equally, one could apply a regression layer to the echo state network and feed the resulting forecasts into the dynamic reservoir. Both approaches make the echo state network recurrent then. We value this recurrent nature in a trading context, as we wish to feed information about the current position back into the model. However, rather than treating this exercise as a value function estimation task as with Szita et al. [18], we feed the augmented, dynamic reservoir features of the echo state network to a direct recurrent reinforcement learner. By differentiating a quadratic utility function with respect to the recurrent reinforcement learner’s parameters, with feedback connections from the agent’s past positions fed back into the echo state network dynamic reservoir, the agent learns from the various sources of impact on proﬁt and loss and targets the appropriate position that maximises the risk- adjusted reward. 1) The Dynamic Reservoir Feature Space Denote as ut, a vector of external inputs to the system, which is observed at time t. In the context of this experi- ment, such external input would include order book, trans- action and funding information. These features may come from the instrument being traded, exogenous instruments, or both. Initialise the external input weight matrix Winput ∈ Rnhidden×ninput, where the weights are drawn at random; a draw from a standard normal would sufﬁce. Here, nhidden denotes the number of hidden processing units in the internal dynamical reservoir andninput is the number of external in- puts, including a bias term. Next we initialise the hidden pro- cessing units weight matrix, Whidden ∈ Rnhidden×nhidden. The procedure detailed by Yildiz et al. [38] is • Initialise a random matrix Whidden, all with non- negative entries. • Scale Whidden such that its spectral radiusρ(Whidden)< 1. • Change the signs of a desired number of entries of Whidden to get negative connection weights as well. • Sparsify Whidden with probability P (α), 0≪ α <1, setting those elements to zero. This procedure is guaranteed to ensure the echo state property for any input. Intuitively, a recurrent neural network has the echo state property concerning an input signal ut, if any initial network state is forgotten or washed out when the network is driven by ut for long enough [39]. The model supports recurrent connections from either a teacher signal yt ∈ Rnback or model output ˆyt ∈ Rnback. These are connected to the model via the weight matrix Wback ∈ Rnhidden×nback, whose weights are initialised at random from a standard normal. Note that Winput, Whidden and Wback, have weights that remain ﬁxed. Finally, initialise the output weight vector wout 0 ∈ Rninput+nhidden+nback. It is at this point that our procedure differs from the original echo state network formulation shown by Jaeger [6]. There, wout is a matrix Wout ∈ Rnback×(ninput+nhidden+nback) and the performance measure of the model is the quadratic loss min Wout 1 2T T∑ t=1 (yt− Woutzt)2. The reasons will become apparent shortly when we detail the model’s direct, recurrent reinforcement learning part. But ﬁrst, we must describe how we create the augmented state of the system, zt∈ Rninput+nhidden+nback. Firstly, we initialise a zero-valued internal state vector x0 ∈ Rnhidden. Then at timet, we compute the recurrent internal state xt =fhidden(Winputut + Whiddenxt−1 + Wback t ˆyt), wherefhidden(.) is typically a squashing function such as the hyperbolic tangent. The augmented, recurrent system state is then zt = [ut, xt, ˆyt]. (5) 6 VOLUME X, 2022 Borrageiro et al.: The Recurrent Reinforcement Learning Crypto Agent Equation 11 deﬁnes what ˆyt represents, namely the past de- sired positions of the direct, recurrent reinforcement learning agent. 2) Direct Recurrent Reinforcement Learning The augmented, internal feature state, zt, is now fed into the upstream model, a direct, recurrent neural network, whose performance measure is a quadratic utility function of reward and risk. For the reader’s beneﬁt and the fact that we use the same target transfer learning model, we describe the dynam- ics of the direct, recurrent reinforcement learner in a manner similar to our earlier work [3]. Sharpe [40] discusses asset allocation as a function of expected utility maximisation, where the utility function may be more complex than that associated with mean-variance analysis. Denote the expected utility for a single asset portfolio as υt =µt− λ 2σ2 t, (6) where the expected returnµt and variance of returnsσ2 t may be estimated in an online fashion with exponential decay µt =τµt−1 + (1−τ)rt, (7) σ2 t =τσ 2 t−1 + (1−τ)(rt−µt)2. The risk appetite constant λ > 0, can be set as a function of an investor’s desired risk-adjusted return, as demonstrated by Kahn [41]. Deﬁne the annualised information ratio as the risk-adjusted differential reward measure, where the differ- ence is taken against a benchmark or baseline strategy irt = 2520.5× µt−bt σt . Substituting the non-annualised information ratio into the quadratic utility and differentiating it against the risk, we obtain a suitable value for the risk appetite parameter λ = irt σt . The net returns whose expectation and variance we seek to learn, are decomposed as rt = ∆ptft−1−δt|∆ft|− κtft, (8) where ∆pt is the change in reference price, typically a mid price ∆pt = 0.5× (bidt +askt−bidt−1−askt−1), δt represents the execution cost for a price taker δt = 0.5× (askt−bidt), (9) κt is the funding cost (see subsection III-A) and ft is the desired position learnt by the recurrent reinforcement learner ft =tanh ( [wout t ]T zt ) . (10) The model is maximally short whenft =−1 and maximally long whenft = 1. The past positions of the model are used as the feedback connections for equation 5 ˆyt = [ft−nback,...,f t−1]. (11) The goal of our recurrent reinforcement learner is to maximise the utility in equation 6, by targeting a position in equation 10. To do this, we apply an online optimisation update of the form wout t = wout t−1 +∇υt≡ ∆wout t + dυt dwout t , where the weight update procedure is an extended Kalman ﬁlter for neural networks [42, 43], albeit modiﬁed for re- inforcement learning in this context; sequential updates are applied as per algorithm 1. Algorithm 1: extended Kalman ﬁlter Require:β,τ // β ≥ 0 is a Ridge penalty. // 0≪τ≤ 1 is an exponential decay factor. Initialise: d =ninput +nhidden +nback wout = 0d, P = Id/β // 0d is a zero vector in Rd. // P is the precision matrix in Rd×d. Input:∇υt Output: wout t 1 q = 1 +∇υT t Pt−1∇υt/τ 2 k = Pt−1∇υt/(qτ ) 3 wout t = wout t−1 + k 4 Pt = Pt−1/τ− kkTq 5 Pt = Ptτ // variance stabilisation Above, Pt is an approximation to∇2υt, the inverse Hes- sian of the utility function υt with respect to the model weights wout t . We decompose the gradient of the utility function with respect to the recurrent reinforcement learner’s parameters as follows ∇υt = dυt drt {drt dft dft dwout t + drt dft−1 dft−1 dwout t−1 } = { dυt dµt dµt drt + dυt dσ2 t dσ2 t drt }{ drt dft [ ∂ft ∂wout t + ∂ft ∂ft−1 ∂ft−1 ∂wout t−1 ] + drt dft−1 [∂ft−1 ∂wout t−1 + ∂ft−1 ∂ft−2 ∂ft−2 ∂wout t−2 ]} . (12) The constituent derivatives for the left half of equation 12 are: dυt drt = (1−η)[1−λ(rt−µt)], drt dft =−δt×sign(∆ft)−κt, VOLUME X, 2022 7 Borrageiro et al.: The Recurrent Reinforcement Learning Crypto Agent dft dwout t = zt[1− tanh2 ([wout t ]T zt)] + wout t,n [1− tanh2 ([wout t ]T zt)] × zt−1[1− tanh2 ([wout t−1]T zt−1)], where n = ninput +nhidden +nback− 1, using 0 as the starting index. C. EXPERIMENT DESIGN We put a recurrent reinforcement learning crypto agent to work by trading the XBTUSD (Bitcoin vs US Dollar) perpet- ual swap on BitMEX. We transfer the output of the source model, the dynamic reservoir feature space of subsection III-B1, to the target model, the direct recurrent reinforce- ment learner of subsection III-B2, who learns to target a risk position directly. Finally, we use ﬁve minutely sampled intraday data. The choice of this sampling rate is driven by the throttle imposed by the vendor on retrieving historical data; if we could obtain the raw, asynchronously delivered tick data promptly, we would do so. Nevertheless, we are still using 365× 5× 1440/5 = 525600 observations in our experiment. Our performance evaluation procedure involves the following: • Construct input features from the order book and trade information made available by BitMEX for XBTUSD. • Feed these input features into an echo state network, with nhidden = 100 , nback = 10 and the percentage of reservoir units Whidden that are sparsiﬁed, set to α = 0.75. • Feed the output of the echo state network (equation 5) into a direct, recurrent reinforcement learner (subsection III-B2). • Set the risk appetite constantλ = 0.00001 for quadratic utility equation 6. • Set the ridge penalty β = 1 and the exponential decay factor τ = 0 .999 for the extended Kalman ﬁlter of algorithm 1. • Backtest the entire history as a test set. • Learn sequentially online to target the desired position. • Force the agent to trade as a price taker, who incurs an execution cost equal to equation 9 plus exchange fees, which are set to 5 basis points (0.05%). • For non-zero risk positions, apply the appropriate fund- ing proﬁt or loss as per equation 4. • Monitor equation 7, the expected net reward of the strategy. The crypto agent can trade freely if µt ≥ 0. Otherwise, close the position and wait for an opportu- nity to enter the market again. D. RESULTS Table 1 and ﬁgure 3 show the results of the experiment. The crypto agent achieves a total return of just under 350% over a test set that is less than ﬁve years. The associated annualised information ratio is 1.46. Denoting the maximally short position as -1, no position as 0 and the maximally long position as 1, we see that the agent averages a position of 0.41. Thus there is a bias toward the agent maintaining a long position, which is desirable, as Bitcoin has appreciated against the US Dollar over this period. We see visual evi- dence in ﬁgure 3 that on occasion, the crypto agent abstains from trading, or rather is forced to take no position; this will happen during periods when the predictive performance of the agent decreases relative to execution and funding costs. Our crypto agent also captures a 71% cumulative return due to earning funding, which is expected as the agent learns to target the appropriate position that maximises its quadratic utility, and funding is one of the drivers of this utility. The total execution cost and exchange fees that the agent pays out is -54%. FIGURE 3. cumulative returns for the XBTUSD crypto agent TABLE 1. daily pnl statistics for the XBTUSD crypto agent position execution carry pnl count 1684 1684 1684 1684 mean 0.405 -0.000 0.000 0.002 std 0.579 0.001 0.005 0.027 min -0.990 -0.019 -0.014 -0.155 25 % 0.000 0.000 -0.000 0.000 50 % 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 75 % 0.990 0.000 0.000 0.003 max 0.990 0.000 0.014 0.177 sum -0.542 0.713 3.498 ir 1.46 IV . DISCUSSION The echo state network provides a robust and scalable feature space representation. We transfer this learning representation to a recurrent reinforcement learning agent that learns to target a position directly. It is possible to use the echo state network as a reinforcement learning agent itself, as shown by Szita et al. [18]. However, the approach may lead to undesired behaviour in a trading context. Speciﬁcally, they use an echo state network to estimate the state-action value function of a 8 VOLUME X, 2022 Borrageiro et al.: The Recurrent Reinforcement Learning Crypto Agent temporal difference learning sarsa model [44, 5]. This value function takes the form qπ(s,a ) = Eπ{rt|st,at}, where the expected returnrt depends on the transition to state st having taken actionat under policyπ. Sarsa estimates this value function sequentially as q(st,at) = (1−η)q(st,at)+η[rt+1+γq(st+1,at+1)], (13) where 0<γ ≤ 1 is a discount factor for multi-step rewards, and η > 0 is a learning rate. Equation 13 shows that the state transition reward is passed back to the starting state. In activities such as maze traversal or board games, being aware of the reward associated with multiple steps or decisions and passing that reward back to the current position is of great value. However, in the context of trading, where the value functionq(st,at) represents the value of a position st, with the possibility of switching or remaining in the same position denoted by action at, we will on occasion ﬁnd that a larger utility is assigned to the wrong state. For example, imagine the current state isst = 0, that is, the model has no position. Now we observe a large positive price jump leading to large positive rewardrt+1≫ 0. Value function estimators such as equation 13 would pass the state transition rewardrt+1 to the initial state q(st = 0,at = 0) . At the next iteration, with probabilityPr (1−ϵ),st+1 = 0 asq(st+1 = 0,at+1 = 0) is the highest value function. However, if the position is zero, the model cannot hope to earn a proﬁt. Even if one excludes the zero state, then there is still the possibility of observing this problem for a reversal strategy with possible states s = {−1, 1}. Direct reinforcement, as we describe it, does not incur these problems and we have, through transfer learning, improved upon the earlier work in direct reinforcement [7, 30] and extended the work of Borrageiro et al. [3]. V . LIMITATIONS OF THE WORK As previously discussed in subsection III-B1, the various echo state network parameters are initialised at random. Figure 4 and table 2 measure the impact of this randomness on test set performance. We run a Monte Carlo simulation of 250 trials, where the network parameterisation is ﬁxed to θ ={nhidden = 100,nback = 10}. The information ratios in this set of simulations vary from 0.219 to 1.763, with total returns between 65.4% and 502.1%. Whilst this does show evidence of a reasonable variability of returns, table 2 also shows that 95% of the mean information ratios vary between 1.1 and 1.2 and 95% of the mean total returns vary between 289% and 307%. Thus the overall picture remains unchanged, that being that the transfer learning crypto agent has successfully learnt how to trade this instrument during the test period. Other than this acceptable sensitivity to weight initialisation, we make no assumptions that would otherwise cause our results to be violated if these assumptions were not met. FIGURE 4. Monte Carlo simulation, information ratio versus total return TABLE 2. Monte Carlo simulation, information ratio versus total return ir total return count 250 250 mean 1.160 2.977 std 0.299 0.740 min 0.219 0.654 25% 1.023 2.572 50% 1.199 3.076 75% 1.355 3.352 max 1.763 5.021 se(mean) 0.019 0.047 lb(mean) 1.123 2.886 ub(mean) 1.197 3.069 VI. CONCLUSION We demonstrate an application of online transfer learning as a digital assets trading agent. This agent uses a powerful feature space representation in the form of an echo state network, the output of which is made available to a direct, recurrent reinforcement learning agent. The agent learns to trade the XBTUSD (Bitcoin versus US Dollars) perpetual swap derivatives contract on BitMEX. It learns to trade intraday on ﬁve minutely sampled data, avoids excessive over-trading, captures a funding proﬁt and is also able to predict the direction of the market. Overall, our crypto agent realises a total return of 350%, net of transaction costs, over roughly ﬁve years, 71% of which is down to funding proﬁt. The annualised information ratio that it achieves is 1.46. REFERENCES [1] R. H. Shumway, Time series analysis and its applica- tions : with R examples, 3rd ed., ser. Springer texts in statistics. Springer, 2011. 1 [2] C. W. J. Granger and P. Newbold, “Spurious regressions in econometrics,” Journal of econometrics, vol. 2, pp. 111–120, 1974. 1 [3] G. Borrageiro, N. Firoozye, and P. Barucca, “Reinforce- ment learning for systematic fx trading,” IEEE Access, VOLUME X, 2022 9 Borrageiro et al.: The Recurrent Reinforcement Learning Crypto Agent vol. 10, pp. 5024–5036, 2022. 1, 3, 7, 9 [4] Q. Yang, Y . Zhang, W. Dai, and S. J. Pan, Transfer Learning. Cambridge University Press, 2020. 1, 2 [5] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. Cambridge, MA, USA: A Bradford Book, 2018. 1, 9 [6] H. Jaeger, “Adaptive nonlinear system identiﬁcation with echo state networks,” in NIPS, 2002. 1, 2, 6 [7] J. Moody, L. Wu, Y . Liao, and M. Saffell, “Performance functions and reinforcement learning for trading sys- tems and portfolios,” Journal of Forecasting, vol. 17, pp. 441–470, 1998. 1, 3, 4, 9 [8] M. M. Dacorogna, R. Gencay, S. Altunç, O. V . Pictet, and R. Olsen, An Introduction to High-Frequency Fi- nance. Academic Press, 2001. 1 [9] P. Zhao, S. C. H. Hoi, J. Wang, and B. Li, “Online transfer learning,” Artiﬁcial intelligence, vol. 216, pp. 76–102, 2014. 2 [10] B. K. Salvalaio and G. de Oliveira Ramos, “Self- adaptive appearance-based eye-tracking with online transfer learning,” in 2019 8th Brazilian Conference on Intelligent Systems (BRACIS). IEEE, 2019, pp. 383– 388. 2 [11] X. Wang, X. Wang, and Z. Zeng, “A novel weight update rule of online transfer learning,” in 2020 12th International Conference on Advanced Computational Intelligence (ICACI). IEEE, 2020, pp. 349–355. 2 [12] S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineer- ing, vol. 22, pp. 1345–1359, 2010. 2 [13] M. Lukosevicius, H. Jaeger, and B. Schrauwen, “Reser- voir computing trends,” KI - Künstliche Intelligenz, vol. 26, pp. 365–371, 2012. 2 [14] M. Lukosevicius and H. Jaeger, “Reservoir computing approaches to recurrent neural network training,” Com- put. Sci. Rev., vol. 3, pp. 127–149, 2009. 2 [15] J. M. Murray, “Local online learning in recurrent net- works with random feedback,” eLife, vol. 8, 2019. 2 [16] W. Maass and H. Markram, “On the computational power of circuits of spiking neurons,” J. Comput. Syst. Sci., vol. 69, pp. 593–616, 2004. 2 [17] A. Samadi, T. P. Lillicrap, and D. B. Tweed, “Deep learning with dynamic spiking neurons and ﬁxed feed- back weights,” Neural Computation, vol. 29, pp. 578– 602, 2017. 2 [18] I. Szita, V . Gyenes, and A. L ˝orincz, “Reinforcement learning with echo state networks,” in Artiﬁcial Neu- ral Networks – ICANN 2006. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 830–839. 2, 6, 8 [19] G. J. Gordon, “Reinforcement learning with function approximation converges to a region,” in NIPS, 2000. 2 [20] G. Shi, D. Liu, and Q. Wei, “Echo state network-based q-learning method for optimal battery control of ofﬁces combined with renewable energy,” Iet Control Theory and Applications, vol. 11, pp. 915–922, 2017. 2 [21] Q. Chen, Y . Jin, and Y . Song, “Fault-tolerant adaptive tracking control of euler-lagrange systems – an echo state network approach driven by reinforcement learn- ing,” Neurocomputing, 2021. 2 [22] M. Lukoševi ˇcius, A Practical Guide to Applying Echo State Networks. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 659–686. 3 [23] C. M. Bishop, “Neural networks and their applications,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments, vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 1803–1832, 1994. 3 [24] R. J. Williams, “Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning,” Machine Learning, vol. 8, 5 1992. 3 [25] M. Sugiyama, Statistical Reinforcement Learning, 1st ed. CRC Press, 2015. 3 [26] W. F. Sharpe, “Mutual fund performance,” The Journal of Business, vol. 39, 1 1966. 3 [27] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams, “Learning internal representations by error propaga- tion,” California Univ San Diego La Jolla Inst for Cog- nitive Science, Tech. Rep., 1985. 4 [28] P. Werbos, “Backpropagation through time: what it does and how to do it,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 78, no. 10, pp. 1550–1560, 1990. 4 [29] R. J. Williams and D. Zipser, “A learning algorithm for continually running fully recurrent neural networks,” Neural computation, vol. 1, pp. 270–280, 1989. 4 [30] C. Gold, “Fx trading via recurrent reinforcement learn- ing,” in IEEE. IEEE, 2003. 4, 9 [31] Z. Jiang and J. Liang, “Cryptocurrency portfolio man- agement with deep reinforcement learning,” in 2017 Intelligent Systems Conference (IntelliSys), 2017, pp. 905–913. 4 [32] K. Lee, S. Ulkuatam, P. Beling, and W. Scherer, “Gener- ating synthetic bitcoin transactions and predicting mar- ket price movement via inverse reinforcement learning and agent-based modeling,” Journal of Artiﬁcial Soci- eties and Social Simulation, vol. 21, no. 3, p. 5, 2018. 4 [33] S. Russell, “Learning agents for uncertain environ- ments,” in Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual Con- ference on Computational Learning Theory, ser. COLT’ 98. New York, NY , USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 1998, p. 101–103. 4 [34] G. Lucarelli and M. Borrotti, “A deep reinforcement learning approach for automated cryptocurrency trad- ing,” in Artiﬁcial Intelligence Applications and Innova- tions. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp. 247–258. 4 [35] V . Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou, D. Wierstra, and M. Riedmiller, “Play- ing atari with deep reinforcement learning,” 2013. 4 [36] Z. Wang, T. Schaul, M. Hessel, H. Van Hasselt, M. Lanctot, and N. De Freitas, “Dueling network archi- tectures for deep reinforcement learning,” in Proceed- 10 VOLUME X, 2022 Borrageiro et al.: The Recurrent Reinforcement Learning Crypto Agent ings of the 33rd International Conference on Interna- tional Conference on Machine Learning - V olume 48, ser. ICML’16. JMLR.org, 2016, p. 1995–2003. 4 [37] Y . Zhang, P. Zhao, Q. Wu, B. Li, J. Huang, and M. Tan, “Cost-sensitive portfolio selection via deep reinforce- ment learning,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 236–248, 2022. 5 [38] I. B. Yildiz, H. Jaeger, and S. J. Kiebel, “Re-visiting the echo state property,” Neural networks : the ofﬁcial journal of the International Neural Network Society, vol. 35, pp. 1–9, 2012. 6 [39] H. Jaeger, “Using conceptors to manage neural long- term memories for temporal patterns,” Journal of Ma- chine Learning Research, vol. 18, pp. 13:1–13:43, 2017. 6 [40] W. F. Sharpe, “Expected utility asset allocation,” Finan- cial Analysts Journal, vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 18–30, 2007. 7 [41] R. C. G. R. N. Kahn, Advances in Active Portfolio Man- agement: New Developments in Quantitative Investing. McGraw-Hill Education, 2019. 7 [42] R. J. Williams, “Training recurrent networks using the extended kalman ﬁlter,” in [Proceedings 1992] IJCNN International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, vol. 4, 1992, pp. 241–246 vol.4. 7 [43] S. Haykin, Kalman ﬁltering and neural networks. Wi- ley, 2001. 7 [44] R. S. Sutton, “Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differences,” Machine learning, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 9–44, 1988. 9 GABRIEL BORRAGEIRO is a PhD student at the University College London, in the Computer Science department and part of the Financial Com- puting Group. His research interests include online learning, reinforcement learning and neural net- works. He obtained his executive MBA from Cass Business School, City University, London, and a computer science diploma from Damelin College, South Africa. Gabriel is employed as a quantitative researcher at BlueCrest Capital. NICK FIROOZYE is currently Honorary Reader, Computational Finance, in the Computer Science department at University College London and also part of the Financial Computing Group. He ob- tained his PhD and MS in mathematics at New York University and a BS in mathematics at Har- vey Mudd College. He also works for Exos Bank in the systematic rates trading business. PAOLO BARUCCA is a lecturer at University College London, Computer Science department and also part of the Financial Computing Group. He is also editor in chief of the science dissemina- tion project, La Scienza Coatta and scientiﬁc of- ﬁcer of the Blockchain Education Network. Paolo received his PhD in theoretical and mathematical physics from Sapienza Universita di Roma. VOLUME X, 2022 11