NEURAL NETWORK AND ORDER FLOW, T ECHNICAL ANALYSIS : PREDICTING SHORT -TERM DIRECTION OF FUTURES CONTRACT Yiyang Zheng Department Of Engineering Shanghai University Shanghai, China zhengyiyang@shu.edu.cn ABSTRACT Predictions of short-term directional movement of the futures contract can be challenging as its pricing is often based on multiple complex dynamic conditions. This work presents a method for predicting the short-term directional movement of an underlying futures contract. We engineered a set of features from technical analysis, order ﬂow, and order-book data. Then, Tabnet, a deep learning neural network, is trained using these features. We train our model on the Silver Futures Contract listed on Shanghai Futures Exchange and achieve an accuracy of 0.601 on predicting the directional change during selected period. Keywords machine learning· neural network· market microstructure 1 Introduction Like the equity market, the derivatives market is often dynamic and volatile. Predicting the trend of a futures contract can be a challenging task since its pricing is often based on multiple complex dynamic conditions. Even though some critics claiming [1] it is impossible to predict the ﬁnancial market efﬁciently, researchers have demonstrated that complex algorithms may create predictive models that can out-perform random guessing consistently. Numerous methods have been proposed in this ﬁeld. The more traditional method, including using time-series models like autoregressive integrated moving average(ARIMA), has been proposed in papers [2] [3]. Those methods tend to over-ﬁt on past data and yield a poor result on future unseen data. Nabipour et al. [ 4] used various technical indicators to model the asset’s return. In recent years, neural networks have been increasingly popular. Moghaddam et al. [ 5] comparatively study the use of Multilayer Perceptron(MLP) and Recurrent Neural Networks ( RNN ) on some unique features. Some alternative methods include using news reports and social media are also suggested. Li et al. suggest using news sentiment to model the future movements of stocks [6], while [7][8][9] suggesting using sentiment analysis and language processing to generate predictive features. In this work, we present a method to predict the short-term directional movement of the futures contract. Our method involves a model that utilizes both technical analysis features and order-ﬂow features that are generally applicable for both equities and derivatives and other features speciﬁcally designed for the futures contract. The main contributions of our work are: (1) We generate features from the order book and from times and trades. (2) We ensemble conventional technical analysis features and those generated from high-frequency book depth data ; (3)We apply ﬁlters to detect institutional traders from retail traders (4) The modeling of our features involved Purged Group Time Series Split in contrast to traditional cross-validation to prevent target leakages and over-ﬁtting (5)as a result, the accuracy of our model is not state-of-the-art, but the prediction accuracy is relatively consistent across timespan regardless of market condition, which is overlooked in numerous of other works. (6) We can thus produce a high return on selected timespan with a basic trading strategy. arXiv:2203.12457v1 [q-fin.ST] 23 Feb 2022 Neural Network and Order Flow, Technical Analysis: Predicting short-term direction of futures contract The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: In the next section, we overview the problem and target construction. Then in section 3,4, we provide a method to generate features from the raw exchange data feed. Section 4 describes the design detail and section 5 focuses on training the model. In section 6, we provide a simple trading strategy and provide detailed performance statics of our model. Finally, in section 7, we conclude the research and identify a few possible directions for future research. 2 Problem Statement We propose a general-applicable method to capture the trend of futures contracts through order-ﬂow and technical analysis. To demonstrate and validate our method, we select Silver Futures Contract listed on Shanghai Futures Exchange, one of the most liquidated precious metal futures contracts in the world, with more than 30 billion yuan traded every session Table 1 compare this contract annual volume with similar contracts listed on other exchange. Table 1: Comparison in Annual V olume of Silver Contract Across Exchange Exchange Annual Volume of 2021(In thousands of Contracts) Shanghai Futures Exchange Silver 231,457[10] COMEX Silver 26,126[11] We selected the near-month silver contract listed on Shanghai Futures Exchange from January 1 st,2018, to Dec 31st,2021. This time frame reﬂects various market conditions, including a lengthy, less-volatile timeframe and increased volatility during the coronavirus pandemic, thus reﬂecting a general market condition and preventing over-ﬁtting. Fig 1 shows the price of the front-month futures contract during the period. Shanghai Futures exchange does not offer an order-based market feed but instead provides a 500-millisecond snapshot of trades through a propriety protocol, providing order-book, aggregated trade, and open interest of the contract. We utilized an unﬁltered feed to create features. Our goal is to predict the direction of movement on this particular contract in the next 15 minutes. To make our target more stable, we apply 2 minutes moving window and calculate VW AP to smooth the ultra-short-term spike, as deﬁned below: Pα (t) =⟨Psession∗Vsession⟩ ⟨Psession⟩ wherePα (t) represents rolling average of 120 snapshots ( 2 minutes) Then, we calculate the log return based on this smooth price: Rα(t) = log(Pα(t + 15) Pα(t) ) Finally, we calculate Targetα(t) based onRα(t) . Targetα(t) = {1, P α (t)> 0, 0, P α (t)< 0 Since it is unlikely that volume-weighted price remained unchanged during the 15 minutes timespan, we ignore target whereRα(t) = 0 . Another consideration is the data-point with minimum movement . Rα(t) with only a few tick changes can create noisy training targets and are not practical to utilize in actual market conditions. To resolve this, we remove those data-point|Rα(t)|<θ In our caseθ = 0.001. The total samples decreased from 38 ,294 ,652 before processing to 24 ,347, 353. As shown in Table 2, the labels are evenly distributed across two labels during the time frame. 2 Neural Network and Order Flow, Technical Analysis: Predicting short-term direction of futures contract Figure 1: Silver Price of Front-Month Contract during January 1 st,2018 to Dec 31 st,2021 Table 2: Target Distribution Target Sample Percentage(%) 1 12 ,389 ,465 50.88 0 11 ,957 ,888 49.11 3 Data and pre-processing 3.1 Market Data Structure Shanghai Futures Exchange provides a snapshot-based order feed using CTP protocol. The feed aggregates the change during the last 500 milliseconds. Each feed contain multiple ﬁelds, including the trade and order-book information; we utilize the following ﬁelds: 1. pricei Last traded price at snapshot i 2. volumei Accumulated volume of the futures contract at snapshot i 3. openInteresti Open Interest of the futures contract at snapshot i 4. sizebidn i Size of n -th level of order-book at snapshot i on bid-side 5. sizeaskn i Size of n -th level of order-book at snapshot i on ask-side 3 Neural Network and Order Flow, Technical Analysis: Predicting short-term direction of futures contract 6. pricebidn i Quoted price ofn-th level of order-book at snapshot i on bid-side 7. priceaskn i Quoted price ofn-th level of order-book at snapshot i on ask-side 3.2 Market Data Pre-processing From the original market feed, we calculate several features for the convenience of further feature engineering. Those features are not directly used in our ﬁnal model. 3.2.1 Volume Change and Open Interest Change • Open Interest and Volume change We calculate the Open Position Change for the snapshot i using. openInterestChgi = openInteresti− openInteresti− 1 • Volume Change We calculate the V olume Change for the snapshoti using. volumeChgi = volumei− volumei− 1 3.2.2 Open Contracts and Close Contracts Since we already calculate the change of open interest and volume and for all timestamp,for a given contract,we can calculate the contracts opened and closed at snapshot i using: { openContracti +closeContracti =volumeChgi openContracti−closeContracti =openIntrestChgi (1) • Open Contracts openContracti = openInteresti + volumei 2 • Close Contracts closeContracti = openInteresti − volumei 3.2.3 Snapshot Type We catalog snapshot i into several types based on directional change of price and open interest, using Figure 2: Figure 2: Snapshot Classiﬁcation 4 Neural Network and Order Flow, Technical Analysis: Predicting short-term direction of futures contract • Type 1 Type 1 snapshot indicates that the snapshot price is higher than the previous snapshot and open interest increase, presumably caused by market participants taking a long position increasing their position. • Type 2 Type 2 snapshot indicates that the snapshot price islower than the previous snapshot and open interestincrease, presumably caused by market participants taking a short position increasing their position. • Type 3 Type 3 snapshot indicates that the snapshot price is higher than the previous snapshot and open interest decrease, presumably caused by market participants taking a long position decreasing their position. • Type 4 Type 4 snapshot indicates that the snapshot price is lower than the previous one, and open interest decreases, presumably caused by market participants taking a short position and decreasing their position. 3.2.4 OHLCV(Open-High-Low-Close-Volume) Bar An OHLCV chart is a bar chart that shows open, high, low, and closing prices and overall volume for each period. We aggregate the bar every 1 minute (120 snapshots) in our usage. OHLCV charts are helpful since they show the data change over a period, and we can generate technical analysis features utilized by the model. 4 Feature Engineering This section provides details of the generation of features utilized in our model. 4.1 Technical Analysis Feature Technical analysis, unlike fundamental analysis, attempts to ﬁnd the pattern of price and volume, modeling supply and demand to predict price movement. Moreover, technical analysis can generate short-term trading signals. There is an extensive range of technical analyses; we utilize some of them using a 1-minute OHLCV bar generated from snapshot as described in section 3.2.4. We use all the indicators with parameters speciﬁed in the Table 3, Table 4, Table 5, Table 6 as features. Table 3: Technical Analysis V olume Indicators Indicator Parameter Acc. Dist. Index Indicator NoneOn Balance V olume Indicator Chaikin Money Flow Indicator Force Index Indicator window = 13 Ease Of Movement Indicator window = 14 V olume Price Trend Indicator window = 14 5 Neural Network and Order Flow, Technical Analysis: Predicting short-term direction of futures contract Table 4: Technical Analysis V olatility Indicators Base Indicator Parameter Bolling Bands P−Band window = 20,windowsdev = 2 W−Band Higher−Band Middle−Band Lower−Band Keltner Channel W−Band window = 10 C−Band P−Band Higher−Band Lower−Band Donchian Channel C−Band window = 20 P−Band W−Band Lower−Band Middle−Band Table 5: Technical Analysis Trend Indicators Base Indicator Parameter MACD MACD windowslow = 26,windowfast = 12,windowsign = 9MACDSignal MACDDiff SMA SMAFast window = 16 SMASlow window = 32 Table 6: Technical Analysis Momentum Indicators Base Indicator Parameter StochRSI StochRSI windowslow = 26,windowfast = 12,windowsign = 9StochRSIK StochRSID 4.2 Order Book Features Order book refers to an electronic list of buy and sell orders for a speciﬁc security or ﬁnancial instrument. The order book provides detailed information about the sale–buy strength. • Bid-Ask Spread Accumulated spread at order-book level k at snapshot i ,using : AccumulatedSpreadk i = k∑ n = 1 priceaskn i − pricebidn i Then, a rolling window is applied to represent order-book overall statics over the last m minutes(120*m snapshots). AverageAccumulatedSpreadk i = 1 120m i∑ i−120m AccumulatedSpreadk i For each snapshot , we calculate accumulated spread of top 5 levels (k=1,2,3,4,5) ,and rolling period m of 5,10,15,30 minutes thus generating 20 features 6 Neural Network and Order Flow, Technical Analysis: Predicting short-term direction of futures contract • V olume imbalance Accumulated spread at order-book level k at snapshot i ,using : AccumulatedVolumeImbalancek i = k∑ n = 1 sizeaskn i − sizebidn i Then, a rolling window is applied to represent order-book overall statics over the last m minutes(120m snapshots). AverageAccumulatedVolumeImbalancek i = 1 120m i∑ i−120m VolumeImbalancek i For each snapshot , we calculate volume imbalance of top 5 levels (k=1,2,3,4,5) ,and rolling period m of 5,10,15,30 minutes thus generating 20 features . 4.3 Order Type Features As speciﬁed in section 3.2.3 ,we classify the snapshot into 4 catalogues.We generate features according to the percentage of each type during the last m minutes(120*m snapshots). SnapshotTypePctk i = 1 |S| ∑ snapshot∈S 1SnapshotType =k(snapshot) Wwhere S represents a set of snapshots from i -120m to i . Further, we want to ﬁlter snapshots where larger orders take place,presumably placed by institution investors,thus,we have : SnapshotTypePctFilterk i = 1 |S| ∑ snapshot∈S 1SnapshotType =k(snapshot) where S represents a set of snapshots from i -120m to i, excluding snapshots with volume change more minor than10 contracts. We calculate all four snapshot types with a rolling period m of 5,10,15,30 minutes for each snapshot, thus generating 32 features. 4.4 Order Flow features In session 3.2.1 and 3.2.2, we derived data such as opened contracts and closed contracts from original snapshots. Utilizing those data, we calculate the following features : • Open Close Percentage Percentage of closed contracts in ratio to opened contracts. openClosePcti = ∑i k =i− 120m openContractk ∑i k =i− 120m closeContractk • Open Interest Change Percentage of open interest change. openInterestChgi = openInteresti openInteresti−120m We calculate a rolling period m of 5,10,15,30 minutes for each snapshot, thus generating 8 features. 4.5 Correlation Analysis We test the correlations between the features and the target before building the model,we perform a Pearson Correlation [12] between each feature and target,as deﬁned below: r = ∑n i=1(xi− ¯x)(yi− ¯y)√∑n i=1(xi− ¯x)2 √∑n i=1(yi− ¯y)2 7 Neural Network and Order Flow, Technical Analysis: Predicting short-term direction of futures contract where x is the feature and y is the target The correlation distribution of all the features is shown in Table 7 Table 7: Feature Correlation Distribution Metrics Value mean 0.017307 std 0.080738 max 0.204487 25% 0.067418 50% 0.015707 75% 0.019624 min -0.02934 5 Model 5.1 Model Selection We utilize TabNet as our model. TabNet uses sequential attention to choose which features to reason from at each decision step, enabling interpretability and more efﬁcient learning as the learning capacity is used for the most salient features. [13] 5.2 Metric We utilize AUC-ROC (Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristics ) as our metric.AUC - ROC curve is a performance measurement for the classiﬁcation problems at various threshold settings. ROC represents a probability curve, and AUC represents separability. Our train data may contain a period of unbalanced labels, so using only accuracy or recall score is inappropriate. To calculate AUC-ROC, we ﬁrst calculate true/false positive and true/false negative instances. A true positive occurs when the model correctly predicts the positive class. Similarly, a true negative is an outcome where the model correctly predicts the negative class. A false positive occurs when the model incorrectly predicts the positive class. Moreover, a false negative is when the model incorrectly predicts the negative class. Then,we calculate speciﬁcity and sensitivity using the formula: Specificity = TrueNegatives TrueNegatives + FalsePositives Sensitivity = TruePositives TruePositives + FalseNegatives Finally, we draw the curve using different thresholds and calculate the area under Sensitivity and 1 - Speciﬁcity. 5.3 Hyper-parameter Hyper-parameters are a set of parameters that control the learning process and model structure. We do not speciﬁcally search for optimal hyper-parameter as it may lead to over-ﬁtting, but we specify some parameters to control the width and depth of the model. Table 8: Model Hyper-parameter Parameters Value Description nd 32 Width of the decision prediction layer. na 32 Width of the attention embedding for each mask. nsteps 5 Number of steps in the architecture 8 Neural Network and Order Flow, Technical Analysis: Predicting short-term direction of futures contract 5.4 Cross-Validation Cross-validation is a method that splits the dataset into different parts and then uses a different fraction for training and validation. Cross-validation can effectively protect overﬁtting, speciﬁcally over a small or diverse dataset. Despite having multi-million rows of the dataset, the future data tend to be volatile in our instance. Thus, a single model will easily overﬁt the training dataset. However, the conventional cross-validation method carries the risk of overﬁtting. Since each of our training instances is not isolated but a time-series, without a gap, some features having some lag or window calculations in them may leak unseen information. Thus, we must introduce a gap to prevent the risk of leaking information. We utilize Purged Group Time Series Split for our model. In Purged Group Time Series Split, test indices must be higher than before in each split without any shufﬂing. A gap is introduced between the training and validation datasets to deal with lagged features. We split the dataset into ﬁve folds. A demonstration of the split is provided below: Figure 3: Demonstration of Purged Group Time Series Split 5.5 Training We train the model on the dataset with dates ranging from Jan 1st,2018 to Aug 31st,2021, with a sample size of 21,642,091. We perform a semi-supervised pre-training before training. The training curve of the model is shown below. Figure 4: Pre-Training and Training Curve 6 Model Validation and Backtesting In this section, we ﬁrst validate the model on a test dataset, then with a basic trading strategy, we examine the model’s proﬁtability. 6.1 Validation Method We validate the model on the dataset with dates ranging from Sept 1st,2021, to Dec 1st,2021. The label distribution of the test dataset is shown in Table 9. 9 Neural Network and Order Flow, Technical Analysis: Predicting short-term direction of futures contract Table 9: Target Distribution Target Samples Percentage(%) 1 695 ,200 49.35 0 713 ,298 50.64 Since we perform a Cross-validation on the dataset , we have a total of 5 models , we ﬁrst individually predict the probability of target to be 1 for each model , then ensemble the result using: pred = ∑5 i = 1 model_predi − max(model_pred)− min(model_pred) 3 We then convert the label predicted using a threshold of 0.5. 6.2 Validation Result We compare the label predicted with the ground truth. The confusion matrix is shown below : Figure 5: Confusion Matrix We further calculate some metrics on the prediction result. Table 10: Performance Metrics Metrics Value Accuracy 0.601339 Recall 0.590069 Pearson Correlation 0.207273 6.3 Backtesting We perform backtesting to test the proﬁtability of our model. To simplify our simulation, we make the following assumptions: • We always hold either 100% cash or 100% futures contract. • We ignore the fee charged by the exchange and broker. 10 Neural Network and Order Flow, Technical Analysis: Predicting short-term direction of futures contract • We assume all our orders are ﬁlled precisely at the last traded price. • We utilize the minimum margin ratio (10%) required by the exchange. Algorithm 1 Trading strategy Input: Model predictions probabilities ˆy1,..., ˆyT , account holding statePX , thresholdγ≥ 0 PX←None γ← 0.25 fort = 1,...,T do ⊿ Loop over each 15 minute interval ifPX =None then ⊿ Currently holding no position if ˆyt≥ (0.5 +γ) then Open Long Position ⊿ We only open position if the prediction is conﬁdent enough. PX←Long end if if ˆyt≤ (0.5−γ) then Open Short Position PX←Short end if else ⊿ Currently holding position if PX = Long AND ˆyt≤ 0.5 then ⊿ The prediction has reversed,we close position. Close Long Position PX←None end if if PX = Short AND ˆyt≥ 0.5 then Close Short Position PX←None end if end if end for We simulate the trading using the same dataset used for validation and the Algorithm 1. The total return and price change during the period is shown in ﬁgure 6. Figure 6: Strategy Return and Price of the Contract Despite the futures contract price remaining nearly unchanged during the period, our model can still generate a relatively decent return during the period. We further calculate some common metrics to measure the model’s performance. 11 Neural Network and Order Flow, Technical Analysis: Predicting short-term direction of futures contract Table 11: Performance of the strategy Metrics Value Max drawdown 24.08% Annualized Sharpe Ratio 1.2054 Total Return 20.48% The model can achieve a decent return, but the daily performance tends to be volatile, which may be attributed to the high margin ratio we used in the simulation. 7 Conclusion and Discussion This paper discussed a neural network model using multiple features generated from conventional technical analysis and market micro-structure like order ﬂow and order book. We train these models using a speciﬁed cross-validation method. When ensembled, the model is proﬁtable even with a basic trading strategy. Thus, we conclude that this method is sufﬁcient to gain insight into the short-term directional change of the futures market. 7.1 Possible Extensions • Feature Engineering We may utilize alternative data, such as news and social media data, to generate features like sentiment scores. • Model We may ensemble a non-neural-network model, for instance, a tree-based model with a neural network model to gain better accuracy. References [1] Jaydip Sen and S Basar. A study of the indian metal sector using time series decomposition-based approach. Book Chapter, (8):223–255, 2017. [2] Manish Kumar and M Thenmozhi. Forecasting stock index returns using arima-svm, arima-ann, and arima-random forest hybrid models. International Journal of Banking, Accounting and Finance, 5(3):284–308, 2014. [3] Yi Xiao, Jin Xiao, John Liu, and Shouyang Wang. A multiscale modeling approach incorporating arima and anns for ﬁnancial market volatility forecasting. Journal of Systems Science and Complexity, 27(1):225–236, 2014. [4] Mojtaba Nabipour, Pooyan Nayyeri, Hamed Jabani, Amir Mosavi, Ely Salwana, et al. Deep learning for stock market prediction. Entropy, 22(8):840, 2020. [5] Amin Hedayati Moghaddam, Moein Hedayati Moghaddam, and Morteza Esfandyari. Stock market index prediction using artiﬁcial neural network. Journal of Economics, Finance and Administrative Science, 21(41):89– 93, 2016. [6] Jintao Liu, Hongfei Lin, Liang Yang, Bo Xu, and Dongzhen Wen. Multi-element hierarchical attention capsule network for stock prediction. IEEE Access, 8:143114–143123, 2020. [7] KiHwan Nam and NohYoon Seong. Financial news-based stock movement prediction using causality analysis of inﬂuence in the korean stock market. Decision Support Systems, 117:100–112, 2019. [8] Sidra Mehtab and Jaydip Sen. Stock price prediction using cnn and lstm-based deep learning models. In 2020 International Conference on Decision Aid Sciences and Application (DASA), pages 447–453. IEEE, 2020. [9] Sidra Mehtab, Jaydip Sen, and Abhishek Dutta. Stock price prediction using machine learning and lstm-based deep learning models. In Symposium on Machine Learning and Metaheuristics Algorithms, and Applications, pages 88–106. Springer, 2020. [10] Shanghai futures exchange volume report. http://www.shfe.com.cn/statements/dataview.html? paramid=yearstat. Accessed: 2022-01-15. [11] Cme group volume report. https://www.cmegroup.com/daily_bulletin/monthly_volume/Web_ Volume_Report_NYMEX_COMEX.pdf. Accessed: 2022-01-15. [12] Jacob Benesty, Jingdong Chen, Yiteng Huang, and Israel Cohen. Pearson correlation coefﬁcient. In Noise reduction in speech processing, pages 1–4. Springer, 2009. 12 Neural Network and Order Flow, Technical Analysis: Predicting short-term direction of futures contract [13] Sercan O Arık and Tomas Pﬁster. Tabnet: Attentive interpretable tabular learning. arXiv, 2020. 13