Do price trajectory data increase the eﬃciency of market impact estimation? Fengpei Li ∗1, Vitalii Ihnatiuk 2,3, Yu Chen 1, Jiahe Lin 1, Ryan Kinnear 3, Anderson Schneider1, Yuriy Nevmyvaka1, and Henry Lam 5 1Machine Learning Research, Morgan Stanley 2Quantitative Research, Morgan Stanley 3Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Waterloo 4Department of Economics, Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv 5Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University Abstract Market impact is an important problem faced by large institutional investors and active market par- ticipants. In this paper, we rigorously investigate whether price trajectory data from the metaorder increases the eﬃciency of estimation, from the view of the Fisher information, which is directly related to the asymptotic eﬃciency of statistical estimation. We show that, for popular market impact models, estimation methods based on partial price trajectory data, especially those containing early trade prices, can outperform established estimation methods (e.g., VWAP-based) asymptotically. We discuss theo- retical and empirical implications of such phenomenon, and how they could be readily incorporated into practice. 1 Introduction Market impact is a crucial feature of the market microstructure faced by large traders, and it manifest itself through the adverse eﬀect on the price of the underlying asset generated from the execution of an order. In other words, upon completion of the trade, aside from direct costs (i.e., commissions/fees), slippage from eﬀective bid-ask spread or delay/timing risk, investors are also subject to the transaction cost generated from the price impact of their own actions [Robert et al., 2012]. For example, a trader who needs to liquidate a large number of shares will take liquidity from the Limit-Order Book (LOB) and push the price down, resulting in a implementation shortfall (see [Perold, 1988]) or liquidation cost (see [Gatheral and Schied, 2013]), i.e. the diﬀerence between the realized revenue and the initial asset value. Besides the short-term correlation between price changes and trades, or the statistical eﬀect of order ﬂow ﬂuctuations (see [Bouchaud, 2010]), one notable explanation for this dynamics of market impact relates to the reveal of new, private information through trades, which dates back to the seminal work of [Kyle, 1985]. As shown in [Kyle, 1985], for an investor with private information, to minimize execution cost or the revelation of information, the optimal strategy is to trade incrementally through time. In fact, in modern electronic markets, a decision to trade a large volume (i.e., the full order, also referred to as metaorder) is typically implemented by a sequence of incremental executions of the smaller orders (referred to as child orders) over a scheduled time window. As discussed in [Zarinelli et al., 2015, Curato et al., 2017], the optimal way to split metaorders depends on the cost criterion and the speciﬁc market impact model. The functional form of the price impact along with its corresponding parameters critically characterize these market impact models. First, a large fraction of the market microstructure literature is dedicated ∗Corresponding author. Email: fengpei.li@mogranstanley.com 1 arXiv:2205.13423v3 [q-fin.TR] 30 Mar 2023 to expressing the optimal execution strategies under diﬀerent risk criteria as a functional of the model parameters (analytically [Gatheral et al., 2012, Adrian et al., 2020] or implicitly [Dang, 2017, Curato et al., 2017]). Moreover, the functional forms/parameters also determine the viability/stability of a market impact model, as models with certain functional forms/parameters admit diﬀerent types of price manipulation strategies (see [Huberman and Stanzl, 2004, Alfonsi et al., 2012, Gatheral and Schied, 2013]) which potentially lead to risky/unstable trading behavior and mathematically preclude the existence of unique optimal execution strategies [Gatheral et al., 2012]. Second, the estimation of model parameters has important implications in explaining and understanding various stylized facts/empirical ﬁndings including the square-root impact law ([Grinold and Kahn, 2000, Bucci et al., 2019]), the logarithmic dependence in market impact surface ([Zarinelli et al., 2015]), the power law decay ([Bouchaud et al., 2003, Gatheral, 2010]) and so on. Finally, the design of trading strategies that minimize execution cost, as well as pre-trade analytic software that delivers a reliable pre-trade estimate of the expected trade cost, relies crucially on an accurate and eﬃcient estimation of the model parameters. Indeed, following the prevalence of automated trading algorithms, both of the above have become standard considerations for active market participants, especially large institutional investors. Despite its theoretical importance in market microstructure literature and its practical importance among institutional traders, there are relatively few studies (both empirically and, to a greater extent, theoretically) on the parameter estimation problem for market impact models and we aim to ﬁll this gap in this paper. One main reason is the limited access to the metaorder data for academics and practitioners, as these data are typically proprietary data of brokerage ﬁrms or funds. Consequently, most empirical studies on the market impact estimation are based on publicly available datasets, which collectively suﬀer from certain inherent drawbacks (e.g., limited information on trades being initiated by buyer vs seller, an unknown number of metaorders, unknown trading duration [Almgren et al., 2005]) and can only provide a “partial view” of the market ([Zarinelli et al., 2015]). Another possible reason is the limited consensus on the appropriate model for price impact (e.g., linear vs non-linear, permanent vs temporary, transient vs instantaneous, see [Bouchaud, 2010, Cont et al., 2014]). Notably, a few exceptions include ([Almgren et al., 2005, Moro et al., 2009, Zarinelli et al., 2015]) which conducted empirical investigations with large metaorder datasets, but the model ﬁtting procedures typically relied only on some summary statistics during the execution. For example, in [Almgren et al., 2005], the authors tried to determine the exponent of the power law functional form in price impact, for which a nonlinear least square regression is carried out with two statistics: the realized impact and the permanent impact (which we explore in detail later). In [Zarinelli et al., 2015], in order to ﬁt the temporary market impact surface, the market impact measured at the moment when the metaorder is completed was regressed on the metaorder duration and the metaorder participation rate. Moreover, it was also suggested in [Curato et al., 2017] that, as “one of the major attractions of the propagator model to practitioners”, the historical execution data on the cost of VWAP executions1 (Volume Weighted Average Price, can be seen as another summary statistics, similar to the realized impact in [Almgren et al., 2005]) can be easily used to estimate the functional forms/parameters of the instantaneous market impact function. While these summary statistics contain important information about the price trajectory during the order (e.g. cost of VWAP involves averaging of price along the trajectory), it seems uneconomical to simply discard a large part of the price trajectory data during model ﬁtting, especially considering how, from an intuitive standpoint, besides the trade cost itself, the trajectory taken by the price movement to arrive at that cost (referred to as the “master curve” shape [Lillo et al., 2003]) could potentially reveal extra information for model ﬁtting (see also [Briere et al., 2020]). For example, it has been empirically observed that the market impact of metaorders is concave with respect to the order size [Zarinelli et al., 2015, T´ oth et al., 2011], from which one might conjecture the price movements around the early stages of the trade can be especially informative for predicting the total order cost or the market impact shape. Meanwhile, for the owner of metaorder data (i.e. asset managers or brokerage ﬁrms), compared with modeling approaches based on LOB, modeling approaches based on the price dynamics would also be feasible, as the additional collection and storage of these extra price data during the life of order should generally not come at a high cost. On the other hand, it is not unusual to see ﬁnancial data intentionally discarded (due to structural noise or data corruption) for more accurate estimates. For example, it is common practice (see [A¨ ıt-Sahalia and Mykland, 2009, Zhang et al., 2005]) when estimating the volatility of an asset return process to throw away a large fraction of the high-frequency data as a way to avoid the 1To be speciﬁed in Section 2. 2 contamination of market microstructure noise (e.g., bid-ask spread). In particular, the realized volatility is typically computed by the sum of less frequently sampled squared returns, i.e. selected on time intervals much larger (i.e. 5 or 10 minutes) than the original ones where data are collected (i.e. every a couple of seconds or less), thus eﬀectively discarding a substantial portion of data. Although the bid-ask spread should not have a substantial eﬀect on the market impact model, as trades within a metaorder mostly have the same sign (i.e. a large buy program usually does not contain many sell orders) and most market impact models in the literature do not include a bid-ask spread (see detailed discussion in [Alfonsi and Schied, 2010] regarding a two-sided versus one-sided LOB model), it remains largely unclear/undiscussed whether the extra price trajectory information should beneﬁt the estimation of market impact models. In this paper, using the Fisher information, which is directly related to the asymptotic eﬃciency of statistical estimation, we investigate whether the additional price trajectory data increase the eﬃciency of market impact estimation. We compare the Fisher information matrix (FI) of diﬀerent statistical experiments constructed from the same underlying stochastic process, and quantify the relative eﬃciency of their respective maximum likelihood estimators (MLE). The validity of this approach in assessing the optimality of experimental design is rooted in the asymptotic optimality of the MLE estimator in regular parametric models among the class of regular estimators (see, e.g.,[Van der Vaart, 2000] or sections below). Speciﬁcally, among the popular existing market impact models, we compare diﬀerent estimators by their respective Fisher information matrix and observe when one information matrix would dominate another, as this implies an asymptotically smaller variance for estimating any quantity of interest under that parametric model, e.g., the impact of metaorder or the cost of execution. To ensure the broad applicability of our ﬁndings, we separately investigate two broad categories of market impact models: the Almgren-Chriss model and the propagator models, which cover a large portion of the parametric models that are currently adopted or studied. Whether the price trajectory data could increase the eﬃciency of estimation is directly related to whether the current statistic is suﬃcient. Perhaps surprisingly (or even puzzling), we observe that, even when one does not have access to the full price trajectory data, it does not take many price points at all to achieve a more eﬃcient estimation than well-established (also highly intuitive) methods, e.g., VWAP-based estimation method. For example, we show that in the Almgren-Chriss model, even substituting the realized impact data (the terminology from [Almgren et al., 2005], equivalent to the cost of VWAP) with just two price points, one in a suﬃciently early stage (within the ﬁrst quarter of trade duration) of the order and the other one at the end of the order, we would get a strictly more asymptotically eﬃcient estimation. One possible, intuitive explanation could be the concavity of the market impact function (see, e.g., [Zarinelli et al., 2015]), where two carefully chosen points can leverage information more eﬃciently than VWAP. Similar results can also be observed for the family of propagator models, except more price trajectories are typically more useful. We will explore our ﬁndings in detail in Section 3 and 4. 1.1 Related Works and Motivation 1.1.1 Market Impact Modeling As one of the central themes in quantitative ﬁnance and market microstructure literature, the modeling of market impact is of great interest to practitioners and academic researchers. There is a wide range of literature on market impact modeling for which we only give a partial review here (for a more comprehen- sive review, see e.g. [Gatheral and Schied, 2013, Zarinelli et al., 2015]). As one of the most well-known and widely adopted models on market impact models, the Almgren–Chriss model in the inﬂuential pa- pers of [Almgren and Chriss, 1999, Almgren and Chriss, 2001] quantiﬁes two distinctive components of price impact: a temporary impact induced by and aﬀecting only an individual’s ongoing trade, and a permanent impact aﬀecting all current and future trades equally. Under the Almgren–Chriss model, [Almgren, 2003] extended the analysis in [Grinold and Kahn, 2000, Loeb, 1983] and solved the optimal execution problem by framing it as a mean-variance optimization between the expected execution cost and its variance (representing the uncertainty/liquidity risk during execution). The optimal execution problem was also investigated, from an optimal control perspective, by [Bertsimas and Lo, 1998, Forsyth et al., 2012, Forsyth, 2011, Gatheral and Schied, 2011] under the geometric Brownian motion assumption for the unaﬀected stock price process, rather than the arithmetic Brownian motion (ABM) assumption in the Almgren-Chriss model. The discrete and continuous time variants of these models ([Bank and Baum, 2004, Almgren and Lorenz, 2007, Brunnermeier and Pedersen, 2005, Carlin et al., 2007, Cetin 3 et al., 2010]) are collectively termed by [Curato et al., 2017] as “ﬁrst-generation” market impact models, as opposed to the “second-generation” models ([Bouchaud et al., 2003, Bouchaud et al., 2006, Gatheral et al., 2012, Gatheral, 2010, Obizhaeva and Wang, 2013, Alfonsi et al., 2010]). The “second-generation” models, among which the propagator model is perhaps the most notable representative, postulate that the price impact should be neither permanent nor temporary, but transient, as it decays over time [Moro et al., 2009, Lehalle and Dang, 2010]. As one of the pioneering “second-generation” models, [Obizhaeva and Wang, 2013] proposed a model with linear transient price impact and exponential decay, by model- ing an exponential resilience for LOB. The model based on dynamics of the LOB was further developed by [Alfonsi et al., 2010, Alfonsi et al., 2008, Gatheral et al., 2012, Curato et al., 2017, Avellaneda and Stoikov, 2008, Bayraktar and Ludkovski, 2014, Cont et al., 2014, Gu´ eant et al., 2012], which include non-linear price impact, as well as LOB with general shape function and time-dependent resilience. On the other hand, instead of modeling the dynamics of LOB, the discrete-time and continuous-time propa- gator models developed by [Bouchaud et al., 2003, Gatheral, 2010] directly model the dynamics of price, using decay kernels to reﬂect the transient nature of the market impact. Detailed discussions on the connection and comparison between these two approaches, as well as further generalizations of propaga- tor models, can be found in [Bacry et al., 2015, Gatheral et al., 2012, Alfonsi and Schied, 2010, Donier et al., 2015, T´ oth et al., 2011, Curato et al., 2017]. Finally, aside from the aforementioned approaches focusing on the interactions between large trades and price changes, other approaches from alternative perspectives also provided many valuable insights on the price impact dynamics. For example, [Cont et al., 2014] investigates how price changes are driven by order ﬂow imbalance in the order book events (e.g., quote events); [Cardaliaguet and Lehalle, 2018] also investigates the optimal execution problem in a mean-ﬁeld game setting, where the trader strategically deals with the uncertainty in price and other market participants. 1.1.2 Stochastic Process and Asymptotic Statistical Inference In this section, we brieﬂy review some of the basic concepts from asymptotic statistical inference and discuss how they are related to our setting where the underlying price evolves as a continuous-time stochastic process. In the market impact literature (see e.g.,[Gatheral et al., 2012, Almgren and Chriss, 2001]), it is typical to assume the “unaﬀected” stock price follows an arithmetic Brownian motion (ABM). The term unaﬀected price process is used in [Gatheral et al., 2012] which refers to the price-determined market participants other than ourselves, i.e., diﬀusion excluding the drift component. As mentioned in [Almgren and Chriss, 2001], while it could be beneﬁcial to consider geometric Brownian motion (GBM) or correlation in price movements for longer investment horizons, ABM remains a suitable model for the unaﬀected stock price (no drift term or no information on the direction of movement) over the short- term horizon, and its diﬀerence with GBM in this regime is almost negligible. In fact, it was investigated in [Gatheral and Schied, 2011] that, under the Almgren-Chriss model, the cost-risk eﬃcient frontier under GBM and ABM assumption is “almost identical” and in [Almgren and Chriss, 2001] that, the improvement gained by incorporating short-term serial correlation in price movement is also small. Indeed, as spelled out in [Merton and Samuelson, 1992], most theoretical models in ﬁnance use a continuous-time diﬀusion process (or general continuous-time Markov process) driven by stochastic diﬀerential equations (SDE). However, as documented in [Grenander, 1950], the extensive literature on stochastic process “rarely touched upon” questions of inference. A notable reference for applying an asymptotic approach in statistical estimation/inference to SDE is [Bishwal, 2007], where the author established the asymptotic property of MLE using the Radon-Nikodym derivative (likelihood) when the whole continuous sample path from the SDE can be observed and sampled. Yet, in practice, the observed data can only possibly be discretely sampled in time and most estimation methods also require discrete input [A¨ ıt-Sahalia and Mykland, 2004, A¨ ıt-Sahalia, 2008]. Thus, the parameter estimation and inference problem for discretely, or sometimes non-synchronously/randomly observed diﬀusion processes (e.g., high-frequency trading) is of much more practical importance. The parameter estimation for drift parameters in diﬀusion processes based on discrete observations has been studied by a few authors (see [Bishwal, 2007] for a comprehensive review). Although a variety of estimating methods for such data exists, a large portion of such studies utilized (quasi-) likelihood- based estimation/inference [Bibby et al., 2010]. While the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) can be a natural choice, the key diﬃculty is that despite the Markovian nature of diﬀusion processes allows one to readily calculate the log-likelihood function of discretely sampled observations simply as the sum 4 of successive pairs of log-transition function, the transition densities themselves from one time point to another generally do not have any ﬁnite or known analytic forms, except in some special cases. In order to implement the eﬃcient MLE-based methods, many attempts have been made to approximate the likelihood function which leads to approximate maximum likelihood estimators (AMLE). Notably, the ground-breaking series of works in [A¨ ıt-Sahalia, 2002, A¨ ıt-Sahalia and Mykland, 2004, A¨ ıt-Sahalia, 2008] proposed asymptotic expansions of the transition density for the diﬀusion process which could be used for approximation. Following this line of work by A¨ ıt-Sahalia, various subsequent analyses and noteworthy applications have been developed (see [Li, 2013, Chang and Chen, 2011] for a review), as well as other numerical, simulation-based approaches to approximate likelihood (see, e.g., [Pedersen, 1995]). Fortunately, in market impact models, by invo the ABM assumption for the price process, one can evade the technical diﬃculty of transition density approximation for likelihood-based estimation of im- pact (i.e., drift term) because the joint distribution of discrete price observations follows a multivariate Gaussian. Within this canonical statistical model, a wide range of basic results in asymptotic inference, especially estimation for regular parametric models, are readily available. Precise deﬁnitions on regular experiments or regular parametric models can be found in [Bickel et al., 1993], which we also specify in the appendix for completeness. As termed in [Bickel et al., 1993], a regular parametric statistical exper- iment has a “nice” parameter space in θ∈ Θ⊆ RK and a density “smooth” in θ. Most importantly, a regular statistical experiment possesses a non-singular Fisher information matrix at each point θ∈ Θ. As we shall see, the relationship between MLE and Fisher information matrix plays a crucial role in our understanding of asymptotic optimality. 1.1.3 Asymptotic Optimality and Experimental Design MLE is a ubiquitous method in statistical inference and it has many desirable properties in terms of eﬃ- ciency, feasibility, and generality. In fact, it has been argued that MLE attains asymptotically optimality among the classes of regular estimators (precise deﬁnitions on regular estimators can be seen in [Van der Vaart, 2000], which we specify in the appendix for completeness. Intuitively, a regular estimator admits a considerable regularity where a small change in parameters does not change the distribution of the estimator too much.). For example (see section 7&8 in [Van der Vaart, 2000] for results stated below), in this regime, the local asymptotic normality (LAN) and Lipschitzness of log-likelihood can be used to establish the√n - convergence of the MLE estimator to the true parameter under a Gaussian distribution with the inverse of Fisher information matrix as its covariance matrix. This limiting property attained by the MLE, as shown in the H´ ajek-LeCam convolution theorem and its variant, is the “best” limiting distribution asymptotically for any regular estimator, in the sense that, it is 1) locally asymptotically minimax for any bowl-shaped loss function, i.e., non-negative function with level sets convex and sym- metric around the origin, 2) achieves the lowest possible variance (i.e., a quadratic form based on the inverse of the Fisher information matrix) for any asymptotically regular sequence of the estimator and 3) any improvement over this limit distribution can only be made on a Lebesgue null set of parameters. The asymptotic eﬃciency of MLE has also been discussed in the sense of Bahadur’s asymptotic eﬃciency or C.R.Rao’s eﬃciency (see [Ibragimov and Has’ Minskii, 2013]). A more well-known result, regarded as a simpler version of the H´ ajek-LeCam convolution theorem, is the Cram´ er-Fr´ echet-Rao information lower bound, which also establishes the asymptotic variance lower bound as the inverse of Fisher information under unbiasedness. Notice the various prerequisites one must declare before one claims the asymptotic optimality of MLE. This is not a mere technicality because, aside from the fact the optimality criterion is not singular in nature, various counter-examples exist outside the conﬁne of such conditions. For example, it is well-known that James-Stein’s shrinkage estimator ([Lehmann and Casella, 2006]) achieves strictly smaller risk for estimating the mean of a K≥ 3-dimension multivariate Gaussian with identity covariance matrix under quadratic loss when compared to the MLE (i.e., sample mean). However, the James-Stein estimator is not regular and the improvement over MLE here is for ﬁnite sample scenarios, not asymptotic ones. For a counter-example with asymptotic improvement on a Lebesgue null set, one can check the famous Hodges’ estimator [Van der Vaart, 2000]. The discussion above does not aim to debate whether one should necessarily use MLE for the esti- mation of market impact models. Rather, one can make the observation that, the asymptotic variance attained by MLE, being the “best” (or “lowest”) possible as the inverse of the Fisher information ma- trix, quantiﬁes an upper limit on how eﬃciently one can learn the parameter from a given statistical experiment. As a result, one naturally questions whether one can, by designing statistical experiments 5 that maximize Fisher information in some sense (more about it below), reduces uncertainty in parameter estimation. Indeed, this line of work is pursued extensively in experimental design literature, where the Fisher information matrix has been used to measure the amount of information gained and to design optimal experiments. For example, recently [Durant et al., 2021] uses Fisher information to optimize the experimental design in neutron reﬂectometry. In this paper, we investigate whether the statistical experiments based on price trajectory are more eﬃcient than the ones based on certain summary statis- tics. In the experimental design literature (see, e.g., [Fedorov, 2010, Whittle, 1973, Wolkenhauer et al., 2008, Chaloner and Verdinelli, 1995]), a unifying, single optimality-criteria for designing experiments has been studied. Traditional methods include maximizing expected trace, minimal eigenvalue, or de- terminant of Fisher information, corresponding to so-called A-optimality, E-optimality, or D-optimality. However, we note that in the case of estimating multiple parameters, there is an inherent diﬃculty in estimating all of them accurately, as an optimal way to estimate one particular parameter may not be optimal for the other ones, especially in the context of market impact models where the scales of param- eters (or their variances) are vastly diﬀerent. As a consequence, the meaning of the traditional criteria becomes less clear, unless the Fisher information from one experiment strictly dominates the other (i.e., their diﬀerence matrix is positive semi-deﬁnite), which we focus on showing in this paper. 1.2 Roadmap and Outline In this section we clarify the roadmap and main contributions of this paper. As mentioned in the pre- vious paragraph, although we discuss and quantify the asymptotic eﬃciency of MLE (based on which numerical simulation is conducted), the main discourse is concentrated on comparing the Fisher informa- tion of diﬀerent statistical experiments or designs. The MLE serves as natural candidate for numerical veriﬁcation and its asymptotic optimality is quantiﬁed by the Fisher information; this also justiﬁes the comparison among statistical experiments based on dominance of Fisher information. To this end, we propose an eﬃcient method—that outperforms those based on common summary statistics—for sam- pling price trajectory data from the underlying continuous-time stochastic process assumed in the market impact models, where eﬃciency is measured by the Fisher information. The sampling scheme and the analysis revolving around it do not rely on any discretization of the continuous process, although we do consider, for theoretical purpose, discretized price trajectory with ﬁxed increments approaching 0 (simi- lar to the canonical model in [A¨ ıt-Sahalia, 2002], with equal spaced discretization). In particular, in the discussion about maximizing the Fisher information, we borrow insight from the concept of suﬃciency in an idealized discretization of price trajectory. The ﬂexibility regarding sampling scheme is an impor- tant practical consideration because, although experiment design with samples along a single trajectory approaching inﬁnity could theoretically improve the Fisher information, in reality the price trajectory at a scale ﬁner than a certain threshold would not behave as a continuous-time diﬀusion process and one would practically want to design robust experiments based on fewer representative trajectory data (e.g., 3 or 4 price points). We focus our discussion in this spirit. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present the basic market impact estimation framework given price trajectory data, including technical lemmas about conditions. In Section 3, we investigate two popular market impact models: Almgren-Chriss and the family of propagator models. The main result for the Almgren-Chriss model, connecting asymptotic eﬃciency and sampling of three trajectory points, is presented in Theorem 1. The main result for propagator models is presented in Theorem 2. In sharp contrast with the Almgren-Chriss result, it states that the only suﬃcient statistic is the full trajectory data when considering general instantaneous and kernel functions. Section 3 also shows a numerical study comparing diﬀerent sampling strategies against VWAP-based estimation methods where the importance of early price data is explored. The last section concludes with discussions on some limitations of the theorems, speciﬁcally on both model misspeciﬁcation and model selection. Simulation and empirical results are placed within each section. Reviews of basic concepts, proofs, and technical conditions are left in the Appendix. 6 2 Basic Setup and Framework 2.1 Background and Model Throughout this paper, we assume the metaorder is a buy program so that we do not need to specify the sign of a trade. The case for a sell program can be derived analogously. We ﬁrst focus our discussion on the VWAP ( Volume Weighted Average Price ) execution strategy, where the trading rate ˙ xt = v is constant in volume time, where, as a standard assumption in market impact literature, time units are measured by traded volume or volume time instead of physical time. Typically volume time is scaled to adjust for diﬀerent levels of trading activity during the day, but for this paper, we do not actively distinguish the two times. Consequently, a VWAP execution strategy aims to trade equally/evenly in volume time, which implies trading at a constant proportion against the current traded volume of the stock. In this setting, VWAP strategies can be identiﬁed as strategies with a constant trading rate. See [Almgren et al., 2005, Gatheral and Schied, 2013]. Note that this is not a restriction on the order types, since we are considering the estimation rather than the optimal execution problem. In particular, diﬀerent execution strategies can be approximated by sequences of interval VWAP strategies with diﬀerent trading rates (see Remark 3.1 of [Curato et al., 2017]) and a provably reliable estimation procedure for VWAP execution provides insight for non-VAWP orders as well. Thus, the discussion for non-VWAP strategies shall be deferred to Section 3.3. We consider a continuous-time model for the evolution of the underlying stock price during the execution of a metaorder during 0 ≤t≤T : St =S0 +µθ(t,v ) +σ ∫ t 0 dWs, for 0≤t≤T (1) wheret represents time. The trade duration T and trading rate v are given beforehand, i.e., the SDE in (1) is conditional on (v,T ). For a buy program, the drift termµθ(t,v ) in (1) is initialized withµθ(0,v ) = 0 and typically a concave function int [Nadtochiy, 2022, Lillo et al., 2003] (various forms ofµθ(t,v ) will be discussed, see also [Almgren et al., 2005, Gatheral, 2010]) representing the price impact generated from trading at rate v for a period of t. Morevoer, {µθ}θ∈Θ is a family of impact functions parameterized by θ∈ Θ⊆ RK as the parameter space. Given ﬁxed ( v,T ) and θ∈ Θ,{St}t∈T is deﬁned on some ﬁltered probability space (Ω,{Ft}t∈T, Pθ) where Wt is a standard Brownian motion, σ is the volatility and T is the time span (typically T = [0,T ] for someT ). As it is typically the case for market impact models (and in practice), we only aim to calibrate functionµθ(t,v ) while we assumeσ is ﬁxed or estimated separately. An execution strategy is represented by a continuous function of time {xt}t∈T (here we write xt instead of Xt, but in general xt can also be random and adaptive w.r.t Ft) with x0 = 0 and xT =X indicating the units of shares bought by time t, whereX is the metaorder size and T is order duration measured by volume time. In general, impact function µ depends on the entire trajectory of trading rate { ˙xt}0≤t≤T , but for VWAP strategy with constant ˙xt =v, we can simplify this dependence into only one variable v. As in [Zarinelli et al., 2015], we characterize two metaorder features (or hyper-parameters): participation rate v and duration T . In particular, if VD is the daily traded volume and VM is the volume traded by the whole market during the order execution period, then we deﬁne T =VM/VD , v =X/VM, (2) where both quantities are unitless and are in [0 , 1]. Notice the deﬁnition in (1) would suggest that T·v = X/VD, making the order size X eﬀectively scaled by a factor of 1 /VD. For ease of notation, henceforth we assumeVD = 1 and treatX as has been scaled. Moreover, as we do not actively distinguish between physical time and volume time so that we retain X =Tv . Below are our two canonical classes models from (1). Example 1. As a ﬁrst example, in the Almgren-Chriss model [Almgren et al., 2005], price dynamics follow as: St =S0 +S0(g(v)t +h(v)) +S0σ ∫ t 0 dWs. where, in view of (1), one can seeµ(v,t ) =S0(g(v)t+h(v)) andσ =σS0 scaled byS0. As we shall discuss in detail, g represents the permanent impact and h the temporary impact. As S0 can be viewed as ﬁxed and execution cost is typically expressed in basis points (bps), an aﬃne transformation of Pt = St−S0 S0 7 is carried out in [Almgren et al., 2005] which reduces the dynamics of Pt to the canonical form (1) with µ(t,v ) =g(v)t +h(v) and volatility σ. Example 2. A second example under the framework of (1), is the continuous-time propagator model (see, e.g., [Bouchaud et al., 2009, Bouchaud et al., 2003, Gatheral et al., 2012, Curato et al., 2017]) developed to quantitatively reﬂect the transient nature of price impact: St =S0 + ∫ t 0 f( ˙xs)G(t−s)ds +σ ∫ t 0 dWs, (3) where f(·) is referred to as the instantaneous market impact function and G(·) as the decay kernel ([Gatheral, 2010]). For a VWAP strategy, (3) reduces to (1) with µ(t,v ) = f(v) ∫t 0 G(s)ds. We shall discuss (3) in detail in Section 3.2. 2.2 Statistical Experiment and Asymptotic Inference In the context of this paper, rather than a statistical model, we speak of a statistical experiment con- structed from discrete observations or statistics sampled from (1), as we cannot observe the whole path under the SDE. We brieﬂy review some basic concepts in the statistical experiment and asymptotic in- ference, with the technical proofs and additional related material provided in the Appendix. We ﬁrst lay out some assumptions. Assumption 1 (Model Speciﬁcation and Identiﬁability ). Θ is an open subset of RK and there exists a unique θ⋆∈ Θ as the true parameter of the SDE in (1) for all (v,T ) almost surely (a.s.). Assumption 2 (Metaorder Characteristics). The distribution of (v,T ) in metaorder data does not depend on θ and follows some exogenous distribution function Gorder. We write it as (v,T )∼Gorder with pdf (or p.m.f) gorder, i.e., Gorder(dv,dT ) =gorder(v,T )dvdT . We further assume (v,T )∼Gorder satisﬁes vL≤v≤vU and TL≤T≤TU for some constants 0<v L≤vU <∞ and 0<T L≤TU <∞ a.s. Remark 1. We make a couple of remarks on the assumptions above. We ﬁrst note that assumption 1 states (1) is well-speciﬁed within the parametric family. The discussion for model misspeciﬁcation is deferred to Section 5. The uniqueness of θ⋆ implicitly requires certain identiﬁability conditions within the parametric family. This is relatively easy to satisfy when the support of Gorder is not too narrow, because, as long as one parametrizes µθ carefully, it would then be diﬃcult to ﬁnd θ1 and θ2 such that they µθ1(t,v ) = µθ2(t,v ) for all 0 ≤t≤T and all (v,T ) pair almost surely. We shall also see later that such “suﬃcient variability” condition on Gorder is crucial in our discussion regarding the nonsingular Fisher information matrix. Such condition on Gorder is also not restrictive as the metaorder data typically contains various execution styles and order characteristics reﬂecting the demands or speciﬁcations of clients, resulting in a broad range of values for (v,T ) in practice (see the ﬁgures on the empirical distribution of ( v,T ) from real metaorder data in [Zarinelli et al., 2015]). For assumption 2, the lower and upper bounds on ( v,T ) are reasonable, as one typically does not trade too slowly or too fast. On the other hand, the assumption 2 on the exogenousity of Gorder may not be as straightforward. Indeed, although the distribution Gorder undoubtedly depends on many exogenous factors such as requests of clients or trading styles, it is not immediately clear whether one can claim Gorder has no dependence on θ. For example, it is conceivable that the traders would, over time, estimate the parameter up to some accuracy and adapt their trading strategy accordingly for all the exogenous requirements, to satisfy certain optimal trading schedules (e.g., [Almgren, 2003]), resulting in a “shift” of Gorder towards their acquired knowledge of θ. In this paper, we assume such dependence is negligible, but we do note that assumption 2 could be a source of bias and should be a subject of future deliberation. 2.2.1 Statistical Experiment & Regularity Conditions We are now ready to discuss the experiment design derived from (1). In this paper, we primarily consider statistical experiments consisting of discrete observations or summary statistics of the following form: 8 given N,M ∈ N+, let2 S ={Sti}i∈[N] and J ={ ∫t2 j t1 j Stdt}j∈[M], the statistical experiment on R2+N+M consists of the triplet, (X, BN+M,{PS∪J θ }θ∈Θ) (4) where X ≜{v,T}∪ S∪J. Here S areN price trajectory data (i.e., observations from a single trajectory) with τi ≜ ti/T ﬁxed; J are M summary statistics proportional to the average cost (or price) along a certain time window with τ1 j ≜t1 j/T,τ 2 j ≜t2 j/T ﬁxed. Such selection of 0 ≤t≤T based on ﬁxed ratio τ avoids inconsistencies in choosing t when T is random. Here B2+N+M is the Borel-sigma algebra on R2+N+M and PS∪J θ is the product measure of Gorder and the probability measure induced from the SDE in (1) conditional on (v,T ) when restricted to S∪ J. For ease of notation, we omit the upper script in PS∪J θ and simply write Pθ (and density functionpθ as well) when there is no ambiguity about the sample space in question. One can consider a sample X under (4) generated as: ﬁrst sample ( v,T )∼ Gorder, then generate a sample path based on SDE (1), and ﬁnally record S and J. Based on (1), it is straightforward to see that, conditional on ( v,T ), the sample S∪ J follows a N +M-dimensional multivariate Gaussian distribution N (µ(θ,T,v ), Σ(T )), (5) with a mean function µ(θ,T,v ) given by ESt =µθ(t,v ) and E ∫ t2 t1 Stdt = ∫ t2 t1 µθ(t,v )dt, and a covariance matrix Σ(T ) given by Cov[(St1,St2)] =σ2Cov[(Wt1,Wt2)] Cov[(St1, ∫ t3 t2 Stdt)] =σ2Cov[(Wt1, ∫ t3 t2 Wtdt)] Cov[( ∫ t2 t1 Stdt, ∫ t4 t3 Stdt)] =σ2Cov[( ∫ t2 t1 Wtdt, ∫ t4 t3 Wtdt)], all of which can be readily computed using elementary Itˆ o calculus on standard Brownian motion (e.g., Cov[(Ws,Wt)] = min(s,t )). A notable consequences is that Σ( T ) has no dependence on θ or v. We assume there is no linear dependence among elements in S∪ J so that Σ(T )≻ 0 and Σ−1(T ) exists. Thus, the likelihood function of a sample from (4) can be written as pθ(X) =gorder(v,T ) 1√ 2π|Σ(T )| exp− ( µ(θ,T,v )− (S, J) )T Σ−1(T ) ( µ(θ,T,v )− (S, J) ) 2 , (6) and log-likelihood l(θ|X) = logpθ(X). (7) Let X1, X2,..., Xn ben i.i.d. samples from experiment (4). Let ˆθn be the maximum likelihood estimator such that ˆθn = argmax θ∈Θ n∑ i=1 l(θ|Xi). (8) Example 3. Typically one has price trajectory data S ={Sti}i∈[N] and J ={ ∫t2 j t1 j Stdt}j∈[M] from metaorders, in the forms of ([Zarinelli et al., 2015, Almgren et al., 2005]): 1. The cost of execution: ∫ St ˙xtdt−XS0 (divide by XS0 for bps), 2. The peak impact ST , 3. The “permanent” impact STpost for Tpost >T (e.g., 30 mins after trade [Almgren et al., 2005]), 4. The quantiﬁcation of price trajectory for µθ(t,v ) for some t<T . 2We use [N] to denote the set {1, 2, ..., N}. 9 For example, conditional (v,T ), the cost of VWAP execution CVWAP =v ∫ Stdt−XS0 follows Gaussian as in (5) Cvwap∼N (cvwap(θ,T,v ),σ 2 vwap(T,v )), (9) where the mean cvwap(θ,T,v ) = v ∫T 0 µθ(t,v )dt and variance σ2 vwap(T,v ) = v2T 3 3 σ2 (derivation left in Appendix). Another example, given a single sample corresponding to price trajectory data X = (v,T )∪ {Sti}i∈[N], the log-likelihood follows (derived using independent increments of St): l(X|θ) ≜ log(pθ(X)) = loggorder(v,T )− N 2 log(2πσ2) + ∑ i∈[N] −1 2 log(τiT−τi−1T )− 1 2σ2(τi−τi−1)T ( (SτiT−Sτi−1T )− (µθ(τiT,v )−µθ(τi−1T,v )) )2 . (10) Then, given n total orders samples Xj, executed by VWAP strategy under ( Tj,vj), with {Sj}1≤j≤n being the j-th price trajectory data Sj ={SτiTj}i∈[N], the MLE is the estimator that maximizes the log-likelihood ratio: ˆθn =arg max θ∈Θ n∑ j=1 l(Xj|θ) =arg min θ∈Θ M∑ j=1 ∑ i∈Kj 1 tij−t(i−1)j ( (Stij−St(i−1)j )− (µθ(tij,vj)−µθ(t(i−1)j,vj)) )2 , (11) where the second equality follows from (10). Assumption 3 (Gaussian Experiment). For the statistical experiment in (4), we assume 1. Pθl(θ|X)<∞,∀θ∈ Θ. 2. For the multivariate Gaussian in (5), there exists some ϵ such that Σ(T ) ≽ϵσ2I∀T a.s. 3. For the multivariate Gaussian in (5), µ(θ,T,v ) is continuously diﬀerentiable in θ∀(v,T ) a.s. 4. For the multivariate Gaussian in (5), there exists a neighborhood around every θ such that ∀θ′ in this neighborhood,µ(θ′,T,v )≤B and|µ(θ′,T,v )−µ(θ′′,T,v )|≤ L‖θ′−θ′′‖ for some B,L ,∀θ′,θ′′ in this neighborhood and ∀(v,T ) a.s. 5. For the multivariate Gaussian in (5), θ⋆ is the unique true parameter. Remark 2. We make a couple of remarks on assumption 3. Assumption 3.1 is standard. Assumption 3.2 is related to the design of the Gaussian experiment, where one must choose S∪ J so that they are not linearly dependent (otherwise one can simply delete redundant observations). This would ensure that Σ(T ) ≻ 0. The uniform lower bound ϵ on its eigenvalue for all T , as we shall see, hinges on the lower and upper bound of T in assumption 2. For assumption 3.3, one simply can check whether µθ(t,v ) in (1) is continuously diﬀerentiable ∀(v,T ) in the bounded support of Gorder. Assumption 3.4 ensures Lipschitz continuity of µθ(t,v ) in (1)∀(v,T ) in the bounded support of Gorder. Assumption 3.5 is diﬀerent from assumption 1 as Pθ is a projection of the probability measure induced from SDE (1) onto a ﬁnite-dimensional space (4). Intuitively, the higher the dimension for θ, the higher the dimension of X we need for the model identiﬁability in (4). Deﬁnition 1. With assumption 3.3 in place, we write the derivative of µ(θ,T,v ) w.r.t θ as a Jacobian matrix J (θ,T,v ) =   ∂µ1 ∂θ1 ∂µ1 ∂θ2 ... ∂µ1 ∂θK ∂µ2 ∂θ1 ∂µ2 ∂θ2 ... ∂µ2 ∂θK ... ... ... ... ∂µN +M ∂θ1 ∂µN +M ∂θ2 ... ∂µN +M ∂θK   . (12) Consequently, givenθ0∈ Θ, we can deﬁne the Fisher information matrix in RK×K for experiment (4): IX(θ0) = Eθ0 [(∂l(θ|X) ∂θ )(∂l(θ|X) ∂θ )T] , (13) where the subscript in Eθ0 denotes expectation under Pθ0 and the subscript inIX denotes the experiment design in (4) based on sample X. 10 Before we discuss the relevance of the Fisher information and its importance, we ﬁrst provide a known result which allows convenient computation for it in a Gaussian experiment (5). Lemma 1. LetX∼N (a(θ), Σ) be the N-dimensional multivariate Gaussian distribution with known Σ whereθ∈ RK. Then, let D(θ)∈ RN×K be Jacobian matrix where D(θ) =   ∂a1 ∂θ1 ∂a1 ∂θ2 ... ∂a1 ∂θK ∂a2 ∂θ1 ∂a2 ∂θ2 ... ∂a2 ∂θK ... ... ... ... ∂aN ∂θ1 ∂an ∂θ2 ... ∂aN ∂θK   , we have IX(θ) =D(θ)T Σ−1D(θ). (14) Proof. See example 7.7 in [Van der Vaart, 2000]. Based on Lemma 1, we have the following Proposition. Proposition 1. Under assumption 2 and 3, the statistical experiment (4) has its Fisher information in (13) as IX(θ) = E(v,T )∼Gorder [ JT (θ,T,v )Σ−1(T )J (θ,T,v ) ] . (15) Proof. Due to assumption 2, we can infer from (6) that l(θ|X) = loggorder(v,T ) + logpθ(X|(v,T )) = loggorder(v,T ) + logpθ(S∪ J|(v,T )) Sincegorder(v,T ) does not depend on θ by assumption 2 and S∪ J is multivariate Gaussian conditional on (v,T ), we can evoke Lemma 1 and the tower property of conditional expectation to write IX(θ) =E(v,T )∼Gorder [ E [(∂l(θ|X) ∂θ )(∂l(θ|X) ∂θ )T ⏐⏐⏐⏐(v,T ) ]] =E(v,T )∼Gorder [ IX|(v,T )(θ) ] =E(v,T )∼Gorder [ JT (θ,T,v )Σ−1(T )J (θ,T,v ) ] . where theIX|(v,T ) is computed from conditional likelihood, treating ( v,T ) as ﬁxed. Lastly, we present our ﬁnal assumption which is essential for establishing regular parametric models. Assumption 4 (Nonsingular Fisher Information ). We assume the Fisher information IX(θ) in (15) is well-deﬁned, non-singular and continuous in θ. As we shall see, assumption 4 is related to Gorder. Simply put, it would be hard to determine a high- dimensionalθ in the market impact model if trading style (v,T ) is too singular, as one might struggle to separate diﬀerent impact eﬀects from v or T . One would need to check assumption 4 on a case-by-case basis. For example, a point mass distribution of Gorder (i.e., one pair of (v,T )) is almost never capable of ﬁtting a good market impact model. 2.2.2 Asymptotic Optimality and Fisher Information Now we present some consequences of assumptions 1-4. The results discussed here are related to basic concepts in asymptotic inference, such as regular parametric model, local asymptotic normality (LAN), and regular estimators. We do not dive into the details of these established results and we defer both the proof and the reference for these concepts to the appendix. The purpose of the following proposition is to establish that, under fairly reasonable criteria and a fairly broad class of estimators, the MLE achieves asymptotic optimality given the aforementioned conditions and that optimality is quantiﬁed by the Fisher information. 11 Proposition 2. Let X1, X2,..., Xn be n i.i.d. samples from experiment (4). Let ˆθn be the maximum likelihood estimator such that ˆθn = argmax θ∈Θ n∑ i=1 l(θ|Xi). Then, under assumptions 1-4, the MLE is consistent for θ⋆, i.e., ˆθn → θ⋆ in probability and √n- asymptotically normal: √n(ˆθn−θ⋆) d → N ( 0,I−1 X (θ⋆) ) and√n(φ(ˆθn)−φ(θ⋆)) d → N ( 0,∇θφ(θ⋆)TI−1 X (θ⋆)∇θφ(θ⋆) ) (16) for any φ(θ) diﬀerentiable in θ. Moreover, for any bowl-shaped loss function l (i.e.,{x : l(x)≤ c} is convex and symmetric around the origin) and any estimator sequence {Tn}n≥0, sup I lim inf n→∞ sup h∈I Eθ⋆+ h√n l (√n ( Tn−φ(θ⋆ + h√n) )) ≥l(Zθ⋆) (17) whereI is taken over all ﬁnite subset of RK and Zθ⋆∼N ( 0,∇θφ(θ⋆)TI−1 X (θ⋆)∇θφ(θ⋆) ) . The proof is presented in the appendix. The argument follows from section 8.7 of [Van der Vaart, 2000] where the asymptotic optimality of the MLE and its Fisher information is argued from the local asymptotic minimax perspective. Many other optimality criteria exist and are discussed in Appendix as well. The main takeaway is that, if (16) is taken as the basis for asymptotic optimality, one should aim to design an experiment that maximizes the Fisher information. To see why, consider two statistical experiments (4) based on diﬀerent designs X and Y (e.g., price trajectory versus total cost) and one wants to predict cvwap(θ) = ∫ cvwap(θ⋆,T,v )Gorder(dv,dT ) based on ˆθn,X or ˆθn,Y . Then, if cvwap(θ) is diﬀerentiable w.r.t θ with gradient ∇θcvwap, one can show that, based on (16) and the delta method [Van der Vaart, 2000], the asymptotic variance of the plug-in estimator satisﬁes √n ( cvwap(ˆθn,X)−cvwap(θ⋆) ) d → N ( 0,∇θcT vwap(θ⋆)·I−1 X (θ⋆)·∇θcvwap(θ⋆) ) √n ( cvwap(ˆθn,Y )−cvwap(θ⋆) ) d → N ( 0,∇θcT vwap(θ⋆)·I−1 Y (θ⋆)·∇θcvwap(θ⋆) ) . Now, if IX(θ⋆) ≽IY (θ⋆) (i.e., A ≽ B denotes the matrix A−B is positive semi-deﬁnite), it can be shown thatI−1 X (θ⋆) ≼I−1 Y (θ⋆) and ∇θcT vwap(θ⋆)·I−1 X (θ⋆)·∇cvwap(θ⋆)≤∇ θcT vwap(θ⋆)·I−1 Y (θ⋆)·∇cvwap(θ⋆), (18) which implies ˆθn,X has lower asymptotic variance for estimating cvwap(θ⋆), or any other diﬀerentiable function of θ, simply based on its greater Fisher information. 2.2.3 Suﬃciency and Other Lemmas In this section, we introduce several technical lemmas we shall use later. Following the previous discussion, one might want to maximize the Fisher information of an experiment (4). An important related concept is suﬃcient statistics. Formally, given X in some statistical experiment (4) and a function φ, one can create another statistical experiment using the statistics φ(X). This typically incurs a loss of information in terms of the Fisher information unless the statistic is suﬃcient. Here, a statistic φ(·) is suﬃcient for {Pθ}θ∈Θ if the conditional distribution of S givenφ(S) is free of θ, under Pθ for anyθ∈ Θ. We also give a formal characterization here which we shall use later. Lemma 2 (Neyman-Fisher Factorization Theorem) . Consider the statistical experiment (4) and its sample X. A statistic φ(X) is suﬃcient if and only if the likelihood function in (4) has the factorization p(X|θ) =h(X)g(φ(X),θ ), for some non-negative h(·),g (·). The following lemmas relate a suﬃcient statistic with the Fisher information. Lemma 3 (Data Processing Inequality [Zamir, 1998]) . Consider the statistical experiment (4) and its sample X. Let φ(X) be a statistic of data, then the statistical experiment based on φ(X) satisﬁes,for θ∈ Θ, IX(θ) ≽Iφ(X)(θ), (19) with the equality obtained if and only if φ(X) is a suﬃcient statistic for the original statistical experiment. 12 Lemma 4 (Data Reﬁnement Inequality). Consider the statistical experiment (4) and its sample X. Let U and V be two statistics of the experiments, respective; then the statistical experiment based on them satisﬁes, for θ∈ Θ, IU,V (θ) ≽IU(θ). Moreover, if V =φ(U) for some φ(·) which is a bijective mapping, then IU(θ) =IV (θ). The proofs for Lemmas 3 and 4 are in the Appendix for completeness. In other words, the Fisher information of the experiment using φ(X) is generally smaller than the one using X, unless statistic φ(X) is suﬃcient, in which case X provides no extra information over φ(X) for estimating θ (thus the equality in (19)). Note the original sample X is always, trivially, a suﬃcient statistic. However, the whole data X is not always required. Example 4. Consider a simple model under (1) which is a random walk with drift expressed by St = S0 + θf(v)t + σWt for some f(·). Let X = (v,T )∪ S be the statistical experiment in (4) where S ={Sti}i∈[N]. It is straightforward to check that the log-likelihood in (10) is given by l(θ|X) = loggorder(v,T )− N∑ i=1 1 2 log(2πσ2(ti−ti−1))− 1 2σ2(ti−ti−1) N∑ i=1 ( (Sti−Sti−1)−θf(v)(ti−ti−1)) )2 which can be reduced to h(S,T,v ) +g(ST−S0,T,v,θ ) for someh,g (i.e., isolate the term with θ). Using Theorem 2, we can see that ( ST−S0,v,T ) is suﬃcient. Thus, for this model, price trajectory S is not needed for the estimation of θ, the diﬀerence between the end price and start price would suﬃce (in fact ST would suﬃce since we assume S0 is known). In the next two sections, we examine sampling schemes from price trajectory in two popular market impact models: namely the Almgren Chriss Model and the Propagator Model. In particular, given Lemma 3, which establishes the connection between suﬃcient statistics and the Fisher information, we are able to ﬁnd some insight in designing eﬃcient statistical experiments. 3 The Almgren-Chriss Model The Almgren-Chriss model remains one of the most popular and widely adopted market impact models since its introduction [Almgren and Chriss, 2001] and the paper [Almgren et al., 2005] is dedicated to parameter estimation problems for the model: St =S0 +S0(g(v)t +h(v)) +S0σ ∫ t 0 dWs, when t≤T St =S0 +S0g(v)T +S0σ ∫ t 0 dWs, when t>T . (20) In Almgren-Chriss model, g is the permanent impact function and h is the temporary impact function. In [Almgren et al., 2005], h and g are parameterized by power law: g(v;θ) =γvα h(v;θ) =ηvβ, (21) for θ = (γ,η,α,β ). Although α can generally vary between [0 , 1], it was argued in [Almgren et al., 2005, Huberman and Stanzl, 2004] that the linearity of permanent impact function g (i.e., α = 1) is desirable for a model to preclude price manipulation strategy. Moreover, β = 0.5 corresponds to a plausible square-root temporary impact function for h. However, during the ﬁtting process, these are not taken as restrictions. There are several practical modiﬁcations in the model estimation section of [Almgren et al., 2005]: 13 1. In order to facilitate the estimation of the permanent impact in the Almgren-Chriss model, the price trajectory S includes an additional price point STpost where Tpost >T ; this can also be seen from the “piece-wise” dynamic in (20). [Almgren et al., 2005] indicated that the choice of Tpost being 30 minutes afterT works well. In this way, in the experiment design (4), we can ﬁx a constant τdelay so that Tpost =T +τdelay, for τdelay = 0.077 (i.e., 30 minutes delay in a day with 6.5 trading hours). In such manner, we remove the randomness of choosing Tpost given T , similar to the way we use ﬁxed τi to choose ti =τiT . 2. The impact functions g and h are further scaled by volatility σ. For a single stock, this can be subsumed in the coeﬃcient γ,η in (21). 3. A liquidity factor in the form of shares outstanding with power law exponent is inserted to charac- terize the fact that the market impact is not just based on ( T,v ), but also on the stock’s liquidity condition. For a single stock, this can also be subsumed in γ,η in (21). We will again discuss these modiﬁcations in detail in the simulation section where we reproduce and compare with the simulation results in [Almgren et al., 2005]. In summary, these modiﬁcations facilitate a cross-sectional description of market impact, although we focus on the single stock analysis in this paper. Finally, for our discussion on (20), aside from assumptions in section 2.2, we do not put restrictions on the exact form of h(·;θ),g(·;θ), i.e., we allow them to take in forms other than the power law parametric form (21). With the aﬃne transformation Pt = St−S0 S0 , [Almgren et al., 2005] estimated θ using two quantities termed as permanent impact I and realized impact J: I =STpost−S0 S0 =PTpost, J = ∫T 0 Stdt/T−S0 S0 = 1 T ∫ T 0 Ptdt, (22) where, under the model (20), conditional on ( v,T ) the joint distribution of I and J follow a Gaussian one (5): ( I J−I/2 ) ∼N ( µI,J (θ,T,v ), ΣI,J (T ) ) where µI,J (θ,T,v ) ≜ (Tg (v;θ) h(v;θ) ) , ΣI,J (T ) ≜σ2 [ Tpost − Tpost−T 2 − Tpost−T 2 Tpost 4 − T 6 ] . (23) A partial derivation of the above can be found in [Almgren et al., 2005], but we also include a full derivation in the Appendix for completeness. Then, in the parameter estimating phase (section 4.2 of [Almgren et al., 2005]), [Almgren et al., 2005] uses the metaorder data to ﬁt the normalized residuals of (I,J −I/2) using Gauss-Newton optimization algorithm, since this is a non-linear least square problem for the µ given by (21). This ﬁts exactly in our frame of (4), as the maximum likelihood estimation (8) for the Gaussian experiment based on I,J in (5) is equivalent to solving the following non-linear least squares problem: max θ∈Θ n∑ i=1 l(θ|Ii,Ji)⇔ min θ∈Θ n∑ i=1 ([ Ii Ji−Ii/2 ] −µI,J (θ,Ti,vi) )T Σ−1 I,J (Ti) ([ Ii Ji−Ii/2 ] −µI,J (θ,Ti,vi) ) , (24) based on n total orders samples ( Ii,Ji)i∈[n], executed under ( Ti,vi)i∈[n]. This equivalence allows us to connect the parameter estimation method in [Almgren et al., 2005] with the asymptotic theory of statistical estimation in Section 2.2. It follows from Lemma 4, Lemma 1 and Proposition 1, if the Jacobian of µI,J (θ,T,v ) w.r.t θ isJI,J (θ,T,v ), then the Fisher information for experiments based on 14 I,J is II,J (θ) =II,J−I/2(θ) =E(v,T )∼Gorder [ JT I,J (θ,T,v )· Σ−1 I,J (T )·JI,J (θ,T,v ) ] =E(v,T )∼Gorder [ JT I,J (θ,T,v )·σ−2 [ 1 T Tpost/4−T/6 Tpost/3−T/4 1 T Tpost/2−T/2 Tpost/3−T/4 1 T Tpost/2−T/2 Tpost/3−T/4 1 T Tpost Tpost/3−T/4 ] ·JI,J (θ,T,v ) ] . (25) Example 5. For ﬁtting the power law model (21) in Almgren-Chriss model with θ = (γ,η,α,β ), one can calculate JI,J (θ,T,v ) = [Tvα 0 Tγvα ln(v) 0 0 vβ 0 ηvβ ln(v) ] , which means that, based on (25), II,J (θ)∈ R4×4 does not have full rank (hence singular) if ( v,T )∼ δ(v0,T0) (i.e., a point mass). In such case, the optimization in (24) could also be under-determined. However, if one only tries to determine the exponent of the power law, thenθ = (α,β ) andJI,J (θ,T,v ) =[Tγ 0vα ln(v) 0 0 η0vβ ln(v) ] for some given ( γ0,η 0). In summary, the non-singularity of II,J (θ) largely depends on the variability of (v,T )∼Gorder for multi-dimensional θ. In a case-by-case fashion, we prove the following in the appendix, so that our results from previous sections can be applied. Lemma 5 (Regularity Check). Consider the statistical experiment (4) based on Almgren-Chriss model with power law (21) impact and I,J in (23). Under Assumptions 1 and 2, Assumptions 3 and 4 are satisﬁed provided that the marginal distribution of Gorder on v has a support with inﬁnite cardinality. Lemma 5 provides a suﬃcient condition for Assumptions 3 (3.5 in particular) and 4 to hold, although it is not necessary. Note that the condition on Gorder is satisﬁed for any distribution with a continuous density. By checking the proof, one can also establish the result for discrete distribution Gorder with carefully chosen support whose cardinality is larger than the dimension of θ. 3.1 Suﬃcient Statistic from a Discrete Price Trajectory From Lemma 5, in view of Section 2.2 and the regularity check of experiment based on (21), we want to see if we can design experiments with Fisher information larger than II,J . We ﬁrst investigate this for the canonical price trajectory data of the form Sfull ={Sti}i∈[N+1] on a given grid {∆t, 2∆t,...,N ∆t = T,T post} with ∆t = T/N and N is a ﬁxed number. Notably, this is also the setup for [Almgren and Chriss, 2001], when they consider the optimal execution problem with N-trading period. In this example, again taking the transform Pt = St−S0 S0 , from (20), we can see that the likelihood for the experiment based on Sfull, conditional on (v,T ), under Almgren-Chriss model is: pθ(Sfull|v,T ) ∝ exp ( − (Pt1−g(v;θ)∆t−h(v;θ))2 2σ2∆t − ( N∑ i=2 (Pti−Pti−1−g(v;θ)∆t)2 2σ2∆t ) − (PTpost−PT +h(v;θ))2 2σ2(Tpost−T ) ) ∝f1(Sfull,T,v )f2 ( g(v;θ)PT +h(v;θ)(Pt1 ∆t− PTpost−PT Tpost−T ),θ ) , (26) for some f1,f 2. Using Lemma 2, we can see that ( Pt1,PT,PTpost) is a suﬃcient statistic for θ. In fact, (Pt1,PT,PTpost) is suﬃcient, but not minimal suﬃcient, as (PT, Pt1 ∆t− PTpost−PT Tpost−T ), a non-invertible mapping of (Pt1,PT,PTpost), is also suﬃcient. For the deﬁnition of minimal suﬃcient, see e.g. [Keener, 2010] or Theorem 2 below. However, the observation Pt1 ∆t − PTpost−PT Tpost−T is somewhat artiﬁcial to this example. Consequently, from Lemma 3 we have: ISfull(θ) =IPt1,PT,PTpost (θ). (27) Although the construction of t1 is artiﬁcial and related to the choice of N. However, since the choice of N can be arbitrarily large, it is reasonable to suspect that the insight from (27) can be translated to 15 generic price trajectory data S. Moreover, since the post-order price I = PTpost, can we actually then substitute the VWAP costJ for two price pointsPt (for somet in “early” stages) and PT along the price trajectory data for a more asymptotically eﬃcient estimate? Indeed, in the next section, we shall see these insights in several important ways. 3.2 Sampling Strategy along the Price Trajectory Based on the previous insight, given a experiment design based on partial trajectory dataS ={Pti}i∈[N]∪ {PTpost} with tN =T , one might ask: 1. Does sampling more than three points along the trajectory (i.e., N >2) increase the Fisher infor- mation? 2. If sampling more than three points does not improve the asymptotic eﬃciency, is simply sampling two points PT and PTpost good enough? 3. For sampling three points, in addition to PT andPTpost, how should we pick the extra point Pt for some t∈ (0,T )? To answer these questions, suppose we have the following grid of observations S ={Pt1,Pt2,...,P tN−1,PT,PTpost}. Then writing out the density pθ(S|v,T ) as in (26), we have pθ(S|v,T )∝f1(S)f2 ( g(v;θ)PT +h(v;θ)(Pt1 t1 − PTpost−PT Tpost−T ),θ ) (28) for some f1,f 2. Following the same reasoning as in the previous section, we see that IS(θ) =IPt1,PT,PTpost (θ), where t1 = min{t :Pt∈ S}. Thus, we have the following corollary. Corollary 1. For the Almgren-Chirss model and experiment based on S ={Pti}i∈[N]∪{PTpost}, sampling more than three points on the trajectory does not increase the Fisher information, as: IS(θ) =IPt1,PT,PTpost(θ). (29) This answers the ﬁrst question. To answer the second question, one can calculate (the derivation is left in the Appendix): IPT,PTpost (θ) = E(v,T )∼Gorder [ JT I,J (θ,T,v )·σ−2 [ 1 T 1 T 1 T Tpost T 1 (Tpost−T) ] ·JI,J (θ,T,v ) ] . (30) Comparing (30) with (25), we note that, in general, neither IPT,PTpost (θ) ≽ II,J (θ) nor II,J (θ) ≽ IPT,PTpost (θ) can be established. Thus, one cannot deﬁnitively say sampling two points is more eﬃ- cient than using VWAP cost J and post-order price I. So far, we have shown that sampling two price points PT and PTpost is not optimal while sampling more than one point along price trajectory {Pt}t∈(0,T) is not necessary. This naturally brings us to the third question above. We summarize the answer as our ﬁrst main theorem. Theorem 1. Under assumptions 1-4, we sample (Pt,PT,PTpost), as long as t is chosen early enough so that t T ≤ 1 4, then, under the Almgren-Chriss model (20), we have IPt,PT,PTpost(θ) ≽II,J (θ). (31) Moreover, (31) holds for generic forms of g and h and all distributions Gorder of (v,T ). Proof. The proof of Theorem 1 is left in the Appendix A.3.3. 16 Remark 3. Notably, also shown in the proof, the ratio 1 4 in Theorem 1 is somewhat tight, in the sense that for t T > 1 4, there might exist some form of h and g for which (31) is no longer true. This could be of interest in its own right, as the signiﬁcance of number 1 4 is not immediately clear from observing (20). Theorem 1 suggests that, at least for the Almgren-Chriss dynamics (20), as long as we sample Pt early enough (e.g., any price sampled within the ﬁrst 25 percent of the ﬁlled order), then MLE estimated using (Pt,PT,PTpost) would outperform the estimation method using I,J in [Almgren et al., 2005] asymptotically, for any distributions of ( v,T ), rendering Theorem 1 applicable for metaorders across diﬀerent magnitudes and for generic form of h andg (speciﬁcally the original power law models in [Almgren et al., 2005]). Perhaps interestingly, this result seems to suggest earlier stages of an order are more informative for calibrating impact models. Finally, we use the data based on Section 4.1, 4.2 and Table 3 of [Almgren et al., 2005] to provide an example of the level of improvement based on Theorem 1. More extensive simulation studies verifying Theorem (1) are provided at the end of the section. Example 6. Consider estimating the power law exponent of (21) in (20). Suppose the underlying true parameters are θ⋆ = (γ⋆,η⋆,α⋆,β⋆) = (0.314, 0.142, 0.891, 0.600). We set the hyper-parameters of the metaorders to be ( X,v,T,T post,σ ) = (0 .1, 0.5, 0.2, 0.275, 0.0157). The data is from [Almgren et al., 2005], which can be viewed as one speciﬁc instance from Gorder, i.e., a point mass. We set t = 0.1·T and (γ⋆,η⋆) = (0.314, 0.142), so we only estimate (α,β ). This avoids non-singular issues from Gorder being a point mass. Then, one can calculate IPt,PT,PTpost (α⋆,β⋆) andII,J (α⋆,β⋆), which leads to I−1 Pt,PT,PTpost (α⋆,β⋆) = 104 [ 3.504· 104 −2.259· 102 −2.259· 102 1.845· 10 ] ,I−1 I,J (α⋆,β⋆) = 104 [ 4.438· 104 −4.942· 102 −4.942· 102 3.811· 10 ] . (32) The closed-form expression ofIPt,PT,PTpost (θ) is calculated in Appendix A.3.3. In view of (16) and (18), using (Pt,PT,PTpost) over (I,J ) implies an asymptotic variance reduction (i.e., equivalent to relative eﬃciency, [Van der Vaart, 2000]) of 21% for estimating α ( calculated by 4.438−3.504 4.438 , or equivalently a 21% increase in sample-eﬃciency), 51% for estimating β and 18.5% for estimating the average VWAP cost in bps, given by cvwap(α,β ) = T 2γvα +ηvβ and∇α,βcvwap(α⋆,β⋆) = [ T 2γvα log(α),ηvβ log(β)]. On the other hand, also following Remark 5, given ( α⋆,β⋆) = (0 .891, 0.600), suppose ones wants to estimate (γ,η ). Similarly one can show a 20.6% variance reduction for estimating γ, 51.5% for η. In the context of [Schied and Sch¨ oneborn, 2009], a model of the form (21) with α⋆ =β⋆ = 1 and a utility u(R) =− exp(−AR) for some A> 0 is assumed (e.g., we let A = 5 below). Then the optimal adaptive liquidation strategy (notice this is a sell-program so x0 = X) is shown to be of xt = X exp(−t √ σ2A 2η ). One can check if η is estimated around η⋆ with a 10% error, then the optimal liquidation at T would be oﬀ-target by around 6.88%, whereas a 5% estimated error on η would reduce that error to around 3.36%, an improvement close to 50%. 3.3 Non-VWAP Executions In this section, we use the framework from [Almgren and Chriss, 2001] to brieﬂy discuss the estimation for non-VWAP orders under (20). In particular, given full grid observation Sfull ={Sti}i∈[N] and a sequence of trading rate {vi}i∈[N] so that a trading rate of vi is executed during interval ( ti−1,ti] and T N ∑N i=1vi = X. We assume trading rates and trading period is all ﬁxed and we only investigate the suﬃciency issue here. Thus, under (20) and Pt = St−S0 S0 we have Pti =Pti−1 +g(vi;θ)∆t +h(vi;θ)−h(vi−1;θ) +σ ∫ ti ti−1 dWs. (33) Note that{vi}i∈[N] needs not to have N distinct values (i.e., |{vi}i| < N) as the same trading rate is allowed to prevail over several periods of ∆t. To account for such strategy, suppose there are N′ distinct (N′≤ N) constant trading rates: {v′ i′}i′∈[N′] with v′ i′⁄= v′ j′ for all i′⁄= j′ and each v′ i′ corresponds to some union of trading intervals where the trading rate is v′ i′. We represent such a union by a sequence of disjoint, non-adjacent intervals Ii′ =∪k(ts,i′ k ,te,i′ k ]. For example, if v′ 1 = 0.5 and the order is executed with a trading rate of 0.5 during ( t0,t 1], (t1,t 2] and (t5,t 6], then I1 = (t0,t 2]∪ (t5,t 6]. Note that the disjoint and non-adjacent property makes sure that 1) the representation of Ii′ is unique and 2) for any t being ts,i′ k or te,i′ k in the representation of Ii′, then 17 1. either t = 0 or t =T 2. or the interval ( t− ∆t,t ] and (t,t + ∆] has two diﬀerent trading rates. In other words, if we view the time before t = 0 and after t = T as having 0 trading rate, then any t being ts,i′ k or te,i′ k in the representation of Ii′ implies t connects two periods with diﬀerent trading rates. In this setting, the likelihood can then be written as pθ(Sfull|v,T ) ∝ exp ( − N∑ i=1 ( (Pti−Pti−1)− (g(vi;θ)∆t +h(vi;θ)−h(vi−1;θ)) )2 2σ2∆t − (PTpost−PT +h(vN;θ))2 2σ2(Tpost−T ) ) = exp ( − ∑ i′∈[N′] ∑ {i:vi=v′ i′} ( (Pti−Pti−1)− (g(vi;θ)∆t +h(vi;θ)−h(vi−1;θ)) )2 2σ2∆t − (PTpost−PT +h(vN;θ))2 2σ2(Tpost−T ) ) =f1(Sfull)· ∏ i′∈[N′] fg ( ∑ (ts,i′ k ,te,i′ k ]∈Ii′ (Pte,i′ k −Pts,i′ k );g(v′ i′;θ) ) · ∏ i′∈[N′] fh ( ∑ (ts,i′ k ,te,i′ k ]∈Ii′ (Pts,i′ k +∆t−Pts,i′ k ) + ∑ (ts,i′ k ,te,i′ k ]∈Ii′ (Pte,i′ k −Pte,i′ k +∆t)1{te,i′ k <T} + (PT−PTpost) ∆t Tpost−T 1{te,i′ k =T};h(v′ i′;θ) ) ·f2(θ). (34) for somef1,f 2,f g,f h. Here an indicator function 1A(x) = 1 ifx∈A and 0 otherwise. In view of Theorem 2, a suﬃcient statistic for (34) is {Pt : t = Tpost or t∈{ ts,i′ k ,ts,i′ k + ∆t,te,i′ k ,te,i′ k + ∆t} for some i′∈ [N′],k ∈ [|Ii′|]}. In other words, the union of Pt’s that is either a node, which connects two diﬀerent trading rate periods, or immediately follows such a node, constitutes a suﬃcient statistic of Sfull. This seems to suggest the price points more closely following trading rate changes are more important to the estimation. Using this characterization, we can also recover the suﬃciency Pt1,PT and PTpost in the VWAP case (P0 = 0 is known). 3.4 Simulation In this section, we verify the results from corollary 1 and theorem 1. For a fair comparison, we recover, to the best of our abilities, the IBM stock simulation result in Table 3 from [Almgren et al., 2005]. Several practical modiﬁcations in [Almgren et al., 2005] are carried out, so impact equations in (7) and (8) of [Almgren et al., 2005] become: I σ =γAT· sgn(XA) ⏐⏐⏐⏐ XA VAT ⏐⏐⏐⏐ α(ΘA VA )δA +⟨noise⟩ 1 σ (J− I 2) =ηA· sgn(X) ⏐⏐⏐⏐ XA VAT ⏐⏐⏐⏐ β +⟨noise⟩ whereas our equation based on (23) gives I =γT·vα +⟨noise⟩ J− I 2 =η·vβ +⟨noise⟩. (35) Here ΘA is called shares outstanding , VA is average daily volume and ΘA VA is called inverse turnover . All concepts are in [Almgren et al., 2005] to model liquidity factor into the market impact, which is not necessary for a single stock analysis. To avoid confusion, the parameters from Table 3 in [Almgren et al., 2005] which are diﬀerent from ours are subscripted by A. Their transformation with our model parameters can be constructed as v = ⏐⏐⏐⏐ XA VAT ⏐⏐⏐⏐,γ =σγA (ΘA VA )δA ,η =σηA 18 Following Table 3 of [Almgren et al., 2005], the initial hyper-parameters for IBM stocks are given as V = 6, 561, 000, Θ = 1, 728, 000, 000,σ = 0.0157,T post−T = 0.5/6.5 = 0.077 and T = 0.2. With these transformations, we can reproduce values in Table 3 in Almgren for IBM using equation (35) and our version of the parameters, up to a negligible error (i.e., no discrepancy up to the forth digit). The results are summarized in Table 1. IBM Average Daily Volume V 6.561M Shares outstanding Θ 1.728B Inverse turnover Θ /V 263.37 Daily volatility (%) σ 1.57% Normalized trade size X/V 0.1 Normalized permanent I/σ 0.1265 Permanent price impact (bp) I 19.86 Trade duration (days) T 0.2 Normalized temporary K/σ 0.0934 Temporary Impact cost (bp) K 14.67 Realized cost (bp) J 24.60 Table 1: Table 3 recreation from [Almgren et al., 2005]. Figure 1: Simulate Price Trajectory for Table 1. Blue line represents expected average. For simulation, we let XA/VA follow a uniform distribution on an interval from 0.05 to 0.15 with T = 0.2 ﬁxed. This would imply our parameter v = XA VAT follows a uniform distribution from 0.25 to 0.75. This speciﬁes Gorder. The ground truth parameters are set following Table 1 as α⋆ = 1,β⋆ = 0.6,γ⋆ = σγA ( Θ V )δA = 0.314· 0.0157· 4.0285 = 0.01986,η⋆ =σηA = 0.142· 0.0157 = 0.002229. In the simulation, we ﬁt all four parametersθ = (γ,η,α,β ) in (21). Each path is generated by the Euler–Maruyama method with ∆ = 0.001T and the stochastic integral in J is approximated by the discrete sum. We consider ﬁve experiments to verify the ﬁndings in the previous sections: 1. Using (I,J ), referred to as “Almgren approach (I,J )” 2. Using (PT,PTpost), referred to as “Two points (T,T post)” 3. Using (P0.1T,PT,PTpost), referred to as “Three points (0 .1T,T,T post)”, with t T = 0.1≤ 0.25. 4. Using (P0.5T,PT,PTpost), referred to as “Three points (0 .5T,T,T post)”, with t T = 0.5≥ 0.25 5. Using (P0.1T,P 0.5T,PT,PTpost), referred to as “Four points (0.1T, 0.5T,T,T post)”. The results are presented in Table 2. For each method, we report the experiment results for metaorder size n = 500,n = 1000 andn = 10000. For each sample sizen, we repeat the experiment 1000 times so that we can report 1) average estimates of each parameter denoted by “Avg estimate ˆθ, across 1000 simulations, 2) the theoretical standard deviation of each parameter, based on empirical Fisher information, denoted by “Theoretical SD(ˆθ)” and 3) the empirical standard deviation of each parameter, based on bootstrap from 1000 simulations, denoted by “ Empirical SD(ˆθ)”. The best method, for each n, is recorded in bold. As we can see, consistent with the results in section 3.2: 1. The “Three points method” with t/T≤ 0.25 outperform the Almgren approach, especially in terms of standard deviation, as indicated by theorem 1. 2. The “Two points method” and “Three points method” with t/T≥ 0.25 do not visibly outperform the Almgren approach and 3. The “Three points method” perform almost exactly the same as the “Four points method”, as indicated by corollary 1. Finally, the Theoretical SD(ˆθ) provides a good estimate for Empirical SD(ˆθ), especially for large n, which can be useful for inference. 19 Avg estimate ˆθ Theoretical SD(ˆθ) Empirical SD(ˆθ) (average over 1000 simulations) (avg. of hessian implied SD) (SD of estimate over 1000 sim) Method α β γ η α β γ η α β γ η n = 500 Almgren apporach (I,J ) 1.0641 0.6209 0.022222 0.002285 0.7777 0.3327 0.010810 0.000520 0.7825 0.3337 0.011847 0.000533 Two points: (T,T post) 1.0694 0.6334 0.022755 0.002356 0.7752 0.4935 0.012370 0.000784 0.8197 0.4814 0.023695 0.000781 Three points: (0.1T,T,T post) 1.0464 0.6161 0.021577 0.002267 0.6835 0.2282 0.009126 0.000355 0.6891 0.2235 0.010007 0.000357 Three points: (0.5T,T,T post) 1.0609 0.6248 0.022008 0.002320 0.7449 0.4164 0.010123 0.000656 0.7420 0.4160 0.010897 0.000669 Four Point: (0.1T, 0.5T,T,T post) 1.0464 0.6161 0.021577 0.002267 0.6835 0.2282 0.009126 0.000355 0.6891 0.2235 0.010007 0.000357 n = 1000 Almgren apporach (I,J ) 1.0294 0.6215 0.020860 0.002273 0.5240 0.2324 0.006782 0.000362 0.5120 0.2316 0.006791 0.000367 Two points: (T,T post) 1.0286 0.6257 0.020847 0.002312 0.5198 0.3401 0.006719 0.000537 0.5095 0.3329 0.006757 0.000537 Three points: (0.1T,T,T post) 1.0372 0.6021 0.020831 0.002245 0.4628 0.1594 0.005990 0.000247 0.4676 0.1561 0.006152 0.000245 Three points: (0.5T,T,T post) 1.0249 0.6262 0.020774 0.002296 0.4995 0.2891 0.006450 0.000454 0.4948 0.2844 0.006514 0.000457 Four Point: (0.1T, 0.5T,T,T post) 1.0372 0.6021 0.020831 0.002245 0.4628 0.1594 0.005990 0.000247 0.4676 0.1561 0.006152 0.000245 n = 10000 Almgren apporach (I,J ) 1.0111 0.5994 0.020039 0.002224 0.1604 0.0728 0.002020 0.000112 0.1634 0.0734 0.002035 0.000114 Two points: (T,T post) 1.0110 0.6006 0.020037 0.002234 0.1601 0.1063 0.002016 0.000164 0.1633 0.1052 0.002033 0.000164 Three points: (0.1T,T,T post) 1.0102 0.6000 0.020007 0.002230 0.1421 0.0503 0.001787 0.000078 0.1431 0.0505 0.001773 0.000076 Three points: (0.5T,T,T post) 1.0117 0.5996 0.020034 0.002232 0.1540 0.0903 0.001939 0.000139 0.1581 0.0919 0.001952 0.000142 Four Point: (0.1T, 0.5T,T,T post) 1.0102 0.6000 0.020007 0.002230 0.1421 0.0503 0.001787 0.000078 0.1431 0.0505 0.001773 0.000076 Table 2: Simulation results with true parameter (α⋆,β⋆,γ⋆,η⋆) = (1.0000, 0.6000, 0.01986, 0.002229). 4 The Propagator Models As discussed in [Zarinelli et al., 2015], the linear permanent market impact predicted by the Almgren- Chriss model can deviate from the market impact trajectory for non-VWAP executions and fail to reproduce the concavity of the market impact curve [Zarinelli et al., 2015]. The propagator models [Bouchaud et al., 2003, Gatheral and Schied, 2013, Obizhaeva and Wang, 2013], on the other hand, can consistently recover features of market impact curve, including the square-root law, by allowing non- linear instantaneous functionf(·) and a decay kernel G(·) to capture the transient component of market impact. The word transient implies the trade impact is neither permanent nor temporary, but decays over time[Moro et al., 2009, Curato et al., 2017]. As discussed in [Bouchaud et al., 2003, Busseti and Lillo, 2012], such a transient assumption is consistent with real data and is in line with empirical ﬁndings on market eﬃciency and strong concavity of impact. In the framework of (1), we have 3 St =S0 + ∫ t 0 f(v)G(t−s)ds +σ ∫ t 0 dWs. (36) Notable functional forms of instantaneous impact function f and decay kernel G (36) includes: 1. power-law f(v)∝vδ and power-law decay G(s)∝s−γ.4 As we shall see, this formulation recovers the square-root law when δ = γ = 1 2. When δ = 1, this corresponds to the transient linear price impact where the optimal execution strategy can be explicitly solved using Fredholm integral equation of the ﬁrst kind [Gatheral et al., 2012]. For non-linear f, the optimal execution problem is harder to solve and generally requires discretization and iterative optimization [Dang, 2017, Curato et al., 2017]. When G(s) = 1{0}(s), this recovers the temporary impact function h of (20) in [Almgren and Chriss, 2001]. 2. linear f(v)∝v and exponential decay G(s)∝e−ρs. This is one of the ﬁrst propagator models with transient impact proposed by [Obizhaeva and Wang, 2013]. The original formulation focused on the modeling of shape/dynamics of the limit order book (LOB), which is later extended by [Alfonsi et al., 2010] for generally-shaped LOB. The connection/equivalence of price impact reversion and volume impact reversion is further discussed in [Alfonsi and Schied, 2010, Gatheral et al., 2011]. 3. logarithmic f(v)∝ log(v/v0) and G(s)∝ l0(l0 +s)−γ or G(s)∝ (l2 0 +s2)−γ/2. Here γ≈ 1−α 2 is related to the exponent of auto-correlation among trade signs studied in [Bouchaud et al., 2003]. The logarithmic impact has also been supported empirically to ﬁt the data across diﬀerent magnitudes better over the square root function. [Zarinelli et al., 2015]. 3The equation (36) is typically referred to as the continuous-time propagator model or the Gatheral (JG) model. The discrete-time propagator was ﬁrst proposed by [Bouchaud et al., 2003]. 4Here ∝ indicates in proportional to. 20 There are many other forms of f and G (e.g., Gaussian kernel, trigonometric kernel in [Gatheral et al., 2012] as examples of where one can solve Fredholm equation) and propagator models have been extensively studied (e.g., [Gatheral, 2010, Gatheral et al., 2011, Gatheral et al., 2012, Curato et al., 2017, Bouchaud et al., 2003, Bouchaud et al., 2006, Alfonsi and Schied, 2010]) to characterize conditions of the model which prevent price manipulation strategy or guarantee the stability of trades [Gatheral, 2010] in optimal execution strategy. The various forms of f andG are typically modeled separately. As a result, their regularity conditions in assumption 1-4 need to be checked in a case-by-case basis, although they are satisﬁed for common propagator models. 4.1 Suﬃcient Statistics for a Discrete Price Trajectory In this section, we ﬁx ( v,T ) by letting Gorder = δv,T be a point mass to simplify the discussion. In the same spirit as Section 3.1, we ﬁrst study the experiment based on Sfull ={Sti}i∈[N] on a given grid{∆t, 2∆t,...,N ∆t = T}. Note that in this setting we no longer include a STpost with Tpost > T to measure the permanent impact, i.e., the height of plateau that peak impact relaxes to height, as its determination might be diﬃcult [Zarinelli et al., 2015]. Formally, we have the following characterization of separability before we can state the theorem based on Sfull, from a parameter estimation point of view as in Section 3.1, Deﬁnition 2. The form off andG in (36) is separable if they are modeled by separate parameters, i.e., there exist parameter spaces Θf and ΘG such that Θ = Θf×ΘG andf(·;θ) =f(·, Θf),G(·;θ) =G(·; ΘG) for all θ∈ Θ. Theorem 2. Fix (v,T ) and consider (5). With a full-grid observations Sfull ={Sti}i∈[N], for power-law kernelG(s)∝s−γ,G (s)∝l0(l0 +s)−γ whereγ∈ Γ⊆ (0, 1) contains some open set or exponential kernel G(s)∝ e−ρs where ρ∈ Γ⊆ R+ contains some open set, assume the instantaneous impact f is positive (i.e., f(v;θ)⁄= 0 for v >0) and is separable from from the kernel G, then the unique suﬃcient statistic (up to a one-to-one transformation) for propagator model (36) is the full trajectory data Sfull. Proof. A suﬃcient statistic is minimally suﬃcient if it can be represented as a function of every other suﬃcient statistic, i.e., X is minimally suﬃcient if for every other suﬃcient statistic Y , there exists some functionf such that X =f(Y ) (a.e. for all θ). Thus, if we can show Sfull is minimal suﬃcient, then for any suﬃcient statistic X, we know both X is a function of Sfull (by deﬁnition of a statistic) and Sfull is a function of X (by minimal suﬃciency of Sfull), thus proving Sfull is the unique suﬃcient statistic, up to a one-to-one mapping. Under (1), we have µ(t,v ;θ) = f(v;θ) ∫t 0 G(s;θ)ds. Then we can write, as in (26): pθ(Sfull|v,T )∝ exp ( − N∑ i=1 (Sti−Sti−1− (µ(ti,v ;θ)−µ(ti−1,v ;θ)))2 2σ2∆t ) = exp ( − N∑ i=1 (Sti−Sti−1−f(v;θ) ∫ti ti−1 G(s;θ)ds)2 2σ2∆t ) =f1(Sfull) exp (( N∑ i=1 (Sti−Sti−1)· f(v;θ) σ2∆t ∫ ti ti−1 G(s;θ)ds ) −f2(θ) ) . (37) for some f1,f 2. It is known that (see e.g., [Lehmann and Casella, 2006] or Theorem 3.19 [Keener, 2010]) that, for an exponential family with density pθ(x) = exp(η(θ)·T (x)−B(θ))h(x), (38) where the η(θ),T (x)∈ Rk and η(θ)·T (x) denote their dot product, the statistic T (x)∈ RK is minimal suﬃcient if (1){Ti(x)}1≤i≤k is linearly independent and (2) the dimension of the convex hull of{η(θ)}θ∈Θ has dimension k. The convex hull of a set S is{∑n i=1tixi : ti≥ 0,xi∈ S,∀i,∑n i=1ti = 1,n > 0}. An equivalent condition for (2) is: there exists {θ0,θ 1,...,θ k}⊆ Θ such that {η(θi)−η(θ0)}1≤i≤k is linearly independent. Now, compare (37) with (38), we let T (Sfull)∈ RN with Ti(Sfull) = Sti−Sti−1 for i∈ [N] and let η(θ)∈ RN with ηi(θ) = f(v;θ) σ2∆t ∫ti ti−1 G(s;θ)ds for i∈ [N]. Clearly {Ti}i∈[N] are linearly independent, as there are no linear constraints among the price increments Sti−Sti−1. Thus 21 (1) is satisﬁed. For (2), since f(v;θ) ⁄= 0 and is separable from G, it suﬃces to show the convex hull of {η(θG)}θG∈ΘG ⊆ RN has dimension N for the various kernel G(·) mentioned above, where we redeﬁneηi(θG) = ∫ti ti−1 G(s;θG)ds usingG only. This is left in the Appendix A.3.4. Finally, the minimal suﬃciency of T (Sfull) = {Sti−Sti−1}i∈[N] is equivalent to the minimal suﬃciency of Sfull since S0 is given. Theorem 2 shows, when ﬁtting a general propagator model, only the entire price trajectory provides the whole information, not any summary statistics (e.g., cost of VWAP, or the three points as in Theorem (1) for Almgren-Chriss model). To see more clearly why this should be the case, consider a simpliﬁed example. Example 7. Suppose we are estimating a one-dimensional parameter θ∈ Θ⊆ R from (1) and (v,T ) is ﬁxed. We can estimate θ using either the average cost of VWAP (up to a constant factor v): J = 1 T ∫ T 0 Stdt∼N ( 1 T ∫ T 0 µθ(t,v )dt,σ2T 3 ), (39) or the entire path Sfull. Using Lemma 1, the Fisher information IJ(θ) is IJ(θ) = 3 σ2T 3 (∫ T 0 ∂µθ(t,v ) ∂θ dt )2 , whereas, using Lemma 1 and the independence of {Sti−Sti−1}i∈[N] (multivariate Gaussian), the Fisher informationISfull(θ) is (let ∆t↓ 0 and assume boundary condition ∂µθ(0,v) ∂θ = 0): lim ∆t→0 ISfull(θ) = 1 σ2 ∫ T 0 (∂2µθ(t,v ) ∂θ∂t )2dt. (40) Let h(t;θ,v ) ≜ ∂µθ(t,v) ∂θ , h′(t;θ,v ) ≜ dh(t;θ,v) dt and assume h′(0;θ,v ) = 0. Then lim ∆t→0ISfull(θ)≥I J(θ) then immediately follows from the inequality: (∫ T 0 h(t;θ,v )dt )2 = (∫ T 0 ∫ t 0 h′(s;θ,v )dsdt )2 = (∫ T 0 ∫ T s h′(s;θ,v )dtds )2 = (∫ T 0 (T−s)h′(s;θ,v )ds )2 ≤ T 3 3 ∫ T 0 (h′(s;θ,v ))2ds, where the second equality follows from the Fubini-Tonelli theorem and the last inequality follows from Cauchy–Schwarz inequality. 4.2 Estimation of Impact Function f In the previous section, Theorem 2 addresses the joint estimation of f and G, but the proof also works for the estimation ofG givenf. However, Theorem 2 can be adjusted for estimation of impact function f givenG, which typically can be calibrated from other methods ([Bouchaud et al., 2003, Busseti and Lillo, 2012]). As discussed in section 2.1 of [Curato et al., 2017], one of the “major attractions of the propagator models to practitioners” is that given G(·) and a large data collection of “VWAP-like executions”, the expected cost of VWAP v ∫T 0 Stdt−XS0: cvwap(θ) =vf (v;θ) ∫ T 0 ∫ t 0 G(s)dsdt, (41) can be used to estimate f(v) and reﬂect the performance of execution algorithms. In this section, based on Theorem 2, we quantify the eﬃciency of using VWAP cost to calibrate f, as well as that of using trajectory data, in the limit case when ∆ t→ 0. For ﬁxed (T,v ), the information matrix based on VWAP cost alone only has rank 1, so for simplicity, we ﬁrst assume we are calibrating an impact function f(v;θ) characterized by a one-dimensional param- eter θ∈ Θ⊆ R. As in Remark 1, the general case could depend on the distribution of ( T,v )∼ Gorder 22 and we avoid this dependence to isolate the eﬀect. For concreteness, one can suppose a power law impact f(v) = vδ and we want to estimate δ∈ Γ⊆ (0, 1]. Interestingly, although considered unrealistic for certain cases ([Gatheral, 2010]), it is recently argued in [Jusselin and Rosenbaum, 2020] that power-law impact is the only impact function consistent with the no-arbitrage condition. Deﬁnition 3. Fix Sfull ={Sti}i∈[N] be price trajectory data. Let Spartial ={St}t∈K be a partial price trajectory data with K ={tK 0,tK 1,tK 2,...,tK NK}⊆ [0,T ] and 0 = tK 0 ≤ tK 1 ≤ tK 2 ≤ ...≤ tK NK ≤ T . Let Jdiscrete =∑NK i=1Sti∆t be the discrete VWAP cost while J = ∫ Stdt is the true VWAP cost. Theorem 3. In the same setting as Theorem 2, suppose the decay kernel G(·) is ﬁxed and the impact functionf(v;θ) is parameterized by some θ∈ Γ⊆ R where Γ contains some open set. Then the suﬃcient statistics for estimating f in (36) is φ(Sfull) ≜∑N i=1(Sti−Sti−1) ∫ti ti−1 G(s)ds, which implies ISfull (θ) =Iφ(Sfull)(θ). (42) Moreover, in the limit as ∆t→ 0, we have ISfull (θ)→ (∂f ∂θ )2 σ2 ∫ T 0 G2(t)dt, (43) and IJdiscrete(θ)→I J(θ) = (∂f ∂θ )2 σ2 · 3 T 3 (∫ T 0 G(t)(T−t)dt )2 . (44) Finally, we have ISpartial(θ)→ (∂f ∂θ )2 σ2 (NK∑ i=1 ( ∫tK i tK i−1 G(t)dt)2 tK i −tK i−1 ) . (45) Proof. The proof is left in Appendix A.3.5. As a straightforward result of Theorem 3, we can compare the Fisher information for calibrating f of using two points (St,ST ) versus J. Corollary 2. In the setting of Theorem 3, we have ISt,ST (θ) = (∂f ∂θ )2 σ2 (( ∫t 0 G(s)ds)2 t + ( ∫T t G(s)ds)2 T−t ) . (46) Consequently, we have ISt,ST (θ)−IJ(θ)≥ 0 when (( ∫t 0 G(s)ds)2 t + ( ∫T t G(s)ds)2 T−t ) ≥ 3 T 3 (∫ T 0 G(s)(T−s)ds )2 . (47) For calibrating f, using both Theorem 3 and Corollary 2, we can compute optimal sampling points S that maximizeIS or compare its eﬃciency with an estimation based on VWAP cost. In Theorem 1, we see that, for the Almgren-Chriss model, a sample St early enough with t T ≤ 1 4 can outperform the VWAP based method. For the propagator model, the comparison between ( St,ST ) and J depends on the speciﬁc decay kernel G as in (47). However, as we shall see in the following examples, the result for the propagator model bears a resemblance to the result for the Almgren-Chirss model in Theorem 1. Example 8. For the decay kernel G(s) = s−γ with γ = 0.4 [Bouchaud et al., 2003], based on (47), we have ISt,ST (θ)≥I J(θ) when 2 .11· 10−4 ≤ t T ≤ 0.279. For diﬀerent values of γ, one can check ISt,ST (θ)≥I J(θ) when the condition in Table 3 is satisﬁed. As shown in Table 3, similar to Theorem γ = 0.35 γ = 0.45 γ = 0.5 γ = 0.55 γ = 0.65 γ = 0.75 τ =t/T 8.97· 10−4≤τ≤ 0.369 9.41· 10−7≤τ≤ 0.252 τ≤ 1 4 τ≤ 0.257 τ≤ 0.279 τ≤ 0.301 Table 3: The range of values of τ = t T whereISt,ST (θ)≥I J(θ). 1, the comparison of ISt,ST (θ) andIJ(θ) only relies on τ = t T . In general, a smaller value of τ would help (St,ST ) outperform J, as long as it is not unreasonably/unrealistically small (i.e. on the order of 10−4 or less for certain γ). Perhaps more interestingly, the cut-oﬀ point for being “small” is around 1 4 just as in Theorem 1, although the precise value also changes with γ (the exact value of 1 4 is achieved for γ = 0.5). 23 Example 9. ForG(s) = e−ρs, the comparison of (47) depends on speciﬁc values of t and T , not just their ratio τ. However, in the case where t,T →∞ but t T →τ, we haveISt,ST (θ)≥I J(θ) as long as τ≤ 1 3, regardless of the value of ρ. The derivation is left in Appendix A.3.6. 4.3 Sampling Strategy for Propagator Models: A Numerical Study Theorem 2 shows that the full price trajectory Sfull is the only suﬃcient statistic for a general propagator model. However, it does not specify how much information is lost when we only have partial observations S, neither suggests a consistent sampling strategy over the cost-of-VWAP based estimation, as in Section 3.2. Unfortunately, unlike Theorem 1, the optimal sampling strategy for (36) depends on the speciﬁc values of t and T (not just their ratios) and the speciﬁc form of G and f. Thus, in section, we aim to gain some insights into questions (1) and (2) through numerical examples. We conduct numerical studies to compare diﬀerent sampling strategies against the VWAP-cost-based estimation methods, in the ﬂavor of Section 3.2. 4.3.1 Example 1: Power Law In the ﬁrst example, we take the power-law kernelG(s) =s−γ withγ = 0.4 [Bouchaud et al., 2003, Busseti and Lillo, 2012] and power-law impact f(v) = vδ with δ = 0.6 [Almgren et al., 2005] (hence µ(v,t ;θ) = vδt1−γ 1−γ ). We shall compare the asymptotic variance for calibratingδ, under diﬀerent estimation methods. In this example, we assume T = 0.1, v = 0.3, σ = 1 γ⋆ = 0.4 and δ⋆ = 0.6. Assuming we are only estimating δ (i.e., all other parameters are given), then as computed in (40), as ∆ t↓ 0, one can check the entry for δ in the Fisher information matrix [ISfull]δ,δ is [ISfull]δ,δ→ 1 σ2 ∫ T 0 (∂2µθ(t,v ) ∂δ∂t )2dt = ∫ T 0 t−2γv2δ ln2(v)dt = 1.078. We compare estimation methods based on the VWAP costJ =v ∫T 0 Stdt−XS0∼N ( v1+δT 2−γ (1−γ)(2−γ), σ2v2T 3 3 ) with methods based on price points Si’s sampled from trajectory. Again, as in (39), we have [IJ]δ,δ = 3 σ2T 3 (∫ T 0 ∂µθ(t,v ) ∂δ dt )2 = 0.702, which recovers just over 65.1% information for estimating δ (i.e., 0.651 ≈ 0.702 1.078), which implies the asymptotic variance for estimating δ using J is approximately 1.536≈ 1/0.651 times larger than the asymptotic variance for estimating δ using Sfull. Next, based on results from Theorem 1, we pick the following representative sampling times t1 = T 8,t 2 = T 4,t 3 = 5T 8 in addition to T and compare their Fisher information ratio [I]δ,δ [ISfull]δ,δ . The results are summarized in Table 4. St1,ST St2,ST St3,ST St1,St2,ST St1,St3,ST St2,St3,ST St1,St2,St3,ST [I]δ,δ/[ISfull]δ,δ 0.689 0.657 0.595 0.700 0.698 0.661 0.704 Table 4: Comparison of Fisher information for calibrating power-law impact. The entries with bold numbers indicate the method has a better performance for estimating δ than using J (i.e., ratio greater than 0 .651). As expected, we see that adding more points always increases the accuracy of estimation, no matter which points you already include. In this example, similar to Theorem 1, the inclusion of the earliest sample point St1 brings most improvement (just the two points withSt1 andST can outperform J) and any combination of three points can outperform the VWAP cost J. The method based on four points recovers about 70% of the ISfull. However, we do note that ISfull here are computed based on the ideal, limiting case where ∆ t↓ 0 and N→∞ (the number observations approach inﬁnity). Moreover, we note that this depends on the particular choice of points. For example, if we let t1 = T 4,t 2 = T 2,t 3 = 3T 4 and t4 = T , then we would have [I]δ,δ [ISfull]δ,δ = 0.662, whereas if we set 24 t1 = T 20,t 2 = T 10,t 3 = T 3 andt4 =T , we would have [I]δ,δ [ISfull]δ,δ = 0.749 (here we see again the improvement related to the inclusion of earlier sample points). We again verify our results on simulation. The results are summarized in Table 5. The performance is evaluated using the squared error between the true cost and the estimated cost, and the parenthesis shows the standard error of the mean error. J is the model based on the average cost of VWAP, others are based on the points along the price trajectory. t1 = T 8,t 2 = T 2,t 3 = 5T 8 andt4 =T . In the simulation study, we use similar settings as the above theoretical analysis with the power-law kernel G(s) = s−γ and power-law impact f(v) = vδ. We set T = 0.1, v = 0.3, σ = 0.2, γ = 0.4 and δ = 0.6. The diﬀusion process is discretized into 1024 time bins. The data-generating model and the estimation model are in the same parametric format and only δ is estimated. The ﬁrst model is based on the average cost of VWAP as in (39). Other models rely on the price trajectory as discussed in section 3.2 with a subset or all points at t1 = T 8,t 2 = T 2,t 3 = 5T 8 and t4 =T . Each estimation has 300 samples, and the simulation is repeated 40,000 times. The performance is evaluated using the squared error of the cost with the estimated ˆδ. Bold numbers in Table 5 indicate the method has a better performance than using J, after a standard two-sample t-test. The conclusion agrees with the theoretical analysis that the cost-based method is inferior to the price trajectory-based methods if earlier price trajectory points are selected (for examplet1 ort2). In addition, if more trajectory points are chosen or the earlier the points are selected, the performance will be better. Estimator mean error×10−7 (SE×10−9) J 3.980 (2.807) St1,ST 3.769 (2.648) St2,ST 3.930 (2.771) St3,ST 4.323 (3.054) St1,St2,ST 3.706 (2.604) St1,St3,ST 3.716 (2.611) St2,St3,ST 3.905 (2.752) St1,St2,St3,ST 3.684 (2.589) Table 5: Numerical comparison of models with power-law impact using simulation. 4.3.2 Example 1: Exponential Kernel Next, we consider the setting of [Obizhaeva and Wang, 2013], where f(v)∝v and G(s)∝e−ρs so that µ(t,v ;θ) = cv ρ (1−e−ρt) for some c. For this example, we assume T = 0.1, v = 0.3, σ = 1 c⋆ = 0.01 and ρ⋆ = 0.15. In this example, we estimate c and ρ jointly and we can compute ISfull now as (again we let ∆t↓ 0): [ISfull]θi,θj = 1 σ2 ∫ T 0 (∂2µθ(t,v ) ∂θi∂t )(∂2µθ(t,v ) ∂θj∂t )dt. For joint estimation, we no longer simply compare the ratio of speciﬁc entries in I againstISfull as in the last example. Instead, we compute the matrix 2-norm (i.e., the spectral norm) of I1/2 Sfull·I−1·I 1/2 Sfull. To see why, note that ‖I1/2 Sfull·I−1 X ·I 1/2 Sfull‖2≤ 1 +ϵ ⇔ wTI−1 X w≤ (1 +ϵ)wTI−1 Sfull w, ∀w which, in view of (18), implies the asymptotic variance for estimating any function of θ using X cannot be more than (1 + ϵ) times more than the asymptotic variance estimated using Sfull (i.e., smaller value of‖I1/2 Sfull·I−1·I 1/2 Sfull‖2 indicates a more accurate estimate, the optimal estimation based on Sfull has ‖I1/2 Sfull·I−1 Sfull·I 1/2 Sfull‖2 = 1). Moreover, same as the last example, we also compare with the VWAP cost J on the asymptotic variance for estimating c (i.e., calibrating impact function f. Here, as before, we use the ratio [I]c,c [ISfull]c,c to compare against the benchmark [IJ]c,c [ISfull]c,c = 0.754. ). We do not compute the joint estimation of c,ρ under VWAP cost J as the Fisher information based on J alone has rank one. Again, we pick the following representative sampling times t1 = T 8,t 2 = T 4,t 3 = 5T 8 in addition to T . The results are summarized in Table 6. 25 St1,ST St2,ST St3,ST St1,St2,ST St1,St3,ST St2,St3,ST St1,St2,St3,ST ‖I 1/2 Sfull ·I −1·I 1/2 Sfull ‖2 3.025 1.769 1.426 1.732 1.219 1.137 1.122 [I]c,c/[ISfull]c,c 1-1.258e-5 1-8.184e-6 1-5.590e-6 1-7.962e-6 1-3.376e-6 1-2.274e-6 1-2.051e-6 Table 6: Comparison of Fisher information for calibrating [Obizhaeva and Wang, 2013]. The numerical results from Table 6 are in line with the ﬁndings from the ﬁrst example, where adding more points always increases the accuracy of estimation. However, for this model, the inclusion of earlier points St1 does not improve the estimation as much as the inclusion of later points St3. This is due to the fact that, we are not just calibrating impact function f, but also the decay kernel G. As we can see, in this example the asymptotic variance of estimation (for any function of θ) using four points method is within 12.2% of the optimal one. On the other hand, for calibrating the impact function f, all sampling-based methods in the table are close to optimal (i.e. close to 1) and considerably outperform J (i.e., 75.4%). Remark 4. Although we have shown that the full price trajectory data Sfull is most eﬃcient and adding more price pointsSt increases the eﬃciency, there seems to be, based on previous examples, a “diminishing return” eﬀect to adding price points, as the increase in eﬃciency tends to decrease in each addition. However, the quantiﬁcation of such an eﬀect or the characterization of eﬃciency for n given points requires further research. 4.4 Square-root Law: A Special Case A well-known, widely-used rule-of-thumb to produce a pre-trade estimate of cost is the square-root law. As stated in [T´ oth et al., 2011], the square-root law provides a remarkably good ﬁt on empirical data (although it is argued in [Zarinelli et al., 2015] that the logarithmic function provides a better ﬁt across more orders of magnitude than the square root function). It is suggested that the square-root law remains a robust statistical phenomenon across a spectrum of traded instruments/markets and is roughly independent of trading period, order type, trade duration/rate, and stock capitalization [Zarinelli et al., 2015]. In particular, under the framework (1), the square-root law can be stated in terms of the impact [Zarinelli et al., 2015]: µ(T,v )∝ (vT ) 1 2 =X 1 2, (48) or the average cost per-share [Gatheral, 2010]: cvwap X ≜ E[v ∫T 0 Stdt−XS0] X ∝X 1 2. (49) The original statement uses X/VD but we have scaled X by VD (i.e., VD = 1, see remarks following (1)). As noted in [Zarinelli et al., 2015], under (48), the market impact no longer depends on the speciﬁc trading ratev or trade durationT , but only on their productX =vT . This phenomenon can be seen as a special case of propagator model under the power-law impactf(v)∝vδ and power-law decayG(s) =s−γ, with the constraint that δ +γ = 1 (see [Gatheral, 2010]). Under such model, (48) is consistent µ(T,v ;θ)∝ vδT 1−γ 1−γ = 1 δ (vT )δ (50) and (49) is consistent with cvwap X = v ∫T 0 E[St]dt−XS0 X ∝ 1 δ(1 +δ)(vT )δ, (51) whenδ =γ = 1 2, as a special case of γ +δ = 1. From an estimation point of view, if we want to calibrate such a propagator model, where the impact only depends on the product vt, by estimating δ under the constraint γ +δ = 1, we can compare the estimation method using sampled points ( St,ST ) based on (50) or using the cost of the VWAP J = v ∫T 0 Stdt−XS0 based on (51). Leveraging techniques from sections before, we have the following Corollary. Again we observe the power of an early sample around 20%. Yet, just as in Table 3, sampling too early is not suﬃciently helpful. 26 Corollary 3. Under the propagator model f(v)∝vδ and G(s)∝sδ−1, if δ≤ 0.8 and 0.005≤vT≤ 1, then the Fisher information matrix (one dimension, estimating δ only) satisﬁes ISt,ST (δ)≥I J(δ), whenever 1.2%≤t/T≤ 22.2%. Proof. See Appendix A.3.7. 5 Limitations In this section, we discuss some limitations and their practical implications on the aforementioned the- orems. First, theorems in Section 3 rely on Assumption 1, which states, the stochastic law (or the underlying “true” structure) governing the process of market impact can be correctly speciﬁed within the parameterized model. It is natural to discuss, when this assumption fails, how the results of previous theorems hold and what types of adjustments need to be made regarding the quantiﬁcation of estimation “eﬃciency”. 5.1 Model Misspeciﬁcation Model misspeciﬁcation occurs when the “true” underlying process of market impact cannot be correctly speciﬁed by (1) (or a speciﬁc variant of (1), e.g., Almgren Chriss model or the propagator model). In other words, given ( T,v )∼ Gorder, the joint distribution of the discretized price trajectory S ∈ RN follows distribution F ; however, a θ⋆ ∈ Θ such that F (θ) equals F does not exist, where F (θ⋆) is characterized by St = S0 +µθ⋆(t,v ) + σWt for all t ∈ [0,T ] and ( T,v ) ∼ Gorder. In this setting, under regularity conditions, it is shown in [White, 1982, Bishwal, 2007] that the MLE (or QMLE, quasi- maximum likelihood estimator in this setting [White, 1982]) ˆθMLE = arg maxθ∈Θ ∑ jl(Sj|θ) estimates the parameter θ⋆ KL, which minimizes the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence θ⋆ KL = arg min θ∈Θ DKL(F‖F (θ)) (52) with consistency and asymptotic normality. As a widely used statistical distance measure, the KL divergence (also known as relative entropy) DKL(P‖Q) between two probability measure P and Q is deﬁned as DKL(P‖Q) = ∫ log dP dQdP, where dP dQ is the Radon-Nikodym derivative of P w.r.t Q. In other words, under model misspeciﬁcation, the MLE estimates the parameters whose corresponding price trajectory distribution is the closest to the true one, in terms of the statistical distance measured by KL-divergence. Since F is unknown, to gain some intuition on the property of θ⋆ KL, we consider the following idealized example, where we observe the entire continuous path{St}0≤t≤T . Example 10. Given (v,T ), suppose the true price process {St}0≤t≤T is governed by a diﬀusion process: dSt =µ⋆(St;t,v )dt +σ⋆(St;t,v )dWt, 0≤t≤T, (53) for some µ⋆(·),σ⋆(·), which cannot be described by (1) for any θ∈ Θ: dSt = ∂µθ(t,v ) ∂t dt +σdWt, 0≤t≤T,θ ∈ Θ. Then, using Girsanov theorem, [McKEAGUE, 1984] showed the log-likelihood function of the process {St}0≤t≤T , as an element of C[0,T ] (C[0,T ] represents the space of continuous function on [0 ,T ]), can be written as l(θ|{St}0≤t≤T ) = − 1 2σ2 ∫ T 0 (∂µθ(t,v ) ∂t −µ⋆(St;t,v ) )2 dt + 1 2σ2 ∫ T 0 ( µ⋆(St;t,v ) )2 dt + 1 σ2 ∫ T 0 ∂µθ(t,v ) ∂t σ⋆(St;t,v )dWt. 27 Given suﬃcient metaorder data, the sum of the log-likelihood can be maximized to obtain an optimal value ˆθMLE (if exists), which can be seen as an estimator for θ⋆ = arg max θ∈Θ E [ l({St}0≤t≤T|θ) ] = arg min θ∈Θ ∫ T 0 E [(∂µθ(t,v ) ∂t −µ⋆(St;t,v ) )2] dt. Thus, in this example, under model misspeciﬁcation, the θ⋆ corresponds to a model whose drift term (i.e., ∂µθ(t,v) ∂t , or the gradient of impact function µθ(t,v ) w.r.t t,), on average, best matches true drift term µ⋆(St;t,v ) of St in mean squared error over [0,T ]. This example suggests the MLE from (1) seeks to recover an impact function that best describes the shape of the impact function by matching gradients (or how the gradient diminishes, in presence of concavity of impact function [Zarinelli et al., 2015]), rather than the direct value the impact function. More importantly, how does model misspeciﬁcation aﬀect our discussion, largely based on the Fisher information, regarding the (asymptotic) “eﬃciency” of MLE? When the model is correctly speciﬁed, as mentioned in (16), the asymptotic covariance matrix of ˆθMLE scaling with 1√n (i.e., the number of metaorders) is the Fisher information matrix evaluated at the true model parameter θ⋆, I(θ⋆) =A(θ⋆) ≜ E [(∂l(θ|S) ∂θ )(∂l(θ|S) ∂θ )T] which can be equivalently deﬁned in Hessian form, known as the information matrix equivalence theorem [White, 1982], as A(θ⋆) =B(θ⋆), (54) where [B]ij(θ⋆) ≜−E [ ∂2l(θ|S) ∂θi∂θj ] . Note both E above refer to expectation taken w.r.t. the true probability measure (Eθ⋆ when the model is correctly speciﬁed and is generally unknown under model misspeciﬁca- tion). However, as shown in [White, 1982], under model misspeciﬁcation, (54) no longer holds and the (scaled) asymptotic variance as ˆθMLE approachesθ⋆ KL becomes C(θ⋆ KL) =B−1(θ⋆ KL)A(θ⋆ KL)B−1(θ⋆ KL). Moreover, [White, 1982] shows the discrepancies between empirical estimates of A(θ⋆ KL) andB(θ⋆ KL) can be used to test model misspeciﬁcation. However, this implies the conclusion drawn from our previous theorems no longer holds, as they rely on the comparison of the Fisher information of correctly speciﬁed models. In this case, it becomes less clear how to choose the appropriate models or consider estimation eﬃciency of MLE based on experiment design, as theoretical properties of A(θ⋆ KL) orB(θ⋆ KL) depends on the unknown, true distribution of the price trajectory. Thus, the presence of model misspeciﬁcation will pose a limitation to the results of previous theorems. To better discuss the extent of such limitations and possible remedies, we revisit relevant concepts on model selection from statistical learning/machine learning. 5.2 Simulation In this section, we perform a simulation study for the model misspeciﬁcation case. The estimator model follows the power-law kernelG(s) =s−γ and power-law impactf(v) =vδ (soµθ(t,v ) = vδt1−γ 1−γ ), whereδ is the only parameter that needs to be estimated. However, the sample-generating model does not have the same parametric format. The generating model has G(s) =s−γ and f(v) = 1.5 ln(1 + 0.5v2 + 0.7v) (so µ⋆(t,v ) = 1.5 ln(1 + 0.5v2 + 0.7v)t1−γ 1−γ ). We set σ = 0.2, γ = 0.4. Each estimation has 300 samples, and each sample trajectory is assigned a random price trajectory length T ∼ Uniform(0.1, 0.15) and a random v∼ Uniform(0.3, 0.4). The simulation is repeated 40,000 times for each scenario. The diﬀusion process is discretized into 1024 time bins. The ﬁrst model is based on the average cost of VWAP as in (39). Other models rely on the price trajectory as discussed in section 3.2 with a subset or all points at t1 = T 8,t 2 = T 2,t 3 = 5T 8 and t4 = T relative to the corresponding path length T . The error of estimation is the mean squared error of the cost across all sample paths. Results are shown in Table 7. The conclusion is similar to the well-speciﬁed model in section 4.3 and the simulation study therein 28 that the cost-based method is worse than the price trajectory-based methods if earlier price trajectory points are selected (for example t1 ort2). In addition, if more trajectory points are chosen or the earlier the points are selected, the performance will be better. The performance is evaluated using the squared error between the true cost and the estimated cost, and the parenthesis shows the standard error of the mean error. X = J is the model based on the average cost of VWAP, others are based on the points along the price trajectory. t1 = T 8,t 2 = T 2,t 3 = 5T 8 and t4 =T . Bold numbers indicate the method has a statistically signiﬁcant better performance than using J based on two sample t-tests. Estimator via X mean error×10−7 (SD×10−9) X =J 1.079 (4.831) X =St1,ST 1.049 (4.612) X =St2,ST 1.077 (4.822) X =St3,ST 1.144 (5.294) X =St1,St2,ST 1.038 (4.538) X =St1,St3,ST 1.040 (4.546) X =St2,St3,ST 1.073 (4.788) X =St1,St2,St3,ST 1.034 (4.509) Table 7: Numerical comparison of models with misspeciﬁcation. 5.3 Model Selection As in (52), given (T,v )∼Gorder, we useF to denote the true distribution of price trajectory S andF (θ) the one characterized under St =S0 +µθ(t,v ) +σWt forSt∈ S and (T,v )∼Gorder. Then, as discussed in the previous section, if we measure the risk as R(θ) =DKL(F‖F (θ)), which quantiﬁes the discrepancy between distributions ﬁtted by the model and truth. Then, the model selection problem decomposes the risk as R(θ) =R(θ)− inf θ∈Θ R(θ) | {z } estimation error + inf θ∈Θ R(θ) | {z } approximation error =R(θ)−R(θ⋆ KL)| {z } estimation error + R(θ⋆ KL)| {z } approximation error (55) In a correctly speciﬁed model,θ⋆ KL =θ⋆ and the estimation error is 0. The approximation error is directly related to the eﬃciency for estimating θ⋆ and the results of our previous theorem, based on the Fisher information matrix, can be applied. When a model misspeciﬁcation occurs, diﬀerent factors/concerns can come into play and the landscape is less clear. For example, • If one is concerned with an accurate estimation of the price trajectory for various values of ( T,v ), then the estimation using the price trajectory would increase the sample size, compared to using summary statistics, e.g., VWAP, which could lead to a positive eﬀect on reducing estimation error. On the other hand, depending on how the distribution is misspeciﬁed, e.g., heavy tail versus light tail, the method using summary statistics could turn out to be more robust than using the entire trajectory. In this case, the previous comparison between using diﬀerent summary statistics (VWAP or sampled price points) may or may not hold. • If one is only concerned with an accurate estimation of summary statistics, e.g., VWAP. Then, this could lead to a reduced approximation error because KL divergence monotonically decreases under the non-invertible transformation (it is well known that KL divergence is invariant under invertible transformations, i.e., given random variable X,Y and an invertible transformation g(·), we have DKL(X|Y ) = DKL(g(X)|g(Y )). However, it can be shown that DKL(X|Y )≥ DKL(g(X)|g(Y )) when g is non-invertible (see [Mena et al., 2018]). The transformation from the price trajectory S to summary statistics are typically non-invertible.). However, it could lead to an increase in approximation error due to reduced sample size or ineﬃciencies of estimation. 29 During practical implementation, we should take these issues into consideration. Typical methods include cross-validation upon diﬀerent methods (or some hybrid of them) under the speciﬁed loss function or Bayesian inference based on carefully calibrated prior from previous data (or even online data, where one can update the posterior as the order is executed and adjust the execution). This is left for discussion and future research. References [Adrian et al., 2020] Adrian, T., Capponi, A., Fleming, M., Vogt, E., and Zhang, H. (2020). Intraday market making with overnight inventory costs. Journal of Financial Markets , 50:100564. [A¨ ıt-Sahalia, 2002] A¨ ıt-Sahalia, Y. (2002). Maximum likelihood estimation of discretely sampled diﬀu- sions: a closed-form approximation approach. Econometrica, 70(1):223–262. [A¨ ıt-Sahalia, 2008] A¨ ıt-Sahalia, Y. (2008). Closed-form likelihood expansions for multivariate diﬀusions. The Annals of Statistics , 36(2):906–937. [A¨ ıt-Sahalia and Mykland, 2004] A¨ ıt-Sahalia, Y. and Mykland, P. A. (2004). Estimators of diﬀusions with randomly spaced discrete observations: A general theory. The Annals of Statistics , 32(5):2186– 2222. [A¨ ıt-Sahalia and Mykland, 2009] A¨ ıt-Sahalia, Y. and Mykland, P. A. (2009). Estimating volatility in the presence of market microstructure noise: A review of the theory and practical considerations. Handbook of ﬁnancial time series , pages 577–598. [Alfonsi et al., 2008] Alfonsi, A., Fruth, A., and Schied, A. (2008). Constrained portfolio liquidation in a limit order book model. Banach Center Publ , 83:9–25. [Alfonsi et al., 2010] Alfonsi, A., Fruth, A., and Schied, A. (2010). Optimal execution strategies in limit order books with general shape functions. Quantitative ﬁnance, 10(2):143–157. [Alfonsi and Schied, 2010] Alfonsi, A. and Schied, A. (2010). Optimal trade execution and absence of price manipulations in limit order book models. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics , 1(1):490– 522. [Alfonsi et al., 2012] Alfonsi, A., Schied, A., and Slynko, A. (2012). Order book resilience, price manip- ulation, and the positive portfolio problem. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics , 3(1):511–533. [Almgren and Chriss, 2001] Almgren, R. and Chriss, N. (2001). Optimal execution of portfolio transac- tions. Journal of Risk , 3:5–40. [Almgren and Chriss, 1999] Almgren, R. and Chriss, N. A. (1999). Value under liquidation. Risk, 12:61– 63. [Almgren and Lorenz, 2007] Almgren, R. and Lorenz, J. (2007). Adaptive arrival price. Algorithmic trading III: precision, control, execution, 2007(1):59–66. [Almgren et al., 2005] Almgren, R., Thum, C., Hauptmann, E., and Li, H. (2005). Direct estimation of equity market impact. Risk, 18:58–62. [Almgren, 2003] Almgren, R. F. (2003). Optimal execution with nonlinear impact functions and trading- enhanced risk. Applied mathematical ﬁnance, 10(1):1–18. [Avellaneda and Stoikov, 2008] Avellaneda, M. and Stoikov, S. (2008). High-frequency trading in a limit order book. Quantitative Finance, 8(3):217–224. [Bacry et al., 2015] Bacry, E., Iuga, A., Lasnier, M., and Lehalle, C.-A. (2015). Market impacts and the life cycle of investors orders. Market Microstructure and Liquidity , 1(02):1550009. [Bank and Baum, 2004] Bank, P. and Baum, D. (2004). Hedging and portfolio optimization in ﬁnan- cial markets with a large trader. Mathematical Finance: An International Journal of Mathematics, Statistics and Financial Economics , 14(1):1–18. [Bayraktar and Ludkovski, 2014] Bayraktar, E. and Ludkovski, M. (2014). Liquidation in limit order books with controlled intensity. Mathematical Finance, 24(4):627–650. [Bertsimas and Lo, 1998] Bertsimas, D. and Lo, A. W. (1998). Optimal control of execution costs. Journal of Financial Markets , 1(1):1–50. 30 [Bibby et al., 2010] Bibby, B. M., Jacobsen, M., and Sørensen, M. (2010). Estimating functions for discretely sampled diﬀusion-type models. InHandbook of ﬁnancial econometrics: Tools and Techniques, pages 203–268. Elsevier. [Bickel et al., 1993] Bickel, P. J., Klaassen, C. A., Bickel, P. J., Ritov, Y., Klaassen, J., Wellner, J. A., and Ritov, Y. (1993). Eﬃcient and adaptive estimation for semiparametric models, volume 4. Springer. [Bishwal, 2007] Bishwal, J. P. (2007). Parameter estimation in stochastic diﬀerential equations. Springer. [Bouchaud, 2010] Bouchaud, J.-P. (2010). Price impact. Encyclopedia of Quantitative Finance . [Bouchaud et al., 2009] Bouchaud, J.-P., Farmer, J. D., and Lillo, F. (2009). How markets slowly digest changes in supply and demand. In Handbook of ﬁnancial markets: dynamics and evolution , pages 57–160. Elsevier. [Bouchaud et al., 2003] Bouchaud, J.-P., Gefen, Y., Potters, M., and Wyart, M. (2003). Fluctuations and response in ﬁnancial markets: the subtle nature ofrandom’price changes. Quantitative ﬁnance, 4(2):176. [Bouchaud et al., 2006] Bouchaud, J.-P., Kockelkoren, J., and Potters, M. (2006). Random walks, liq- uidity molasses and critical response in ﬁnancial markets. Quantitative ﬁnance, 6(02):115–123. [Briere et al., 2020] Briere, M., Lehalle, C.-A., Nefedova, T., and Raboun, A. (2020). Modeling trans- action costs when trades may be crowded: A bayesian network using partially observable orders imbalance. Machine Learning for Asset Management: New Developments and Financial Applications , pages 387–430. [Brunnermeier and Pedersen, 2005] Brunnermeier, M. K. and Pedersen, L. H. (2005). Predatory trading. The Journal of Finance , 60(4):1825–1863. [Bucci et al., 2019] Bucci, F., Benzaquen, M., Lillo, F., and Bouchaud, J.-P. (2019). Crossover from linear to square-root market impact. Physical review letters, 122(10):108302. [Busseti and Lillo, 2012] Busseti, E. and Lillo, F. (2012). Calibration of optimal execution of ﬁnancial transactions in the presence of transient market impact. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2012(09):P09010. [Cardaliaguet and Lehalle, 2018] Cardaliaguet, P. and Lehalle, C.-A. (2018). Mean ﬁeld game of controls and an application to trade crowding. Mathematics and Financial Economics , 12(3):335–363. [Carlin et al., 2007] Carlin, B. I., Lobo, M. S., and Viswanathan, S. (2007). Episodic liquidity crises: Cooperative and predatory trading. The Journal of Finance , 62(5):2235–2274. [Cetin et al., 2010] Cetin, U., Jarrow, R. A., and Protter, P. (2010). Liquidity risk and arbitrage pricing theory. In Handbook of Quantitative Finance and Risk Management , pages 1007–1024. Springer. [Chaloner and Verdinelli, 1995] Chaloner, K. and Verdinelli, I. (1995). Bayesian experimental design: A review. Statistical Science, pages 273–304. [Chang and Chen, 2011] Chang, J. and Chen, S. X. (2011). On the approximate maximum likelihood estimation for diﬀusion processes. The Annals of Statistics , 39(6):2820–2851. [Cont et al., 2014] Cont, R., Kukanov, A., and Stoikov, S. (2014). The price impact of order book events. Journal of ﬁnancial econometrics , 12(1):47–88. [Curato et al., 2017] Curato, G., Gatheral, J., and Lillo, F. (2017). Optimal execution with non-linear transient market impact. Quantitative Finance, 17(1):41–54. [Dang, 2017] Dang, N.-M. (2017). Optimal execution with transient impact. Market Microstructure and Liquidity, 3(01):1750008. [Donier et al., 2015] Donier, J., Bonart, J., Mastromatteo, I., and Bouchaud, J.-P. (2015). A fully consistent, minimal model for non-linear market impact. Quantitative ﬁnance, 15(7):1109–1121. [Durant et al., 2021] Durant, J. H., Wilkins, L., Butler, K., and Cooper, J. F. (2021). Determining the maximum information gain and optimizing experimental design in neutron reﬂectometry using the ﬁsher information. Journal of Applied Crystallography , 54(4):1100–1110. [Fedorov, 2010] Fedorov, V. (2010). Optimal experimental design. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Statistics, 2(5):581–589. 31 [Forsyth, 2011] Forsyth, P. A. (2011). A hamilton–jacobi–bellman approach to optimal trade execution. Applied numerical mathematics, 61(2):241–265. [Forsyth et al., 2012] Forsyth, P. A., Kennedy, J. S., Tse, S. T., and Windcliﬀ, H. (2012). Optimal trade execution: a mean quadratic variation approach. Journal of Economic dynamics and Control , 36(12):1971–1991. [Gatheral, 2010] Gatheral, J. (2010). No-dynamic-arbitrage and market impact. Quantitative ﬁnance, 10(7):749–759. [Gatheral and Schied, 2011] Gatheral, J. and Schied, A. (2011). Optimal trade execution under geomet- ric brownian motion in the almgren and chriss framework. International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance, 14(03):353–368. [Gatheral and Schied, 2013] Gatheral, J. and Schied, A. (2013). Dynamical models of market impact and algorithms for order execution. Handbook on Systemic Risk, Jean-Pierre Fouque, Joseph A. Langsam, eds, pages 579–599. [Gatheral et al., 2011] Gatheral, J., Schied, A., and Slynko, A. (2011). Exponential resilience and decay of market impact. In Econophysics of order-driven markets , pages 225–236. Springer. [Gatheral et al., 2012] Gatheral, J., Schied, A., and Slynko, A. (2012). Transient linear price impact and fredholm integral equations. Mathematical Finance: An International Journal of Mathematics, Statistics and Financial Economics , 22(3):445–474. [Grenander, 1950] Grenander, U. (1950). Stochastic processes and statistical inference. Arkiv f¨ or matem- atik, 1(3):195–277. [Grinold and Kahn, 2000] Grinold, R. C. and Kahn, R. N. (2000). Active portfolio management. [Gu´ eant et al., 2012] Gu´ eant, O., Lehalle, C.-A., and Fernandez-Tapia, J. (2012). Optimal portfolio liquidation with limit orders. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics , 3(1):740–764. [Huberman and Stanzl, 2004] Huberman, G. and Stanzl, W. (2004). Price manipulation and quasi- arbitrage. Econometrica, 72(4):1247–1275. [Ibragimov and Has’ Minskii, 2013] Ibragimov, I. A. and Has’ Minskii, R. Z. (2013). Statistical estima- tion: asymptotic theory , volume 16. Springer Science & Business Media. [Jusselin and Rosenbaum, 2020] Jusselin, P. and Rosenbaum, M. (2020). No-arbitrage implies power-law market impact and rough volatility. Mathematical Finance, 30(4):1309–1336. [Kagan and Shepp, 2005] Kagan, A. and Shepp, L. A. (2005). A suﬃciency paradox: an insuﬃcient statistic preserving the ﬁsher information. The American Statistician, 59(1):54–56. [Keener, 2010] Keener, R. W. (2010). Theoretical statistics: Topics for a core course . Springer Science & Business Media. [Kyle, 1985] Kyle, A. S. (1985). Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 1315–1335. [Lehalle and Dang, 2010] Lehalle, C.-A. and Dang, N. M. (2010). Rigorous post-trade market impact measurement and the price formation process. Trading, 2010(1):108–114. [Lehmann and Casella, 2006] Lehmann, E. L. and Casella, G. (2006). Theory of point estimation . Springer Science & Business Media. [Li, 2013] Li, C. (2013). Maximum-likelihood estimation for diﬀusion processes via closed-form density expansions. The Annals of Statistics , pages 1350–1380. [Lillo et al., 2003] Lillo, F., Farmer, J. D., and Mantegna, R. N. (2003). Master curve for price-impact function. Nature, 421(6919):129–130. [Loeb, 1983] Loeb, T. F. (1983). Trading cost: the critical link between investment information and results. Financial Analysts Journal , 39(3):39–44. [McKEAGUE, 1984] McKEAGUE, I. W. (1984). Estimation for diﬀusion processes under misspeciﬁed models. Journal of Applied Probability , 21(3):511–520. [Mena et al., 2018] Mena, G., Belanger, D., Linderman, S., and Snoek, J. (2018). Learning latent per- mutations with gumbel-sinkhorn networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations. 32 [Merton and Samuelson, 1992] Merton, R. C. and Samuelson, P. A. (1992). Continuous-time ﬁnance. [Mityagin, 2020] Mityagin, B. S. (2020). The zero set of a real analytic function. Matematicheskie Zametki, 107(3):473–475. [Moro et al., 2009] Moro, E., Vicente, J., Moyano, L. G., Gerig, A., Farmer, J. D., Vaglica, G., Lillo, F., and Mantegna, R. N. (2009). Market impact and trading proﬁle of hidden orders in stock markets. Physical Review E, 80(6):066102. [Nadtochiy, 2022] Nadtochiy, S. (2022). A simple microstructural explanation of the concavity of price impact. Mathematical Finance, 32(1):78–113. [Obizhaeva and Wang, 2013] Obizhaeva, A. A. and Wang, J. (2013). Optimal trading strategy and supply/demand dynamics. Journal of Financial Markets , 16(1):1–32. [Pedersen, 1995] Pedersen, A. R. (1995). Consistency and asymptotic normality of an approximate maximum likelihood estimator for discretely observed diﬀusion processes. Bernoulli, pages 257–279. [Perold, 1988] Perold, A. F. (1988). The implementation shortfall: Paper versus reality. Journal of Portfolio Management, 14(3):4. [Robert et al., 2012] Robert, E., Robert, F., and Jeﬀrey, R. (2012). Measuring and modeling execution cost and risk. The Journal of Portfolio Management , 38(2):14–28. [Schied and Sch¨ oneborn, 2009] Schied, A. and Sch¨ oneborn, T. (2009). Risk aversion and the dynamics of optimal liquidation strategies in illiquid markets. Finance and Stochastics, 13(2):181–204. [T´ oth et al., 2011] T´ oth, B., Lemperiere, Y., Deremble, C., De Lataillade, J., Kockelkoren, J., and Bouchaud, J.-P. (2011). Anomalous price impact and the critical nature of liquidity in ﬁnancial markets. Physical Review X, 1(2):021006. [Van der Vaart, 2000] Van der Vaart, A. W. (2000). Asymptotic statistics, volume 3. Cambridge univer- sity press. [White, 1982] White, H. (1982). Maximum likelihood estimation of misspeciﬁed models. Econometrica: Journal of the econometric society , pages 1–25. [Whittle, 1973] Whittle, P. (1973). Some general points in the theory of optimal experimental design. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological) , 35(1):123–130. [Wolkenhauer et al., 2008] Wolkenhauer, O., Wellstead, P., Cho, K.-H., Banga, J. R., and Balsa-Canto, E. (2008). Parameter estimation and optimal experimental design. Essays in biochemistry, 45:195–210. [Zamir, 1998] Zamir, R. (1998). A proof of the ﬁsher information inequality via a data processing argument. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 44(3):1246–1250. [Zarinelli et al., 2015] Zarinelli, E., Treccani, M., Farmer, J. D., and Lillo, F. (2015). Beyond the square root: Evidence for logarithmic dependence of market impact on size and participation rate. Market Microstructure and Liquidity, 1(02):1550004. [Zegers, 2015] Zegers, P. (2015). Fisher information properties. Entropy, 17(7):4918–4939. [Zhang et al., 2005] Zhang, L., Mykland, P. A., and A¨ ıt-Sahalia, Y. (2005). A tale of two time scales: Determining integrated volatility with noisy high-frequency data. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 100(472):1394–1411. 33 A Appendix A.1 Asymptotic Inference A.1.1 Proof of Basic Results and Review Deﬁnition 4 (Diﬀerentiability in Quadratic Mean). A family of model{Pθ}Θ with dominating measure m is diﬀerentiable in quadratic mean (q.m.d.) if there exists a vector of measurable function ˙lθ = (˙lθ,1,..., ˙lθ,K) such that ∫ [√pθ+h−√pθ− 1 2hT ˙lθ √pθ ] dm =o(‖h2‖) as h→ 0. Deﬁnition 5 (Regular Estimator). For a parametric family of probability measure {Pθ}Θ, a sequence of estimators{Tn}n≥0 is called regular at θ for estimating φ(θ) if, for every h, √n ( Tn−φ(θ + h√n) ) d −−−−−→ Pθ+ h√n Lθ, i.e., the left hand side converges in distribution under Pθ+ h√n to some random variable Lθ which do not depend on h. Proof of Proposition 2. The proof mainly follows from basic results in [Van der Vaart, 2000] and [Bickel et al., 1993]. Given assumption 3.3, we derive that θ→ √ pθ(x) is continuously for all x. Assumption 4 ensures that IX(θ) is well-deﬁned and continuous in θ. Assumption 1 gives openness of Θ. As as result, according to Lemma 7.6 in [Van der Vaart, 2000] or Proposition 1 in [Bickel et al., 1993], the model {Pθ}Θ is q.m.d. with ˙lθ given by ˙pθ pθ . Then, we can use Assumptions 2 and 3.4 to derive | logpθ1(x)− logpθ2(x)|≤ L‖θ1−θ2‖, for some θ1,θ 2 in the neighborhood of θ⋆. Assumption 3.1 gives consistency of ˆθn by Theorem 5.14 of [Van der Vaart, 2000]. These two results, in addition to assumption 3.5 and q.m.d. give (16), according to Theorem 7.12 in [Van der Vaart, 2000]. Finally, (17) follows by Theorem 8.11 in [Van der Vaart, 2000], using q.m.d. and assumption 4. The locally asymptotic minimax theorem is only one of many ways to argue the asymptotic optimality of MLE. For example, the H´ ajek-LeCam convolution theorem and its variant show that for any regu- lar estimator, the MLE attains the “best” limiting distribution asymptotically and achieves the lowest possible variance for any asymptotically regular sequence of the estimator. Moreover, any improvement over this limit distribution can only be made on a Lebesgue null set of parameters. For a comprehensive review, see section 8 of [Van der Vaart, 2000]. A.1.2 Technical Lemma The appendix mainly consists of technical proofs and additional lemmas. The proof of the following support lemma can be found in [Zamir, 1998, Zegers, 2015]. Lemma 6 (Chain Rule for Fisher Information) . Let X and Y be two statistics of a given experiments (S,F,{Pθ}θ∈Θ), then IX,Y (θ) =IX(θ) +IY|X(θ), whereIY|X(θ) = EX[IY|X=x(θ)] is simply deﬁned as IY|X=x(θ) = Eθ [(∂l(Y|X =x,θ ) ∂θ )(∂l(Y|X =x,θ ) ∂θ )T] . More generally, if we have n statistics X1,X 2,...,X n, then IX1,X2,...,Xn(θ) =IX1(θ) + n−1∑ i=1 IXi+1|X1,...,Xi(θ) whereIXi+1|X1,...,Xi(θ) = EX1,...,Xi[IXi+1|X1,...,Xi=x1,...,xi(θ)]. 34 A.2 Proofs A.2.1 The Proof of Lemma 3 Proof of Lemma 3. The rigorous proof can be found in Theorem 7.2 of [Ibragimov and Has’ Minskii, 2013]. It can be checked that the assumptions in Theorem 7.2 are all satisﬁed. For a more concise proof, similar to the proof in [Zamir, 1998], we can use Lemma 6 to obtain: IX(θ) + EX[Iφ(X)|X=x(θ)] =IX,φ(X)(θ) =Iφ(X)(θ) + Eφ(X)[IX|φ(X)=φ(x)(θ)]. (56) Sinceφ(X) is a statistic of X, it is clear that the conditional distribution ofφ(X) given X is independent of θ, implying thatIφ(X)|X(θ) = 0. Consequently, (56) now becomes IX(θ) =Iφ(X)(θ) + Eφ(X)[IX|φ(X)=φ(x)(θ)]. SinceIX|φ(X)(θ) ≽ 0 (any Fisher information is positive semi-deﬁnite as it is the covariance matrix of the score function), we have shown that IX(θ) ≽Iφ(X)(θ). Now, if φ(X) is a suﬃcient statistic, then the conditional distribution of X givenφ(X) is independent of θ which leads to IX|φ(X)(θ) = 0 and the equality of IX(θ) = Iφ(X)(θ). On the other hand, if IX(θ) =Iφ(X)(θ), we must have Eφ(X)[IX|φ(X)=φ(s)(θ)] = 0, but this does not necessarily imply φ(X) is a suﬃcient statistic. An interesting counter-example where an insuﬃcient statistic preserves Fisher information can be found in [Kagan and Shepp, 2005]. To complete the proof, an additional condition on the continuous diﬀerentiability of density is enough to establish the suﬃciency of φ(X), the detailed proof again is shown in [Kagan and Shepp, 2005]. A.2.2 The Proof of Lemma 4 Proof of Lemma 4. The ﬁrst claim follows directly from Lemma 6 sinceIY|X=x(θ) ≽ 0 and EX[IY|X=x(θ)] ≽ 0. For the second claim, notice by Lemma 6, IY (θ) + EY [IX|Y =y(θ)] =IX,Y (θ) =IX(θ) + EX[IY|X=x(θ)]. Since Y =φ(X) andφ(·) is a bijective mapping, it is easy to check thatEX[IY|X=x(θ)] =EY [IX|Y =y(θ)] = 0 which impliesIX(θ) =IY (θ). A.3 The Joint Distribution of (I, J ) in Almgren-Chriss Model In this derivation, we ﬁx ( v,T ) as constant and derive the distribution of ( I,J ) conditional on ( v,T ). Notice that, after the aﬃne transformation Pt = St−S0 S0 , we have Pt =g(v)t +h(v) +σWt, when t≤T Pt =g(v)T +σWt, when t>T . Following the notations in [Almgren et al., 2005], we let ¯S = ∫t 0 St ˙xtdt X = ∫T 0 Stdt T . First, following (23), we have I =PTpost =Tg (v) +σWTpost, =⇒I∼N (Tg (v),σ 2Tpost) J = ¯S−S0 S0 = 1 T ∫ T 0 Ptdt = T 2g(v) +h(v) +σ 1 T ∫ T 0 Wtdt, =⇒J∼N (T 2g(v) +h(v),σ 2T 3 ) , where we know ∫T 0 Wtdt = ∫T 0 (T−t)dWt∼N (0, ∫T 0 (T−t)2dt) =N (0, T 3 3 ) by Itˆ o’s Lemma. SinceI and J are clearly jointly normal and we have known their mean and variance, we only need to calculate 35 their correlation to determine the joint distribution. First, we can calculate Cov( ∫T 0 Wtdt,WTpost): Cov( ∫ T 0 Wtdt,WTpost) =Cov( ∫ T 0 Wtdt,WT +WTpost−WT ) =Cov( ∫ T 0 Wtdt,WT ) =EWT ∫ T 0 Wtdt = ∫ T 0 E[WTWt]dt = ∫ T 0 tdt = T 2 2 . On the other hand, again using Itˆ o’s Lemma, we have Var( ∫T 0 Wtdt) = T 3 3 and Var(WTpost) = Tpost. Thus, it can be checked that Corr( ∫T 0 Wtdt,WTpost) = √ 3T 4Tpost . This allows characterizing the joint distribution ofI andJ completely, equivalent as in equation (2) of [Almgren et al., 2005], by noting that there exist two independent standard normal random variables ξ1,ξ 2 where WTpost = √ Tpostξ1 ∫ T 0 Wtdt = T 2 2 √ Tpost ξ1 +T √ T 12(4− 3 T Tpost )·ξ2 (57) which can then be shown to be equivalent as (23). A.3.1 Proof of Lemma 5 Based on assumption 1, 2 on the lower and upper boundedness of v andT , and the speciﬁc form of (21), one can routinely check assumption 3.1,3.3,3.4 are satisﬁed. For assumption 3.4, we note that, by (23) the ΣI,J (T ) in Gaussian variable (5) is given by ΣI,J (T ) ≜σ2 [ Tpost − Tpost−T 2 − Tpost−T 2 Tpost 4 − T 6 ] . Deﬁne the ratio τ = Tpost T − 1, we note τ is random but τ >0. Then, one can write ΣI,J (T ) ≜σ2T [1 +τ −τ 2 −τ 2 1+τ 4 − 1 6 ] ≜σ2T Στ. The smallest eigenvalueλ1(τ) of Στ can be explicitly computed by a− √ a2−b wherea = 5(1+τ) 8 − 1 12 is the mean of diagonal elements and b = (1+τ)2 4 − (1+τ) 6 − τ 2 4 is the determinant. For τ >0,λ1(τ) is lower bounded by λ1(0) which is a positive constant. Thus, by assumption 2, we have ΣI,J (T ) =σ2T Στ ≽σ2TLλ1(0)I. For assumption 3.5, the uniqueness of θ⋆ can be violated only if there exists θ′ = (γ′,η′,α′,β′) such that γ′vα′ T =γ⋆vα⋆ T η′vβ′ =η⋆vβ⋆ , (58) for all (v,T ), Gorder almost surely. This is impossible when the support of the marginal distribution of v from Gorder has inﬁnite cardinality (or ﬁnite and suﬃciently large). For assumption, recall from (25) that, II,J (θ) =E(v,T )∼Gorder [ JT I,J (θ,T,v )·σ−2 [ 1 T Tpost/4−T/6 Tpost/3−T/4 1 T Tpost/2−T/2 Tpost/3−T/4 1 T Tpost/2−T/2 Tpost/3−T/4 1 T Tpost Tpost/3−T/4 ] ·JI,J (θ,T,v ) ] , JI,J (θ,T,v ) = [Tvα 0 Tγvα ln(v) 0 0 vβ 0 ηvβ ln(v) ] . 36 In order to showII,J (θ)≻ 0, it suﬃces to show that, for any x∈ RK with‖x‖ = 1, we have xTII,J (θ)x> 0. The non-singularity of Σ I,J and form of II,J (θ) ensures xTII,J (θ)x≥ 0 for all such x. If there exists one such x that xTII,J (θ)x = 0, we must have xTJI,J (θ,T,v )Σ−1 I,J (T )JI,J (θ,T,v )x = 0 for all (v,T )∼Gorder almost surely. To see why, simply note that, for a random variableX≥ 0, E[X] = 0 if and only if P(X = 0) = 1. Due to the non-singularity of Σ I,J (T ), this requires JI,J (θ,T,v )x = 0 for all (v,T )∼Gorder almost surely: x1Tvα +x3Tγvα ln(v) =0 x2vβ +x4ηvβ ln(v) = 0 for all (v,T )∼ Gorder almost surely. This is not possible for any x = 1, when the support of marginal distribution of v from Gorder has inﬁnite cardinality (e.g., x1 +x3 ln(v) = 0 for all v iﬀ x1 =x3 = 0). A.3.2 Derivation of IPT,PTpost (θ) in Almgren-Chriss Model In this derivation, we ﬁx (v,T ) as constant. By Lemma 4, we have IPT,PTpost (θ) =IPTpost,PTpost−PT (θ). To calculateIPTpost,PTpost−PT (θ), note that: ( PTpost PT−PTpost ) ∼N ((Tg (v;θ) h(v;θ) ) ,σ 2 [ Tpost −(Tpost−T ) −(Tpost−T ) Tpost−T ]) . The rest follows from standard calculation based on Lemma 1 and let ( v,T )∼Gorder. A.3.3 Proof of Theorem 1 Proof of Theorem 1. Throughout the proof, we assume (v,T ) is ﬁxed, i.e.,Gorder is a point mass. Results for generic Gorder follow trivially since, for any random variable, X≥Y implies E[X]≥ E[Y ]. Following (28), we can see that, ( PT, Pt′ 1 t′ 1 − PTpost−PT Tpost−T ) is suﬃcient for experiment based on S, thus we also have IS(θ) =IPT,φτ1(Pt1,PT,PTpost )(θ). (59) whereφτ1(Pt1,PT,PTpost) = Pt1 t1 − PTpost−PT Tpost−T andτ1 is ﬁxed for the experiment. Together with (29), we can see that, for (Pt,PT,PTpost), IPt,PT,PTpost (θ) =IPT,φτ (Pt,PT,PTpost )(θ). (60) Now, we can check ( PT t·φτ(Pt,PT,PTpost) ) ∼N ( ¯µ(θ), ¯Σ, ) (61) where ¯µ(θ) ≜ ( Tg (v;θ) +h(v;θ) tg(v;θ) + (1 + t Tpost−T )h(v;θ) ) , ¯Σ ≜σ2 [ T t t t + t2 Tpost−T ] . (62) Recall the deﬁnition in (23) where µ(θ) ≜ (Tg (v;θ) h(v;θ) ) . Now deﬁne the matrix A ≜ [ 1 1 t T 1 + t Tpost−T ] . 37 It is straightforward to check that for all t∈ (0,T ) and Tpost >T , A is non-singular and ¯µ(θ) =Aµ(θ). Thus, if we deﬁne U∈ R2 as U ≜A−1 [ PT t·φτ(Pt,PT,PTpost) ] , (63) we can check that U∼N ( µ(θ),A−1 ¯Σ(A−1)T) (64) Since A is non-singular, we know from Lemma 4 and (60) that IU(θ) =IPT,t·φτ (Pt,PT,PTpost )(θ) =IPt,PT,PTpost (θ). (65) Thus, it suﬃces to calculate IU(θ), for which we use Lemma 1 on (64) to obtain: IPt,PT,PTpost (θ) =IU(θ) =JT I,J (θ) ( AT ¯Σ−1A ) JI,J (θ), where we can carry out direct calculations to get AT ¯Σ−1A =σ−2 [ 1 T 1 T1 T 1 t + 1 Tpost−T ] . Recall from equation (25) that II,J (θ) =JT I,J (θ)·σ−2 [ 1 T Tpost/4−T/6 Tpost/3−T/4 1 T Tpost/2−T/2 Tpost/3−T/4 1 T Tpost/2−T/2 Tpost/3−T/4 1 T Tpost Tpost/3−T/4 ] ·JI,J (θ). In order to showIU(θ) ≽II,J (θ) for generic form of h,g , it suﬃces to show that [ 1 T 1 T1 T 1 t + 1 Tpost−T ] ≽ [ 1 T Tpost/4−T/6 Tpost/3−T/4 1 T Tpost/2−T/2 Tpost/3−T/4 1 T Tpost/2−T/2 Tpost/3−T/4 1 T Tpost Tpost/3−T/4 ] . (66) Deﬁne τ1 ≜ Tpost T and τ2 ≜ T t (notice τ1,τ 2 > 1), showing (66) is equivalent as showing: B ≜ [ 1− τ1/4−1/6 τ1/3−1/4 1− τ1/2−1/2 τ1/3−1/4 1− τ1/2−1/2 τ1/3−1/4 τ2 + 1 τ1−1− τ1 τ1/3−1/4 ] ≽ 0. To check the positive semi-deﬁniteness of the above matrix, we use Sylvester’s criterion, which reduces to checking:    [B]11 = 1− τ1/4−1/6 τ1/3−1/4≥ 0, [B]22 =τ2 + 1 τ1−1− τ1 τ1/3−1/4≥ 0 det(B)≥ 0 . (67) For [B]11, it is easy to check that [B]11 > 0 wheneverτ1 > 1, which is satisﬁed by deﬁnition ofτ1 ≜ Tpost T . For det(B), we wanted to check for det(B) = (1− τ1/4− 1/6 τ1/3− 1/4)(τ2 + 1 τ1− 1− τ1 τ1/3− 1/4)− (1− τ1/2− 1/2 τ1/3− 1/4)2≥ 0. (68) By multiplying a strictly positive term 12 2(τ1/3− 1/4)2, one can check (68) is greater than 0 if and only if (τ2(τ1− 1) + 1)(4τ1− 3)− 12τ1(τ1− 1)− (2τ1− 3)2≥ 0 which simpliﬁes to (τ2− 4)(4τ2 1− 7τ1 + 3)≥ 0. One can check 4τ2 1− 7τ1 + 3 > 0 for all τ1 > 1. Thus, det( B)≥ 0 if and only if τ2≥ 4. So far, the validity of (67) requires τ1 > 1 and τ2≥ 4. Finally, for [ B]22, by multiplying a strictly positive term 12(τ1− 1)(τ1/3− 1/4), it can be checked that [B]22≥ 0 if and only if 4(τ2− 3)τ2 1 + (16− 7τ2)τ1 + 3(τ2− 1)≥ 0. (69) 38 Forτ2≥ 4, (69) is a quadratic function in τ1 with positive quadratic coeﬃcient. The discriminant of (69) is ∆ = (16− 7τ2)2− 48(τ2− 3)(τ2− 1), (70) which satisﬁes ∆ < 0 (no roots) if and only if 4 < τ2 < 28. Thus, for 4 < τ2 < 28, [B]22 > 0 for all τ1 > 1. When τ2 = 4, we have ∆ = 0 and [ B]22≥ 0 for all τ1 > 1. Thus, On the other hand, when τ2≥ 28, (69) has two roots (possibly with multiplicity): 7τ2− 16± √ ∆ 8τ2− 24 . (71) However, it can be checked that, when τ2≥ 28, (τ2− 8)2− (τ2− 4)(τ2− 28) = 16(τ2− 3)> 0, thus we have √ ∆ = √ (τ2− 4)(τ2− 28)≤ √ (τ2− 8)2 =τ2− 8. Consequently, forτ2≥ 28, we have for (71) that 7τ2− 16 + √ ∆ 8τ2− 24 ≤ 1, which implies the roots of (69) is no greater than 1 and [ B]22 > 0 for τ1 > 1. Thus, in summary, (67) is satisﬁed as long as τ1 > 1 and τ2≥ 4. The rest follows by letting ( v,T )∼Gorder. A.3.4 Technical Proof in Theorem 2 Fix (v,T ). We prove the case for the kernelG(s)∝s−γ and the case forG(s)∝l0(l0+s)−γ orG(s)∝e−ρs is similar. For simplicity, we assume G(s) = s−γ so that ηi(γ) = ∫ti ti−1 G(s;γ)ds = 1 1−γ (t1−γ i −t1−γ i−1 ) = (∆t)1−γ 1−γ (i1−γ− (i− 1)1−γ). We want to show that the convex hull of {η(γ)}γ∈Γ has dimension N, or equivalently: there exists {γ0,γ 1,...,γ N}⊆ Θ such that {η(γi)−η(γ0)}1≤i≤N is linearly independent. Deﬁne ai(γ) ≜ (∆t)1−γ 1−γ (i1−γ− (i− 1)1−γ), we then want to show there exists ( γ0,γ 1,...,γ N)∈ ΓN+1, such that the matrix A(γ0,γ 1,...,γ N) ≜   a1(γ1)−a1(γ0) ... a 1(γN)−aN(γ0) ... ... ... aN(γ1)−aN(γ0) ... a N(γN)−aN(γ0)   (72) has full rank N. To show this, it suﬃces to show there exists ( γ0,γ 1,...,γ N)∈ ΓN+1 such that det(A(γ0,γ 1,...,γ N))⁄= 0. (73) To show this, note that the dimension of the convex hull of{η(γ)}γ∈Γ is also the dimension of the smallest aﬃne set (aﬃne hull) that contains {η(γ)}γ∈Γ. There are two scenarios: Scenario 1 If{η(γ)}γ∈Γ cannot be contained in a linear hyper-plane of dimension N− 1, then the convex hull of{η(γ)}γ∈Γ has dimensionN, therefore there must exist (γ0,γ 1,...,γ N)∈ ΓN+1 that satisﬁes (73). Scenario 2 If η(γ) can be contained in a linear hyper-plane of dimension N− 1, then there exists some w∈ RN+1 = (w0,w 1,...,w N) such that w⁄= 0 and b(γ) ≜ N∑ i=1 wiai(γ)−w0 = 0 (74) for all γ∈ Γ. First, we note that ai(γ) is an analytic function on not just Γ, but also (−∞, 1). It follows from [Mityagin, 2020] that the zero set of b(γ): B ={γ∈ (−∞, 1) :b(γ) = 0} either has Lebesgue measure 0 or is the entire ( −∞, 1). First, we assume, for the sake of contradiction, that B = (−∞, 1), then b(γ) = 0⇔ N∑ i=1 wi(t1−γ i −t1−γ i−1 ) =w0(1−γ), (75) 39 for all γ∈ (−∞, 1). Then we can deﬁne i⋆ = max{i : 0≤ i≤ N,wi⁄= 0}. Note that i⋆ is well-deﬁned since w⁄= 0. Moreover, i⋆≥ 1 since otherwise we would would have 0 = N∑ i=1 wi(t1−γ i −t1−γ i−1 )⁄=w0(1−γ), which contradicts (75). Thus, we can rewrite (75) as i⋆ ∑ i=1 wi(t1−γ i −t1−γ i−1 ) =w0(1−γ), (76) for all γ∈ (−∞, 1).Divide both side by t1−γ i⋆ and let γ↓−∞ , the left side of (76) goes to wi⋆ while the right side of (76) becomes lim γ↓−∞ w0(1−γ) t1−γ i⋆ , which cannot converge to a constant other than 0 (i.e., not wi⋆), regardless of the value of ti⋆. Thus, we arrive at a contradiction and we conclude that B cannot be (−∞, 1). Thus, B must have Lebesgue measure 0. However, we assumed that Γ contains an open set, which implies the Lebesgue of Γ on R is greater than 0. As a result, there exists γ∈ Γ (in fact there exists a set of positive measures with such points) such that b(γ)⁄= 0, which contradicts (74). Thus, Scenario 2 is not possible, we must only have Scenario 1, which completes the proof. A.3.5 Proof of Theorem 3 Fix (v,T ). Denote ∆Si ≜Sti−Sti−1 and ∆Gi = ∫ti ti−1 G(s)ds. It follows from (37) and Theorem 2 that φ(Sfull) ≜ N∑ i=1 (Sti−Sti−1) ∫ ti ti−1 G(s)ds = N∑ i=1 ∆Si∆Gi, is a suﬃcient statistic. Since φ(Sfull)∼N (f(v;θ)∑N i=1(∆Gi)2,σ 2∆t∑N i=1(∆Gi)2), as ∆t→ 0, it follows from Lemma 1 that ISfull(θ) =Iφ(Sfull)(θ) = (∂f ∂θ )2 σ2 N∑ i=1 ∆G2 i ∆t → (∂f ∂θ )2 σ2 ∫ T 0 G2(t)dt, (77) which proves (43). Now, based on deﬁnition 3, we have J = N∑ i=1 Sti∆t = N∑ i=1 ∆Si(T−ti + ∆t). (78) Now, using Lemma 6, we have IJ(θ) =Iφ(Sfull)(θ)− Ex∼J[Iφ(Sfull)|J=x(θ)]. (79) However, based on (78), the joint distribution of ( φ(Sfull),J ) is (φ(Sfull) J ) = ( ∑N i=1 ∆Si∆Gi∑N i=1 ∆Si(T−ti + ∆t) ) ∼N ( f(v;θ) ( ∑N i=1(∆Gi)2 ∑N i=1(T−ti + ∆t)∆Gi ) ,σ 2∆t [ ∑N i=1(∆Gi)2 ∑N i=1(T−ti + ∆t)∆Gi∑N i=1(T−ti + ∆t)∆Gi ∑N i=1(T−ti + ∆t)2 ]) . Then, standard Gaussian calculation gives conditional distribution: φ(Sfull)|J =x∼N ( f(v;θ) N∑ i=1 (∆Gi)2 + ∑N i=1(T−ti + ∆t)∆Gi ∑N i=1(T−ti + ∆t)2 ( x−f(v;θ)· N∑ i=1 (T−ti + ∆t)∆Gi ) , N∑ i=1 (∆Gi)2− (∑N i=1(T−ti + ∆t)∆Gi)2 ∑N i=1(T−ti + ∆t)2 ) . 40 Now, based on Lemma 1, we have, as ∆ t→ 0, Iφ(Sfull)|J(θ) =(∂f ∂θ )2 σ2 ( N∑ i=1 (∆Gi)2 ∆t − (∑N i=1(T−ti + ∆t)∆Gi)2 ∑N i=1(T−ti + ∆t)2∆t ) →(∂f ∂θ )2 σ2 (∫ T 0 G2(t)dt− ( ∫T 0 (T−t)G(t)dt)2 ∫t 0 (T−t)2dt ) =(∂f ∂θ )2 σ2 (∫ T 0 G2(t)dt− 3 T 3 ( ∫ T 0 (T−t)G(t)dt)2 ) , which, combined with (79) and (43), gives (44): IJ(θ)→ (∂f ∂θ )2 σ2 · 3 T 3 (∫ T 0 G(t)(T−t)dt )2 . The fact thatIJ(θ) = (∂f ∂θ )2 σ2 · 3 T 3 (∫T 0 G(t)(T−t)dt )2 can be directly calculated using Proposition 1, and note that by Fubini theorem that ∫T 0 ∫t 0 G(s)ds = ∫T 0 G(t)(T−t)dt. Finally, to prove (45), we ﬁrst write Spartial as S for ease of notation. Note that it follows from Lemma 4 that IS(θ) =IStK 1 −StK 0 ,StK 2 −StK 1 ,...,StK NK −StK NK−1 (θ). (80) Now denote ∆SK i = StK i −StK i−1 for 1 ≤ i≤ NK. Since ∆ SK i is independent with ∆ SK j for i⁄= j, it follows that (80) becomes IS(θ) =I{∆SK i}1≤i≤n(θ) = NK∑ i=1 I∆SK i (θ). (81) On the other hand, ﬁx 1 ≤i≤NK, deﬁne Ti =tK i −tK i−1, ∆i = Ti N and ∆Sij =j∆i so that we have ∆SK i = N∑ j=1 ∆Sij. We further deﬁne similarly ∆Gij and φK i (S) ≜ N∑ j=1 ∆Sj∆Gj, which, similar as (77), can be shown to satisfy as N→∞ , IφK i (S)(θ) = (∂f ∂θ )2 σ2 ∫ tK i tK i−1 G2(s)ds. (82) Now, ﬁx 1≤i≤n, as in (79), base on Lemma 6, we have I∆SK i (θ) =IφK i (S)− Ex∼∆SK i [IφK i (S)|∆SK i =x(θ)]. (83) Again, we calculate the joint distribution (φK i (S) ∆SK i ) = (∑ j∈[N] ∆Sij∆Gij∑ j∈[N] ∆Sij ) ∼N ( f(v;θ) (∑ j∈[N](∆Gij)2 ∑ j∈[N] ∆Gij ) ,σ 2∆t [∑ j∈[N](∆Gij)2 ∑ j∈[N] ∆Gij∑ j∈[N] ∆Gij ∑ j∈[N] 1 ]) . which further gives a conditional distribution φK i (S)|∆SK i =x∼N ( f(v;θ) ∑ j∈[N] (∆Gij)2 + ∑ j∈[N] ∆Gij ∑ j∈[N] 1 ( x−f(v;θ)· ∑ j∈[N] ∆Gij ) , ∑ j∈[N] (∆Gij)2− (∑ j∈[N] ∆Gij)2 ∑ j∈[N] 1 ) . 41 Again, following Lemma 1, we have, as N→∞ , IφK i (S)|∆SK i (θ) =(∂f ∂θ )2 σ2 ( ∑ j∈[N] (∆Gij)2 ∆t − (∑ j∈[N] ∆Gij)2 ∑ j∈[N] ∆t ) →(∂f ∂θ )2 σ2 (∫ tK i tK i−1 G2(t)dt− ( ∫tK i tK i−1 G(t)dt)2 tK i −tK i−1 ) . (84) Now, sinceISpartial(θ) does not depend on N, we can combine (82), (83),(84) and (81) to show (45): ISpartial(θ) = (∂f ∂θ )2 σ2 ( n∑ i=1 ( ∫tK i tK i−1 G(t)dt)2 tK i −tK i−1 ) . A.3.6 Derivation of Example 9 To calculate (47), notice when G(s) =e−ρs, we have ( ∫t 0 G(t)dt)2 t + ( ∫T t G(t)dt)2 T−t = 1 t (1−e−ρt ρ )2 + 1 T−t (e−ρt−e−ρT ρ )2 (85) and (∫ T 0 G(t)(T−t)dt )2 = 3 T 3 (ρT +e−ρT− 1 ρ2 )2 . (86) To show (85) is greater than (86), it suﬃces to show ( 1−e−ρt ρ )2 t/T + (e−ρt−e−ρT ρ )2 1−t/T ≥ 3 T 2 (ρT +e−ρT− 1 ρ2 )2 (87) Now, let t T →τ while t,T →∞ , (87) becomes 1 τρ2≥ 3 ρ2. or simply τ≤ 1 3. A.3.7 Proof of Corollary 3 Under the setting of Corollary 3, we have µ(T,v ) = c δ (vT )δ and J X∼N ( c δ(1 +δ)(vT )δ,σ2T 3 ) for some c. Under the setting of Corollary 3, for St,ST , we have µ(δ) = [ c 1 δ (vt)δ c 1 δ (vT )δ ] St∼N ( c1 δ (vt)δ,σ 2t ) ST∼N ( c1 δ (vT )δ,σ 2T ) Σ = 1 σ2t(T−t) [ T −t −t t ] 42 According to Lemma 1, the Fisher information with respect to δ is, ISt,ST (δ) =J (δ)T Σ−1J (δ) (88) = c2 σ2t(T−t) ( T ( − 1 δ2 (vt)δ + ln(vt) δ (vt)δ )2 +t ( − 1 δ2 (vT )δ + ln(vT ) δ (vT )δ )2 (89) − 2t ( − 1 δ2 (vt)δ + ln(vt) δ (vt)δ )( − 1 δ2 (vT )δ + ln(vT ) δ (vT )δ )) (90) where the Jacobian matrix is, J (δ) = [ ∂ ∂δc 1 δ (vt)δ ∂ ∂δc 1 δ (vT )δ ] =c [ − 1 δ2 (vt)δ + ln(vt) δ (vt)δ − 1 δ2 (vT )δ + ln(vT ) δ (vT )δ ] (91) ForJ, consider J X∼N ( c 1 δ(1 +δ)(vT )δ,σ2T 3 ) Applying Lemma 1, the Fisher information with respect to δ is, IJ(δ) = 3c2 σ2T ( − 2δ + 1 δ2(1 +δ)2 (vT )δ + ln(vT ) δ(1 +δ)(vT )δ )2 . Finally, it follows from an ad-hoc numerical analysis, which does not depend on c (as long as it is not 0), that for 0.005≤vT≤ 1 and δ≤ 0.8, we have IJ(δ)≤I St,ST as long as 1.2%≤t/T≤ 22.2%. 43