HIGH -FREQUENCY FINANCIAL MARKET SIMULATION AND FLASH CRASH SCENARIOS ANALYSIS : AN AGENT -BASED MODELLING APPROACH Kang Gao1,2*, Perukrishnen Vytelingum2, Stephen Weston1, Wayne Luk1, and Ce Guo1 1*Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK 2Simudyne Limited, London EC3V 9DS, UK *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): kang.gao18@imperial.ac.uk August 30, 2022 ABSTRACT This paper describes simulations and analysis of ﬂash crash scenarios in an agent-based modelling framework. We design, implement, and assess a novel high-frequency agent-based ﬁnancial market simulator that generates realistic millisecond-level ﬁnancial price time series for the E-Mini S&P 500 futures market. Speciﬁcally, a microstructure model of a single security traded on a central limit order book is provided, where different types of traders follow different behavioural rules. The model is calibrated using the machine learning surrogate modelling approach. Statistical test and moment coverage ratio results show that the model has excellent capability of reproducing realistic stylised facts in ﬁnancial markets. By introducing an institutional trader that mimics the real-world Sell Algorithm1 on May 6th, 2010, the proposed high-frequency agent-based ﬁnancial market simulator is used to simulate the Flash Crash that took place that day. We scrutinise the market dynamics during the simulated ﬂash crash and show that the simulated dynamics are consistent with what happened in historical ﬂash crash scenarios. With the help of Monte Carlo simulations, we discover functional relationships between the amplitude of the simulated 2010 Flash Crash and three conditions: the percentage of volume of the Sell Algorithm, the market maker inventory limit, and the trading frequency of fundamental traders. Similar analyses are carried out for mini ﬂash crash events. An innovative "Spiking Trader" is introduced to the model, aiming at precipitating mini ﬂash crash events. We analyse the market dynamics during the course of a typical simulated mini ﬂash crash event and study the conditions affecting its characteristics. The proposed model can be used for testing resiliency and robustness of trading algorithms and providing advice for policymakers. Keywords Agent-based Model· Financial Market Simulator· High-frequency Data· Flash Crash JEL Classiﬁcation C52· C63· G17 Acknowledgements The support of the UK EPSRC (Grant Nos. EP/L016796/1, EP/N031768/1, EP/P010040/1, EP/S030069/1 and EP/V028251/1), Xilinx, and Intel is gratefully acknowledged. Kang Gao holds a China Scholarship Council-Imperial Scholarship. Statements and Declarations Competing Interests The authors declare that they have no further conﬂict of interest. 1See SEC and CFTC (2010) for detailed description. arXiv:2208.13654v1 [q-fin.TR] 29 Aug 2022 AUGUST 30, 2022 1 Introduction With the advent of electronic ﬁnancial markets for the exchange of securities, the electronic centralized limit order book has become the standard market mechanism for transaction matching and price discovery. This form of order book offers market participants a more liquid market system with a small bid-ask price spread, increased market depth and decreased transaction times. Algorithmic trading is commonly deﬁned as the use of computer algorithms to automatically make trading decisions, submit orders, and carry out post-submission order management. In the past decade algorithmic trading has grown rapidly across the world and has become the dominant way securities are traded in ﬁnancial markets, currently generating more than half of the volume of U.S. equity markets. Constantly improving computer technology and its application by both traders and exchanges, together with the evolution of market micro-structure, automation of price quotation and trade execution have together enabled faster trading. Nowadays the speed of order submission has become a principal characteristic for distinguishing trading agents. Market participants known as high-frequency traders are capable of trading hundreds of times in a second, using fast algorithms and specialized network connections with exchanges. high-frequency traders are often orders of magnitude faster in order submission than other traders, and even other trading algorithms. The rise of algorithmic trading and high-frequency trading has had broad impacts on ﬁnancial markets, especially on the price discovery process and market price stability. One conspicuous impact is the increasingly frequent "ﬂash crash" in major ﬁnancial markets. The ﬂash crashes comprise large and rapid changes in the price of an asset that does not coincide with changes in economic fundamental value for the asset. The ﬂash crash events have occurred in markets that are among the largest and most liquid exchanges in the world. One representative ﬂash crash event is the famous 2010 Flash Crash, which happened in the U.S. stock market on May 6th, 2010. During this ﬂash crash event, one market participant’s algorithm caused a sharp price drop in the E-mini S&P futures market. The ﬂash crash soon spread to other futures markets and equity markets. The market price fell almost 6% in just several minutes, while the bulk of losses was recovered nearly as quickly. The 2010 Flash Crash led to turmoil market conditions and caused huge market value loss. As for the cause of the 2010 Flash Crash, Kirilenko et al. (2017) show that the key events in the 2010 Flash Crash have clear relationships with regard to algorithmic trading. The 2010 Flash Crash seems to be singular because of the fact that no following events have rivalled its depth, breadth, and speed of price movement. Nevertheless, ﬂash crashes on a smaller scale happen frequently. These events are termed mini ﬂash crashes (Johnson et al. 2012). According to Johnson et al. (2012), there were more than 18,000 mini ﬂash crashes that are identiﬁed in the U.S. equity market between 2006 and 2011. As scaled-down versions of the 2010 Flash Crash, mini ﬂash crashes are abrupt and severe price changes occur in an extremely short time period (Golub et al. 2012). Mini ﬂash crashes are attracting great research interest because their frequent occurrence could destabilize the ﬁnancial market and undermine investor conﬁdence (Golub et al. 2012). The ﬂash crash episodes 2, including large ﬂash crash and mini ﬂash crash events, are of signiﬁcant concern to researchers, practitioners, and policymakers. Financial markets in which price changes are orderly and reﬂect proper changes in valuation factors are desirable. However, ﬂash crash episodes could potentially disorganise such a desirable market and cause adverse consequences for ﬁnancial stability if they were to impede investment by undermining investor conﬁdence in the price at which securities could be transacted (Karvik et al. 2018). To prevent ﬂash crash episodes from becoming more frequent and longer-lasting, it is important to understand how such episodes arise. In this paper we explore the dynamics during both large ﬂash crashes and mini ﬂash crashes. The main methodology employed here is ﬁnancial market simulation in agent-based models. The agent-based ﬁnancial market simulation provides realistic synthetic ﬁnancial market data and a testbed for exploring dynamics during ﬂash crash episodes and conditions that inﬂuence the characteristics of ﬂash crash episodes. Financial market simulation based on agent-based models is a promising tool for understanding the dynamics of ﬁnancial markets. With huge potential academic and industrial value, agent-based ﬁnancial market simulation has gained extensive research attention in recent years. Financial market simulation by agent-based models is an exciting new ﬁeld for exploring behaviours of ﬁnancial markets. An agent-based ﬁnancial market simulation consists of a number of distinct agents that follow predetermined rules in a manner analogous to how real-world trader behaves in reality. Unlike traditional economic theories, there is no equilibrium assumption in agent-based ﬁnancial markets. In addition, traders are no longer assumed to have rational behaviours as in traditional economic theories. The removal of these assumptions makes agent-based ﬁnancial market simulation more realistic than traditional equilibrium-based economic and ﬁnancial theories. These advantages of agent-based ﬁnancial market simulation make it possible to explore complex phenomena such as ﬂash crash episodes in modern ﬁnancial markets, which is unachievable with traditional equilibrium-based theories. 2We use "ﬂash crashes", "ﬂash crash episodes" and "ﬂash crash scenarios" interchangeably in this article. 2 AUGUST 30, 2022 Various agent-based simulators have been developed in the literature. However, there are still gaps in creating ideal agent-based ﬁnancial market simulators that are capable of generating synthetic high-frequency market data that are realistic. Speciﬁcally, most existing agent-based ﬁnancial markets are of lower frequency such as daily or weekly. To explore market dynamics that involve high-frequency trading, a higher simulation frequency is needed. In addition, instead of using full exchange protocols, many simulators make assumptions about the price formation process and use mathematical formulas to approximate the matching engine. This signiﬁcantly undermines the realism of the simulator. Last but not the least, the proper calibration and validation of agent-based ﬁnancial market simulation are still an open problem. To sum up, there are two challenges that this paper aims to address: • C1: To design and implement a high-frequency agent-based ﬁnancial market simulator with full exchange protocols, and with proper calibration and validation process to reproduce a realistic artiﬁcial ﬁnancial market. • C2: Under the proposed agent-based ﬁnancial market simulator, investigate the market dynamics during ﬂash crashes (including both large ﬂash crashes and mini ﬂash crashes) and explore the conditions that inﬂuence the characteristics of ﬂash crashes. Motivated by the above challenges, we developed a novel high-frequency ﬁnancial market simulator to narrow the existing gaps. The simulator is then employed to explore the dynamics during ﬂash crashes and the conditions that affect ﬂash crashes. Broadly speaking, our contributions in this paper are three-fold: • A high-frequency agent-based ﬁnancial market simulator is implemented, with each simulation step corre- sponding to 100 milliseconds. Full exchange protocols (limit order books) are implemented to simulate the order matching process. In this way, we provide a microstructure model of a single security traded on a central limit order book in which market participants follow ﬁxed behavioural rules. The model is calibrated using the machine learning surrogate modelling approach. As for model validation, statistical test and moment coverage ratio results show that the simulation is capable of reproducing realistic stylised facts in ﬁnancial markets. • Under the framework of the proposed high-frequency agent-based ﬁnancial market simulator, the 2010 Flash Crash is realistically simulated by introducing an institutional trader that mimics the real-world Sell Algorithm on May 6th, 2010. We investigate the market dynamics during the simulated ﬂash crash and show that the simulated dynamics are consistent with what happened in historical ﬂash crash scenarios. We then explore the conditions that could have inﬂuenced the characteristics of the 2010 Flash Crash. According to our Monte Carlo simulation, three conditions signiﬁcantly affect the amplitude of the 2010 Flash Crash: the percentage of volume (POV) of the Sell Algorithm, market maker inventory limit, and the trading frequency of fundamental traders. In particular, we found that the relationship between the amplitude of the simulated 2010 Flash Crash and the POV of the Sell Algorithm is not monotonous, and so is the relationship between the amplitude and the market maker inventory limit. For the trading frequency of fundamental traders, the higher the frequency, the smaller the amplitude of the simulated 2010 Flash Crash. • Similar analysis is carried out for mini ﬂash crash events. An innovative type of trader called "Spiking Trader" is introduced to the agent-based ﬁnancial market simulator, creating more price shock and precipitating more mini ﬂash crash events. Market dynamics for a typical simulated mini ﬂash crash event are analysed. We also explore the conditions that could inﬂuence the characteristics of mini ﬂash crash events. Experimental results show that the market maker inventory limit signiﬁcantly affects both the frequency and amplitude of mini ﬂash crash events. However, the trading frequency of fundamental traders shows no obvious inﬂuence on mini ﬂash crash events in our experiments. The novelty of our approach lies in several features. Firstly, the proposed agent-based ﬁnancial market simulator has a higher frequency than most other simulators in the literature. Our simulation step is at milliseconds level, which allows for the investigation of high-frequency dynamics in the simulated ﬁnancial market, while most simulation models in literature adopt larger simulation steps of 1 second or 1 minute. Secondly, we explore the inﬂuence of different market conﬁgurations on the amplitude of the 2010 Flash Crash. To the best of our knowledge, there are few similar experiments in the existing literature. Thirdly, an innovative type of trader named "Spiking Trader" is proposed to precipitate more mini ﬂash crash events. Fourthly, the experiments that explore the conditions that inﬂuence the frequency and amplitude of mini ﬂash crash events are also a novelty of this work. The remainder of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents general background on the agent-based ﬁnancial market simulation and an overview of previous research about ﬂash crash events. Section 3 shows the structure and details for the proposed agent-based model, while Section 4 presents the model calibration process and model validation results. Section 5 and Section 6 provide simulation and analysis for the 2010 Flash Crash scenario and mini 3 AUGUST 30, 2022 ﬂash crash scenarios, respectively, in the framework of the proposed agent-based ﬁnancial market simulation. Section 7 concludes and gives directions for future work. 2 Background and Related Work 2.1 Agent-based Financial Market simulation An agent-based model (ABM) is a computational simulation driven by the individual decisions of programmed agents (Todd et al. 2016). ABMs are often used in simulating ﬁnancial markets. In agent-based simulated ﬁnancial markets, an agent’s objective is to "digest the large amounts of time series information generated during a market simulation, and convert this into trading decisions" (LeBaron 2001). With the advantage of capturing the heterogeneity of agents and diversity of the underlying economic system, ABMs provide a promising alternative to traditional equilibrium-based economic models. Gode and Sunder (1993) build an agent-based model with only zero-intelligence traders to simulate ﬁnancial markets. Those zero-intelligence traders are not able to think strategically, or do any advanced learning, or statistical modelling of the ﬁnancial market. Surprisingly, results show that zero-intelligence traders can trade very effectively in the simulated market. The prices tend to converge to the standard equilibrium price and market efﬁciency tends to reach a very high level. According to their experimental results, they argue that some stylised facts in ﬁnancial markets may rely more on institutional design rather than actual agent behaviour. Agent-based models are also proposed to model the "Trend" and "Value" effects in ﬁnancial markets. Chiarella designed an agent-based model composed of two types of traders: fundamentalists and chartists (Chiarella 1992). With only two types of traders, lots of dynamic regimes that are compatible with empirical evidence can be generated in the simulated artiﬁcial ﬁnancial market. An extension of the Chiarella model is proposed in Majewski et al. (2020). The extended model adds a new type of trader called noise trader and allows the fundamental asset value to have a long term drift. The extended Chiarella model is capable of reproducing more realistic price dynamics. This extended Chiarella model in Majewski et al. (2020) forms the basis of the proposed agent-based ﬁnancial market simulation in this paper. A more complex agent-based model for ﬁnancial market simulation is proposed in McGroarty et al. (2019). Five different types of traders are present in the simulated market: market makers, liquidity consumers, momentum traders, mean reversion traders, and noise traders. Their model is capable of replicating most of the existing stylised facts of limit order books, such as autocorrelation of returns, volatility clustering, concave price impact, long memory in order ﬂow, and the presence of extreme price events. Those stylised facts have been observed across different asset classes and exchanges in real ﬁnancial markets. The successful replication of these stylised facts indicates the validity of their agent-based simulation model. It is shown that agent-based ﬁnancial market simulation is capable of generating artiﬁcial ﬁnancial markets with realistic macro behaviours. The prevalence of electronic order books and automated trading permanently change the way the market works. It is virtually impossible to infer meaningful relationships between market participants using traditional mathematical methods because of the complexity of electronic ﬁnancial markets. Instead, agent-based ﬁnancial market simulation has been gradually getting popularity in the market microstructure literature. An agent-based simulated ﬁnancial market offers an experimental environment for examining market features and characteristics. It also provides plenty of artiﬁcial ﬁnancial market data for analysis. Hayes et al. (2014) develop an agent-based model for use by researchers, which offers the capability of capturing the organization of exchanges, the heterogeneity of market participants, and the intricacies of the trading process. Agent-based models can also provide regulators with an experimental environment that helps to comprehend complex system outcomes. In other words, it allows for a clearer examination of the relationship between micro-level behaviour and macro outcomes. For example, Darley and Outkin (2007) test the regulatory changes that came with decimalization in the NASDAQ market using agent-based ﬁnancial market simulation. The agent-based models of the NASDAQ market shed light on how these changes would impact market function. To summarise, agent-based ﬁnancial market simulation simpliﬁes complex ﬁnancial system simulation by including a set of individual agents, a topology and an environment. Different agent-based models in the literature focus on different practical problems in ﬁnancial markets. In this paper, we focus on agent-based models applied to ﬂash crash analysis. In the following section, we provide a literature review of ﬂash crash episodes. 2.2 Flash Crash Episodes During the 2010 Flash Crash, over a trillion dollars were wiped off the value of US equity markets in an event that has been largely attributed to the rapid rise of algorithmic trading and high-frequency trading Kirilenko et al. (2017). The base indices in both the futures and securities market experienced a rapid price fall of more than 5% in just several minutes, after which the bulk of the price drop was recovered nearly as fast as it fell. The staff from CFTC and SEC 4 AUGUST 30, 2022 present a thorough report on what happened during the 2010 Flash Crash event (SEC and CFTC 2010). They identiﬁed an automated execution algorithm that sold a large number of contracts as the main catalyst for the ﬂash crash. The Sell Algorithm, which was activated on the E-mini S&P 500 futures market, kept pace with the market aiming at selling around 9% of the previous minute’s trading volume (SEC and CFTC 2010). Even though no negative impact was known previously, this process triggered a cascade of panic selling by market participants that employ high-speed automated trading systems. The consequent "hot-potato" effect, where those market participants rapidly acquired and then liquidated positions among themselves, resulted in rapid and extreme price decline. Flash crash episodes have attracted attention after the 2010 Flash Crash event. Several months after the crash, the staff from regulatory authorities released a report that highlighted the important role of a large seller in initiating the ﬂash crash event (SEC and CFTC 2010). It is reported that although high-frequency traders appear to have exacerbated the magnitude of the crash, they do not actually trigger the ﬂash crash. Though high-frequency traders played a role in creating the so-called "hot-potato" effect, the ﬂash crash would very likely have been avoided without the overly simplistic sell algorithm based on volume alone. There is also a lot of academic research on ﬂash crash episodes. For example, Kirilenko et al. (2017) applied purely empirical approaches to understanding the causes of the 2010 Flash Crash. They use regression analysis on a unique dataset that is labelled with the identities of all market participants. It is demonstrated that in responding to the activity of the Sell Algorithm, high-frequency traders caused the "hot-potato" effect that exacerbated the price drop. This is consistent with the SEC and CFTC (2010) report. Paddrik et al. (2012) develop an agent-based model of the E-mini S&P futures applied to ﬂash crash analysis. A general ﬂash crash in price is replicated in their model. However, they only reproduce a rough shape of the ﬂash crash price behaviour, and detailed analyses of trader behaviours and market depth are absent. Karvik et al. (2018) developed an agent-based model to analyse the ﬂash crash episodes in the sterling-dollar forex market. They emphasize the important role of high-frequency traders in the emergence of ﬂash crash episodes. The proposed approach in this paper is partly inspired by their work. Paddrik et al. (2017) explore how the levels of information can be used to predict the occurrence of ﬂash crash events. Their ﬁndings suggest that some stability indicators derived from limit order book information are capable of signalling a high likelihood of an imminent ﬂash crash event. There are also different angles of view for ﬂash crash episodes in literature. Paulin et al. (2019) design and implement a hybrid microscopic and macroscopic agent-based approach to investigate the conditions that give rise to the "electronic contagion"3 of ﬂash crash events. Their results demonstrate that the ﬂash crash contagion between different assets is dependent on portfolio diversiﬁcation, behaviours of algorithmic traders, and network topology. It is also stressed that regulatory interventions are important during the propagation of ﬂash crash distress. Menkveld and Yueshen (2019) look at the ﬂash crash event from the perspective of cross-arbitrage. They ﬁnd that the breakdown of cross-arbitrage activities between related markets plays an important role in exacerbating the ﬂash crash event. Kyle and Obižaeva (2020) analyse price impact during ﬂash crash events in their market microstructure invariance model. It is shown that the actual price declines in ﬂash crash events are larger than the predicted price impact. Madhavan (2012) argues that the ﬂash crash episodes are linked directly to the current market structure, mostly the pattern of volume and market fragmentation. He further suggests that a lack of liquidity is the critical issue that requires the greatest policy attention to prevent future ﬂash crash events. Similarly, Borkovec et al. (2010) explicitly owe the ﬂash crash in ETFs to an extreme deterioration in liquidity. Their results are consistent with the liquidity provision behaviour in ﬁnancial markets. Golub et al. (2012) analyse mini ﬂash crashes, which are the scaled-down versions of the 2010 Flash Crash. It is shown that mini ﬂash crashes also have an adverse impact on market liquidity and are associated with ﬂeeting liquidity phenomenon. The above provides various analyses for the occurrence of ﬂash crash episodes. However, despite extensive work on analysing the ﬂash crash episodes, the exact causes of the ﬂash crash episodes are still not clear. In this paper, we investigate and analyse the ﬂash crash episodes through the lens of agent-based ﬁnancial market simulation. In this sense, our work is similar to the work in Karvik et al. (2018) and Paddrik et al. (2012). Nevertheless, we offer a much more extensive and detailed analysis of the simulated ﬂash crash event which, to the best of our knowledge, is the most ﬁne-grained analysis in current literature. Speciﬁcally, we realistically simulate the 2010 Flash Crash event in our simulation, and divide the simulated ﬂash crash event to several phases. For each phase, detailed analyses about traders behaviours and market dynamics are presented. To the best of our knowledge, this ﬁne-grained simulation and analysis is not reported before in literature. By dividing the whole ﬂash crash event into different phases and examine trader behaviours and market dynamics for each phase, we shed light on the cause for ﬂash crash events. In addition, controlled experiments under different model settings and trader behaviours are carried out in the developed agent-based simulation framework, which provide insights about how to prevent the happening of detrimental ﬂash crash events. The basis of our agent-based model is the extended Chiarella model in Majewski et al. (2020), which comprises fundamental traders, momentum traders, and noise traders. We further divide momentum traders into long-term momentum traders 3Electronic contagion refers to the contagion phenomenon in ﬁnancial markets that results from interactions between trading algorithms, instead of human traders. 5 AUGUST 30, 2022 and short-term momentum traders, and introduce market makers to the model. The motivation for introducing these types of traders and their interactions will be presented in section 3.1. It is shown that the proposed model is capable of generating realistic artiﬁcial ﬁnancial time series. Within the framework of the proposed realistic agent-based ﬁnancial market simulation, special types of agents are introduced to trigger ﬂash crash episodes in the simulated ﬁnancial market. In this way, simulated ﬂash crash episodes are scrutinized and analysed. 3 Model Structure This section presents the set-up and components of the proposed agent-based high-frequency ﬁnancial market simulator. 3.1 Model Set-up We denote the price of a stock at timet asPt. The price in this work refers to mid-price, which is the mean value of the best bid price and the best ask price at timet: Pt := 0.5∗b0 t + 0.5∗a0 t whereb0 t anda0 t denote best bid and best ask price at timet, respectively. The price dynamics are exactly the same as the price dynamics in real stock exchanges - a limit order book is built to accept all orders and trades are generated by the match engine. All the orders submitted by various traders in one simulation period, including limit orders and market orders, constitute the aggregated virtual "demand" and "supply" in that period. The aggregated virtual "demand" and "supply" depend on the trading strategies of various types of market participants. The market participants are assumed to be heterogeneous in their trading decisions. According to the Extended Chiarella model (Majewski et al. 2020), a popular set of traders in an artiﬁcial ﬁnancial market includes momentum traders, fundamental traders, and noise traders. This composition of traders is capable of capturing the trend and value effects in ﬁnancial markets. We further extend the model by dividing momentum traders into two groups: short-term momentum traders and long-term momentum traders. In this way, heterogeneity is introduced not only between groups of traders, but also inside a speciﬁc group of traders. In addition, in an artiﬁcial ﬁnancial market with full exchange protocols, market maker is an indispensable component to create realistic limit order book behaviours. To sum up, ﬁve types of traders are included in our model: fundamental traders, short-term momentum traders, long-term momentum traders, noise traders, and market makers. Each type of trader is associated with several parameters which control the trading behaviours. Trading heuristics, speciﬁc parameters and the parameter calibration process will be presented in subsequent sections. 3.2 Common Trader Behaviours Traders in our simulation model have some behaviours in common, for example submitting and cancelling orders. We can assume that there is a certain type of agent called "Base Agent", and all traders in our model inherit the functionalities of this base agent. Speciﬁcally, all traders in the model have common behaviours as follows. • Each trader has a parameter θ, which controls the probability of submitting a limit order. The value of θ depends on the type of traders and also varies during simulation, but the behaviour given aθ value is common for all types of traders. That is, for each simulation step, if p∈U(0, 1)4 <θ , the trader will place an limit order, otherwise no action is taken. Note that the speciﬁc side of the order (buy or sell) depends on the trader type and market conditions. The value ofθ could be zero for some traders, which means that the corresponding traders do not submit limit orders. • Each trader has a parameter µ. The function of µ is identical to parameter θ, except that µ controls the probability of sending a market order. Similar toθ, the value ofµ is different for different types of traders and varies for different timestamps. For each simulation step, ifp∈U(0, 1)<µ , the trader will place a market order, otherwise no action is taken. The speciﬁc side of the market order also depends on the trader type and market conditions. Similar toθ, the value ofµ can also be zero for some particular type of traders. • The side for all limit orders and market orders are determined by corresponding trader types and market conditions. A market order is submitted directly to the exchange after the side is determined. For a limit order, the price information is required. Given the order side, a buy limit order will have a price lower than the market mid-price at the corresponding timestamp, while a sell limit order will have a price higher than the market mid-price. The distance between the limit order price and the market mid-price follows a particular distribution, whose type is determined by the trader types. Speciﬁcally, the price distance for limit orders from 4p ∈U (0, 1) returns a value that follows uniform distribution between 0 and 1. 6 AUGUST 30, 2022 market makers is sampled from a uniform distribution with parameters 0 andpMM edge , and the price distance for limit orders from other types of traders is sampled from a common log-normal distribution with parametersµ𝓁 and Σ𝓁. The parameters of these distributions are calibrated to historical price time series stylised facts. The price for a limit order is calculated after the price distance is sampled from the corresponding distribution. • Each type of trader has a parameterδ. Regardless of the order price and side, each limit order has a cancellation probability ofδ at each simulation step. The value ofδ is dependent on the type of trader who places the order, and is calibrated using historical market data to create realistic limit order book behaviours. In the presented model, all traders share the same value forδ except market makers, who have a higher value ofδ. This reﬂects the fact that orders submitted by market makers tend to have a much higher cancellation / replacement rate. • In the proposed model, short-term momentum traders, long-term momentum traders and noise traders all have a parameter calledρ, which controls the ratio between the number of market orders and limit orders placed by the same trader. That is, for each trader of these three types, there is a ﬁxed relationship betweenθ andµ: µ =θ∗ρ. This relationship enables a realistic ratio between the number of market orders and limit orders in the simulated ﬁnancial market and the value ofρ is selected according to historical orders data. • The volume V for each order is 100, regardless of limit order or market order. Despite the common trader behaviours, each type of trader follows different trading heuristics and has different values for the associated parameters. For example, fundamental traders only submit market orders. Market makers submit limit orders in normal trading time. Only after the inventory limit is hit will market makers submit market orders to reduce their inventory risk. The remaining types of traders submit both limit orders and market orders during trading hours, aiming to maintain a ﬁxed ratio between the number of limit orders and the number of market orders. The remainder of the section describes the trading behaviour heuristics for each type of trader in more detail. Descriptions for all the parameters involved in the proposed model are summarised in Appendix A. 3.3 Fundamental Trader (FT) Fundamental traders make their trading decisions based on the perceived fundamental value of the stock. The fundamental value is denoted asVt. A fundamentalist tends to buy a stock if the stock is under-priced(Vt−Pt > 0), otherwise he will sell the stock. Following the convention in Majewski et al. (2020), in this work we assume the aggregated demand of fundamental traders is polynomial to the level of mispricing. Speciﬁcally, the aggregated demand of fundamentalists is: DFT =κ1(Vt−Pt) +κ2(Vt−Pt)3 (1) whereκ1 andκ2 controls the overall demand generated by fundamental traders. Since we have NFT fundamental traders, each fundamental trader will contribute κ1|Vt−Pt|+κ2|Vt−Pt|3 NF T to the aggregated demand. Since the fundamental traders only submit market orders, the value ofθ for each fundamental trader is set to 0, while the value ofµ for each fundamental trader is set to κ1|Vt−Pt|+κ2|Vt−Pt|3 NF T . The fundamental valueVt is an exogenous signal that is input to the model. Each fundamental trader is also associated with a parameterSFT interval. A fundamental trader only attempts to submit a market order once in everySFT interval simulation steps. A detailed description of the fundamental trader’s logic is given in Algorithm 1. Algorithm 1 Fundamental Trader Logic 1: for each simulation step do 2: θ← 0 3: µ← κ1|Vt−Pt|+κ2|Vt−Pt|3 NF T 4: if (simulation_steps mod SFT interval == 0) and (p∈U(0, 1)<µ ) then 5: ifVt−Pt > 0 then Place a buy market order 6: else ifVt−Pt < 0 then Place a sell market order 7: end if 8: else No market order submitted 9: end if 10: end for 7 AUGUST 30, 2022 3.4 Momentum Trader (MT) Momentum traders are also called "Chartists". This group of traders buy and sell ﬁnancial assets after being inﬂuenced by recent price trends. The assumption is to take advantage of an upward or downward trend in the stock prices until the trend starts to fade. Instead of looking at the fundamental value of the stock, momentum traders focus more on recent price action and price movement. If the stock price has been recently rising, a long position is established; otherwise, momentum traders will enter a short position. In the proposed model, momentum traders can submit both limit orders and market orders. For momentum traders, the ratio between the number of limit orders and market orders is ﬁxed, which is denoted asρ. There are lots of methods to estimate the momentum of stock prices. A common trend signal is the exponentially weighted moving average of past returns with decay rateα. This trend signal is denoted byMt: Mt = (1−α)Mt−1 +α(pt−pt−1) (2) whereα is the decay rate. Given the trend signalMt, the demand function of momentum traders is denoted asf(Mt). The demand functionf(Mt) must satisfy two conditions: • f(Mt) is increasing. • f′′(Mt)∗Mt < 0 where the ﬁrst condition is consistent with the nature of momentum trading and the second condition imposes the risk-averse assumption to momentum traders. Consistent with Majewski et al. (2020), here we choose f(Mt) = β tanh(γMt) with the requirement that γ > 0. γ represents the saturation of momentum traders’ demand when momentum signals are very large. This phenomenon is partly due to for example budget constraints and risk aversion, which are prevalent in real momentum traders.β controls the overall demand generated by momentum traders.β is also assumed to be positive, i.e. the demand of momentum traders is positive when the momentum signal (Mt) is positive, otherwise the demand is negative. The choice of this demand function for momentum traders strictly satisﬁes the two requirements. According to the value of α, we further divide the group of momentum traders into two sub-groups: long-term momentum traders (smallα) and short-term momentum traders (largeα). The two types of momentum traders also have different values forβ; however, they share the sameγ value. The proposed model includes NLMT long-term momentum traders andNSMT short-term momentum traders. 3.4.1 Long-term Momentum Trader (LMT) Long-term momentum traders are associated with a small value forα. According to equation 2, a smallα corresponds to slow changes in the momentum signal. Consequently, the momentum signal is smooth and reﬂects the trend on a longer time scale. In our intra-day simulation, we choose anα value of 0.01 for long-term momentum traders. This would approximately correspond to an intra-day hourly trend. The group of long-term momentum traders will focus on the relatively long-time price trend and calculate their demand function. For limit orders, the virtual aggregated demand from long-term momentum traders is βL tanh(γML t ), while for market orders the virtual aggregated demand from long-term momentum traders isρβL tanh(γML t ). As there areNLMT long-term momentum traders, theθ andµ for each trader are corresponding quantities divided byNLMT . Trading decisions are made according to the common order submission rules. A full description of long-term momentum traders’ logic is shown in Algorithm 2. 3.4.2 Short-term Momentum Trader (SMT) Compared to the long-term momentum traders, short-term momentum traders are associated with a much larger α. Typically,α for short-term momentum trader would be a value close to 1. Following equation 2, the momentum signal is updated very fast whenα has a large value. In this circumstance,Mt represents the trend in an extremely short time scale, typical only several ticks in our intra-day simulation. The group of short-term momentum traders aim at exploiting the price trend in a very short time scale, which mimics the behaviour of some real-world high-frequency traders. In our agent-based ﬁnancial market simulation, we assign a value of 0.9 to α of short-term momentum traders.5 The trading heuristics for short-term momentum traders are exactly the same as that for long-term momentum traders, except thatαL andβL are replaced byαS andβS, respectively. A full description of short-term momentum traders’ logic is shown in Algorithm 3. 5We also run simulation experiments with α having value 0.95 and 0.99. Similar experimental results are obtained in these settings, showing that minor changes inα value will not signiﬁcantly affect the results. 8 AUGUST 30, 2022 Algorithm 2 Long-term Momentum Trader Logic 1: for each simulation step do 2: for each outstanding limit orders submitted by this trader do 3: if p∈U(0, 1)<δ then Cancel this limit order 4: end if 5: end for 6: Mt = (1−αL)Mt−1 +αL(pt−pt−1) 7: θ← βL tanh(γMt) NLM T 8: µ←θ∗ρ 9: if p∈U(0, 1)<θ then 10: ifMt > 0 then Place a buy limit order 11: else ifMt < 0 then Place a sell limit order 12: end if 13: else No limit order submitted 14: end if 15: if p∈U(0, 1)<µ then 16: ifMt > 0 then Place a buy market order 17: else ifMt < 0 then Place a sell market order 18: end if 19: else No market order submitted 20: end if 21: end for Algorithm 3 Short-term Momentum Trader Logic 1: for each simulation step do 2: for each outstanding limit orders submitted by this trader do 3: if p∈U(0, 1)<δ then Cancel this limit order 4: end if 5: end for 6: Mt = (1−αS)Mt−1 +αS(pt−pt−1) 7: θ← βS tanh(γMt) Nsmt 8: µ←θ∗ρ 9: if p∈U(0, 1)<θ then 10: ifMt > 0 then Place a buy limit order 11: else ifMt < 0 then Place a sell limit order 12: end if 13: else No limit order submitted 14: end if 15: if p∈U(0, 1)<µ then 16: ifMt > 0 then Place a buy market order 17: else ifMt < 0 then Place a sell market order 18: end if 19: else No market order submitted 20: end if 21: end for 9 AUGUST 30, 2022 Algorithm 4 Noise Trader Logic 1: θ← σN T NN T 2: µ←θ∗ρ 3: for each simulation step do 4: for each outstanding limit orders submitted by this trader do 5: if p∈U(0, 1)<δ then Cancel this limit order 6: end if 7: end for 8: if p∈U(0, 1)<θ then 9: ifp∈U(0, 1)< 0.5 then Place a buy limit order 10: else ifp∈U(0, 1)> 0.5 then Place a sell limit order 11: end if 12: else No limit order submitted 13: end if 14: if p∈U(0, 1)<µ then 15: ifp∈U(0, 1)< 0.5 then Place a buy market order 16: else ifp∈U(0, 1)> 0.5 then Place a sell market order 17: end if 18: else No market order submitted 19: end if 20: end for 3.5 Noise Trader (NT) Another group of market participants are noise traders. They are designed so as to capture other market activities that are not reﬂected by trend-following and value investing. As a result, the cumulative demand of noise traders can be described by a random walk, with each step having an equal probability of placing buy/sell orders. Parameter σNT controls the aggregated demand level from noise traders. There areNNT noise traders in the model, with each noise trader having value σN T NN T forθ. Similar to momentum traders, noise traders are also associated with a parameter ρ, which controls the ratio between the number of limit and market orders. Note that unlike other traders whoseθ andµ vary according to simulated market conditions,θ andµ for noise traders are determined prior to simulation and remain ﬁxed during the simulation process. Algorithm 4 gives a description of noise traders’ logic in the simulated ﬁnancial market. 3.6 Market Maker (MM) The market makers are another group of traders in the model. The introduction of market makers in the proposed model is aimed at creating realistic limit order book dynamics. Market makers in the proposed model are more complex than previous traders. During normal trading time, market makers only submit quotes to the market. A quote includes one buy limit order and one sell limit order. The simpliﬁcation that market makers only submit limit orders is motivated by Menkveld (2013), which ﬁnds that around 80% of market makers’ orders are passive. The price of the sell (buy) order is calculated by adding (subtracting) a distance from the mid-price at the corresponding timestamp, where the distance is sampled from a uniform distribution. (The price is rounded to the closest multiple of tick size before being submitted to the exchange.) In alignment with the market making behaviours during the 2010 Flash Crash event (SEC and CFTC 2010), market makers in the proposed model are associated with a position limit. Speciﬁcally, once the inventory of a market maker reaches the position limit, the market maker will stop all active quoting and actively submit market orders to reduce the inventory level. This will continue until the inventory reduces to a certain safe level, which is also a parameter of the model. At this stage, the market maker suspends trading for a certain time period. This resembles the real-world scenarios that market makers tend to suspend trading to check their own trading systems and observe market conditions after some unusual scenarios happen. After this time period, the market maker will restart the normal trading heuristics. Table 1 presents the corresponding order types that market makers will submit in different trading conditions. Table 1 Order types submitted by market makers under different trading conditions Trading condition Normal trading Stressed trading (after inventory limit reached) Trading suspension Order type Limit order Market order None 10 AUGUST 30, 2022 Since market makers only submit limit orders during the normal trading time, theµ for each market maker is set to 0. Similar to the case in previous traders,δ andθ control the probability of order cancellation and limit order submission respectively, whose values are calibrated to historical price time series. Note that one difference is thatθ controls the probability of submitting a quote (buy and sell limit orders) for market makers. In addition toδ,θ andµ, market makers are associated with several extra parameters that correspond to the trading behaviours presented above. The trading edge of market makers is sampled from a uniform distribution, which controls the spread of the quotes submitted by market makers. Speciﬁcally, the uniform distribution from which the price distance is sampled has a minimum value of 0 and a maximum value ofpMM edge . εMM limit represents the position limit for each market maker, whileεMM safe denotes the safe position level. That is, market makers will actively reduce inventory onceεMM limit is reached, until the position is reduced toεMM safe level.εMM rest represent the time length for the trading suspension. Algorithm 5 presents a full description of market makers’ trading heuristics in the proposed model. Algorithm 5 Market Maker Logic 1: Before simulation starts: 2: θ←θMM 3: µ← 0 4: δ←δMM 5: Flag← 0 6: Restart_step← 0 7: 8: for each simulation step do 9: Get current simulation stepcurrent_step 10: if|position|>=εMM limit then 11: Flag← 1 12: Restart_step =Current _step +εMM rest 13: end if 14: 15: if (Flag == 1)∧ (|position|<=εMM safe ) thenFlag← 0 16: end if 17: 18: ifFlag == 1 then 19: Cancel all active limit orders 20: if |position| < 0 then 21: Submit a buy market order 22: else 23: Submit a sell market order 24: end if 25: 26: else ifCurrent _step>Restart _step then 27: if p∈U(0, 1)<δ then 28: Cancel existing quotes by this market maker 29: end if 30: 31: if p∈U(0, 1)<θ then 32: Submit a quote(one limit buy order and one limit sell order, with sampled trading edge.) 33: else 34: No limit order submitted 35: end if 36: 37: end if 38: end for 3.7 Simulation Dynamics The above are the ﬁve types of agents included in the proposed model. A fully functioning limit order book was implemented, as is the case in most electronic ﬁnancial markets. The simulation is run in pseudo-continuous time. Speciﬁcally, each simulation step represents 100 milliseconds of trading time. Each trading day is divided 11 AUGUST 30, 2022 intoT = 324, 000 steps, corresponding to 9 hours of trading (8:00 to 17:00). The minimum time for execution of transactions is 100 milliseconds, showing that the simulated ﬁnancial market represents a high-frequency trading environment. We remind here that the fundamental valueVt, which is extracted from the historical price time series, is an exogenous signal that is input to the model. The whole simulation runs as follows. For each step, each trader collects and processes market information. Internal variables associated with each trader are calculated. According to agent type and values of internal variables, actions are taken by the traders. These actions include limit order submission, market order submission, and order cancellation. The programmed matching engine matches these orders and updates the state of the limit order book. Finally, transactions and limit order book status are published to all traders. The whole simulation procedure is shown in Algorithm 6. Algorithm 6 Simulation Procedure 1: Simulation Parameter Initialization 2: while timestamp < market close do 3: timestamp += ∆t 4: 5: for each trader do 6: Collect latest market information and update internal states 7: if fundamental trader then 8: Fundamental trader logic(Algorithm 1) 9: end if 10: if long-term momentum trader then 11: Long-term momentum trader logic(Algorithm 2) 12: end if 13: if short-term momentum trader then 14: Short-term momentum trader logic(Algorithm 3) 15: end if 16: if noise trader then 17: Noise trader logic(Algorithm 4) 18: end if 19: if market maker then 20: Market maker logic(Algorithm 5) 21: end if 22: end for 23: 24: for each limit order, market order, or order cancellation) do 25: Update limit order book and publish transactions 26: end for 27: 28: Publish latest limit order book status 29: end while We suggest that the proposed ﬁve types of traders reﬂect a sufﬁciently realistic and diverse market environment. According to O’Hara (1995), there are three major market-microstructure trader types: uninformed traders, informed traders and market makers. The noise traders in our model correspond to uninformed traders, while market makers in the proposed model obviously correspond to the market makers in literature. The remaining three types of traders represent informed traders in our model. Speciﬁcally, fundamental traders utilise exogenous information implied by the fundamental value, while the two types of momentum traders exploit the endogenous technical indicator information. In addition, among the informed traders some perceived trading opportunities are based only on an analysis of short- horizon returns, while others focus on market information revealed by long-term return horizons. This is reﬂected by the division of momentum traders into long-term and short-term momentum traders. Overall, a sea of different informed and uninformed traders in the proposed model compete with each other, with market makers providing liquidity and ensuring realistic limit order book behaviours. In conclusion, the proposed model with ﬁve types of traders represents a complete range of micro-behaviours of real ﬁnancial markets. 3.7.1 Fundamental Value from Kalman Smoother The only remaining unknown variable is the fundamental value of the stock. The simulation can proceed only if the fundamental value is known and is exogenously input to the model. One difﬁculty is the non-observability of the 12 AUGUST 30, 2022 fundamental value. According to the economic literature, the fundamental value of a stock equals the expected value of discounted dividends that the company will pay to the shareholders in the future. However, this methodology requires extremely strong assumptions about the future dynamics of the stock dividends. Furthermore, this approach can never reﬂect the intra-day change of fundamental value, while the consensus fundamental value can indeed vary during the trading day due to the continuous feed of events and news. In this paper, we propose a new method which is to apply Kalman Smoother (Ralaivola and d’Alche Buc 2005) directly to the stock price time series to get the hidden fundamental value. In accordance with Majewski et al. (2020), we assume the fundamental valueVt is a hidden variable of a linear dynamical system. The observations are the actual prices traded in real markets. The speciﬁc Kalman Smoothing algorithm used here can be found in Byron et al. (2004). The algorithm is applied to the price time series for each trading day to extract the corresponding fundamental value time series for that day.6 4 Model Calibration and Validation In this section we present the methodology for calibrating the agent-based ﬁnancial market. Calibration means ﬁnding an optimal set of model parameters to make the model generate the most realistic simulated ﬁnancial market. Firstly we describe the real data and the associated stylised facts in ﬁnancial markets. Next we deﬁne the distance between historical and simulated stylised facts, which acts as the loss function in the calibration process. The parameters calibration workﬂow is presented, followed by detailed validation of the proposed high-frequency ﬁnancial market simulator. 4.1 Calibration Target: Data and Stylised Facts for Realistic Simulation In the model calibration process, real ﬁnancial market data is essential for setting up the calibration target. We collected high-frequency limit order book data of E-mini S&P 500 futures, from May 3rd, 2010 to May 6th, 2010 7. We select the most liquid contract as the calibration target, which is the contract expires in June 2010. Our dataset comprises high-frequency information for 10 levels of limit order book update, both the buy side and sell side. Financial price time series data display some interesting statistical characteristics that are commonly called stylised facts. According to Sewell (2011), stylized facts refer to empirical ﬁndings that are so consistent (for example, across a wide range of ﬁnancial instruments and different time periods) that they are accepted as truth. A stylized fact is a simpliﬁed presentation of an empirical ﬁnding in ﬁnancial markets. A successful and realistic ﬁnancial market simulation is capable of reproducing various stylised facts. These stylised facts include fat-tailed distribution of returns, autocorrelation of returns, and volatility clustering. The loss function used in the calibration process is constructed by measuring the distance between historical and simulated stylised facts. 4.1.1 Fat-tailed distribution of returns The distributions of price returns have been found to be fat-tailed across all timescales. In other words, the return distributions exhibit positive excess kurtosis. Understanding positively kurtotic return distributions is important for risk management since large price movements are much more likely to occur than in commonly assumed normal distributions. Following the convention in literature, in this paper we investigate the stylised fact of fat-tailed returns by examining second-level intra-day price returns. Both millisecond-level historical and simulated mid-price time series are resampled into second-level frequency and we examine the mid-price returns for each second. Speciﬁcally, the last price snapshot is taken as the price for that speciﬁc second. Second-level price returns are calculated accordingly. Our experiments show that different time scales have no signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the ﬁnal results. The main metric used for evaluating the fat-tail characteristic is the Hill Estimator of the tail index (Hill 2010). A lower value of the Hill Estimator implies that the return distribution has a fatter tail. 4.1.2 Autocorrelation of returns Autocorrelation is deﬁned to be a mathematical representation of the degree of similarity between a time series and a lagged version of the same time series. It measures the relationship between a variable’s past values and its current value. Take ﬁrst-order autocorrelation for example. A positive ﬁrst-order autocorrelation of returns indicates that a positive (negative) return in one period is prone to be followed by a positive (negative) return in the subsequent period. 6The algorithm is already implemented in Python package "pykalman". 7Evening trading sessions are excluded. That is, the data span from 8:00 in the morning to 5:00 in the afternoon for each day. 13 AUGUST 30, 2022 Instead, if the ﬁrst-order autocorrelation of returns is negative, a positive (negative) return will usually be followed by a negative (positive) return in the next period. It is observed that the returns series lack signiﬁcant autocorrelation, except for weak, negative autocorrelation on very short timescales. McGroarty et al. (2019) show that the negative autocorrelation of returns is signiﬁcantly stronger at a smaller time horizon and disappears at a longer time horizon. Examination of our data also reveals this stylised fact. Figure 1 shows the autocorrelation function of second-level return time series for E-mini S&P 500 futures on two days. We can see that the autocorrelation is signiﬁcantly negative for very small lags, and the negative autocorrelation gradually disappears for larger lags. Fig. 1 Autocorrelation function of second-level returns for E-mini S&P 500 futures on two days 4.1.3 Volatility clustering Financial price returns often exhibit the volatility clustering property: large changes in prices tend to be followed by large changes, while small changes in prices tend to be followed by small changes. This property results in the persistence of the amplitudes of price changes (Cont 2007). It is found that the volatility clustering property exists on timescales varying from minutes to days and weeks. V olatility clustering also refers to the long memory of square price returns (McGroarty et al. 2019). Consequently, volatility clustering can be manifested by the slow decaying pattern in the autocorrelation of squared returns. Speciﬁcally, for short lags the autocorrelation function of squared returns is signiﬁcantly positive, and the autocorrelation slowly decays with the lags increasing. Figure 2 shows the autocorrelation patterns for squared second-level returns for E-mini S&P 500 futures on two days. It is shown that the volatility clustering stylised fact clearly exists in our collected E-mini S&P 500 futures price dataset. Fig. 2 Autocorrelation function of squared second-level returns for E-mini S&P 500 futures on two days 4.1.4 Stylised Facts Distance as Loss Function The target for agent-based model calibration is to ﬁnd an optimal set of model parameters to make the model generate a realistic simulated ﬁnancial market. To solve this optimization problem, it is essential to have a metric that is able to quantify the "realism" of a simulated ﬁnancial market. First of all, a realistic simulated ﬁnancial market must exhibit similar characteristics to real ﬁnancial markets, such as the fat-tailed return distribution and volatility level. In addition, realistic simulated ﬁnancial data are also required to reproduce other stylised facts such as the autocorrelation patterns 14 AUGUST 30, 2022 in returns and squared returns. Here we design a stylised facts distance to quantify the similarities between simulated and historical ﬁnancial data. Four metrics are considered in the stylised facts distance: Hill Estimator of the tail index for absolute return distributions, volatility, autocorrelation of returns and autocorrelation of squared returns. For each metric, the differential quantity between simulated value and historical value is calculated. The stylised facts distance is then calculated as the weighted sum of the four differential quantities: D =w1∗ ∆Hill +w2∗ ∆V +w3∗ ∆ACF 1 +w4∗ ∆ACF 2 (3) Detailed calculations of the four quantities in the stylised facts distance are presented below. The Hill Estimator is famous for inferring the power behaviour in tails of experimental distribution functions. Following Franke and Westerhoff (2012), we use the Hill Estimator of the tail index to estimate the degree of fat-tail in the distribution of absolute returns on the mid-price. Note that the absolute return distribution is considered since there is no need to distinguish between extreme positive and negative returns. In our experiments, the Hill Estimator for simulated absolute returns and historical absolute returns are calculated, respectively. The absolute difference between the two Hill Estimators constitutes the ﬁrst part of the stylised facts distance: ∆Hill =|Hills−Hillh| (4) whereHills andHillh are the Hill Estimator for simulated absolute return distribution and historical absolute return distribution, respectively. Intuitively, this part of the stylised facts distance quantiﬁes the distance between simulated and historical return distribution, in terms of the heavy-tailedness. It addresses the requirement that the simulated return distribution exhibits the fat tail property, as is the case in historical return distribution. The second part of the stylised facts distance is the absolute volatility difference between simulated returns and historical returns: ∆V =|Vs−Vh| (5) whereVs andVh denote simulated volatility and historical volatility, respectively. This part addresses the requirement that a simulated ﬁnancial market should be similar to real market in terms of volatility. The third part of the stylised facts distance is the difference between simulated and historical autocorrelations of returns. This part in the stylised distance measures the model’s ability to reproduce autocorrelation patterns commonly found in historical returns. It is shown that ﬁnancial price return time series lack signiﬁcant autocorrelation, except for short time scales, where signiﬁcantly negative autocorrelations exist. This phenomenon is backed by our empirical data. For very small lags the autocorrelations are negative, while for larger lags the autocorrelations become insigniﬁcant. To measure the distance in autocorrelation patterns between simulated data and historical data, we invoke the autocorrelation function of returns and calculate the average absolute difference between autocorrelations of simulated return time series and historical return time series for various lags: ∆ACF 1 = ∑ linlags |ACFs(l,r )−ACFh(l,r )| |lags| (6) whereACFs(l,r ),ACFh(l,r ) are the autocorrelation function of lag l for simulated returns and historical returns, respectively.|lags| denotes the number of lags used in the calculation. Because the empirical autocorrelations are negative for very small lags and close to zero for larger lags, it is not necessary to consider all of the autocorrelation coefﬁcients. Empirical evidence suggests that the autocorrelation pattern is well represented by the coefﬁcients for three lags: 30, 60, and 90. Also, to reduce the effects of accidental outliers, the autocorrelation function is smoothed by calculating the three-lag average. That is, the lag 30 autocorrelation is calculated as the average autocorrelation of lag 30, 31, 32, and so is the calculation for lag 60 and lag 90. In total, autocorrelations of 9 lags (30, 31, 32, 60, 61, 62, 90, 91, 92) are considered and included in the calculation. The last part of the stylised facts distance is the difference between simulated and historical autocorrelations of squared returns. The replication of autocorrelation patterns in squared returns indicates the model’s capability to reproduce the volatility clustering stylised fact. It is shown empirically that large price changes tend to be followed by other large price changes, known as the volatility clustering phenomenon. Consequently, though there are generally no signiﬁcant patterns in autocorrelations of returns, the autocorrelations of squared returns are signiﬁcantly positive, especially for small time lags. Also, as time lag increases, the autocorrelation of squared returns displays a slowly 15 AUGUST 30, 2022 decaying pattern, as shown in Figure 2. Similar to the difference between autocorrelations of returns ∆ACF 1, the difference between autocorrelations of squared returns is calculated as follows: ∆ACF 2 = ∑ linlags |ACFs(l,r 2)−ACFh(l,r 2)| |lags| (7) whereACFs(l,r 2),ACFh(l,r 2) are the autocorrelation function of lagl for simulated squared returns and historical squared returns, respectively.|lags| denotes the number of lags used in the calculation. Here we use a slightly different lags from the case for autocorrelations of returns calculation. Since empirical autocorrelations of squared returns are signiﬁcantly positive and slowly decaying, we consider the autocorrelations of squared returns for four lags: 1, 30, 60, and 90. The three-lag average smoothing is also applied in the calculation. In total, the autocorrelations of 12 lags (1, 2, 3, 30, 31, 32, 60, 61, 62, 90, 91, 92) are considered and included in the calculation. The above four parts, along with the corresponding weights, constitute the stylised facts distance in Equation (3). The next question is how to determine the associated weight for each part of the stylised facts distance. The basic guiding idea is that the higher the sampling variability of a given part in historical data, the larger the difference between simulated value and historical value that can still be deemed insigniﬁcant. A natural candidate for each weight is the inverse of the sampling variance for the corresponding part in the stylised facts distance: wi = 1 σ2 i (8) Following Franke and Westerhoff (2012), the sampling variance σ2 i for each part in the stylised facts distance is estimated by applying the block bootstrap method on the historical return time series. Note that the stylised facts distance is a function of model parameters. In other words, given a set of model parameters, there is a unique stylised facts distance calculated from the simulated time series, which corresponds to that particular set of model parameters. Let θ denote the vector of model parameters to be estimated, Equation (3) can be rewritten as: D(θ) =w1∗ ∆Hill(θ) +w2∗ ∆V (θ) +w3∗ ∆ACF 1(θ) +w4∗ ∆ACF 2(θ) (9) The smallerD(θ) is, the more realistic the simulation is. Thus D(θ) serves as the loss function that the calibration method aims to minimize by ﬁnding an optimal set of model parameters. Let Θ denotes the admissible set for model parameter vector θ, the calibration target is to ﬁnd the optimal model parameter vector ˆθ that minimizes the stylised facts distance: ˆθ = arg min θ∈Θ D(θ) (10) 4.2 Calibration Workﬂow and Results The model is calibrated by choosing values for the model parameters so that the dynamics of simulated price time series match those observed empirical price time series. Speciﬁcally, the aim of the calibration process is to ﬁnd ˆθ that minimizes the stylised facts distance, as speciﬁed in Equation 10. As mentioned, data used in the calibration are the price time series data of the most liquid contract of E-mini S&P 500 futures, from May 3rd, 2010 to May 6th, 2010. The model parameters are calibrated for every trading day8. After a large-scale trial and error, seven model parameters are selected to be calibrated. The seven parameters are: µ𝓁,σNT ,κ1,κ2,βL,βS,θMM . Speciﬁc meanings of these seven parameters are presented in Section 3. In terms of the replication of stylised facts, our experiments show that the simulation results are less sensitive to the values for other parameters. As a result, it is reasonable to keep other parameters ﬁxed. This choice signiﬁcantly reduces the computational complexity of the calibration process. These parameters and corresponding descriptions, as well as speciﬁc values, are presented in Appendix A and Appendix B. The focus of this paper is not on speciﬁc methods for calibration; instead, we will pay more attention to the validation part. Here we brieﬂy present the calibration process. The calibration workﬂow has two stages in our experiments. The main calibration technique in the ﬁrst stage is the surrogate modelling approach, proposed by Lamperti et al. (2018). Speciﬁcally, an XGBoost surrogate model is built to approximate the agent-based model simulation. The surrogate model is capable of intelligently guiding the exploration of the parameter space. Estimated parameter values are those that give rise to smaller stylised facts distance, indicating that simulated moments match those observed empirically. 8Due to the ﬂash crash event in the afternoon trading session on May 6th, 2010, only the ﬁrst half of the trading data (8:00-12:30) is used to calibrate the model parameters for this trading day. 16 AUGUST 30, 2022 After the ﬁrst stage of the calibration, optimal parameters are given by the surrogate model. Even though global optimum is not guaranteed, it is shown in our experiments that the obtained parameter combination yields small stylised facts distance and is capable of reproducing realistic price dynamics. It is likely that the global optimal parameters are located close to the parameters generated by the ﬁrst stage. Taking this into consideration, a numerical grid search over a feasible bounded set of parameters is carried out. The feasible set of parameters is centered around the optimal parameters given by the surrogate modelling approach in stage one. The parameter combination that yields the smallest stylised facts distance is selected as the ﬁnal calibrated model parameter combination. Calibrated model parameter values for each trading day, as well as the yielded stylised facts distance, are presented in Table 2. Table 2 Calibrated values for the seven model parameters and the yielded stylised facts distances Date µ𝓁 σNT κ1 κ2 βL βS θMM D(ˆθ) 20100503 0.9093 0.7895 0.1632 0.0235 0.0924 0.0252 0.7805 0.2259 20100504 1.2717 0.6732 0.0933 0.3402 0.6964 0.681 0.8998 0.2269 20100505 1.7396 0.6176 0.2844 0.2098 0.5935 0.055 0.8291 0.2191 20100506 1.0098 0.0107 0.3697 0.1649 0.7494 0.9877 0.3265 0.1666 Figure 3 compares empirical time series of mid-price on May 5th to simulated mid-price time series. Visual inspection shows that the model produces price time series whose dynamics are very similar to those in empirical data. Nevertheless, quantitative assessment is required to validate the proposed simulation model, which is presented in the subsequent section. Fig. 3 Comparison between empirical mid-price time series on May 5th and simulated mid-price time series on May 5th 4.3 Model Validation Table 2 shows the stylised facts distance of the calibrated model. However, the value itself does not present an intuitive description of how well the simulated data ﬁt empirical data. A cross-check on the validity of our model topology and calibration strategy is needed. Following Franke and Westerhoff (2012), two metrics are used for assessing the quality of the moment matching and the validity of the model simulation: the moment-speciﬁc p-value and the moment coverage ratio. 4.3.1 Statistical Hypothesis Testing: Moment-speciﬁc p-value The stylised facts distance provides us with numerical values for the realism of the simulation. However, one more elementary question needs to be addressed: whether the data generated by model calibration and simulation would be rejected by the empirical data. The question is answered by calculating a moment-speciﬁc p-value as a statistical hypothesis test. Recall that in Section 4.1.4 the weights are calculated by the block bootstrapping method proposed in Franke and Westerhoff (2012). While the variance of block bootstrapping samples is the corresponding weight for each part of the loss function, the large number of samples obtained in this procedure can also be used to apply the loss functionD to them. In this way an entire frequency distribution of values ofD is available, which can subsequently be contrasted with the simulated distribution of values ofD. The fundamental idea is that the set of bootstrapped samples of return time series is a proxy of the set of different return time series samples that could be produced if the hypothetical real-world 17 AUGUST 30, 2022 data generation process exists. Accordingly, if a simulated return time series yields a value ofD within the range of the bootstrapped values ofD, this simulated return time series is difﬁcult to be distinguished from a real-world series. Note that a Monte Carlo experiment is undertaken and the simulation is repeated many times to create a distribution of model-generatedD values. In total, two distributions ofD values are obtained: bootstrapped distribution and Monte Carlo simulated distribution. Let N denote the number of bootstrapped samples. For consistency, we also select N Monte Carlo samples to create the simulated distribution. Let Db andDm(ˆθ) denote the bootstrapped sample and Monte Carlo sample, respectively9. The distributions of the following two sets ofD-values are then compared: Bootstrap :{Db}N b=1 Simulated :{Dm(ˆθ)}N m=1 (11) The p-value is obtained as follows. A critical value ofD is established from the bootstrapped distribution of values ofD. Taking account of the rare extreme events with a signiﬁcance level of 5%, the critical value is deﬁned to be the 95% percentileD0.95 of the bootstrappedD. In this way, a simulated return time series will be considered to be inconsistent with the real-world data, and therefore be rejected, if the correspondingD-value is larger thanD0.95. Take May 3rd trading day as an example. Here D = 0.2114 is obtained as the critical value of the bootstrapped distance function. As for the Monte Carlo simulation, the model-generated distribution ofD is prominently wider to the right. Detailed calculation yields thatD0.95 corresponds to the 18.33% percentile of the simulated distribution of values of D. Following the general moment matching convention in Franke and Westerhoff (2012), the model is said to have a p-value of 0.1833, with respect to the estimated parameter vector ˆθ, the historical data for May 3rd, and the speciﬁc moments that we have chosen. According to the conventional signiﬁcance criteria, for this trading day the model will not be rejected as being obviously inconsistent with the empirical data. Following Franke and Westerhoff (2012), a p-value of 0.1833 is actually believed to be a fairly good performance for an agent-based ﬁnancial market simulator. The p-values for the calibrated model for all trading days are shown in Table 3. Table 3 P-values for the calibrated model for all trading days Date 20100503 20100504 20100505 20100506 p-value 0.1833 0.4167 0.0833 0.6167 From Table 3 we can see that for all trading day in the collected dataset, the moment-speciﬁc p-values are greater than 0.05. Consequently, we cannot reject the null hypothesis which speciﬁes that the simulated return time series belong to the same distribution as the empirical return time series. This statistical hypothesis testing gives evidence that the calibrated model is capable of generating realistic ﬁnancial price time series. 4.3.2 Moment Coverage Ratio The previous evaluation of the model was based on the values of the stylised facts distance function D. While statistical testing enables us to evaluate the validity of the model simulation, the quality of moment matching for each speciﬁc moment is still unknown. Another potential issue is that the stylised facts distance function D is the optimisation target during the calibration process. Thus the evaluation metric involving the distanceD may be biased because of the potential overﬁtting problem. To address the above problems, the "moment coverage ratio" (MCR) metric is adopted to assess the degree of moment matching, taking into account each speciﬁc moment. The moment coverage ratio is originally proposed in Franke and Westerhoff (2012). The basis for moment coverage ratio calculation is the concept of a conﬁdence interval of the empirical moments. Consistent with Franke and Westerhoff (2012), the 95% conﬁdence interval of a moment is considered, which is deﬁned to be the interval with boundaries±1.96 times the standard deviation around the empirical value of this moment. The next step is to determine the standard deviation for each empirical moment. Franke and Westerhoff (2012) apply the delta method to the autocorrelation coefﬁcients to calculate the standard deviation. In this paper, we use a more direct way to obtain the empirical standard deviation, which is based on the block bootstrapping method. Recall that large quantities of return time series are obtained by the block bootstrapping method. For each speciﬁc moment, a moment value can be calculated out of every sampled return series. In total there will be B values for each moment, whereB is the bootstrapping sample number. The standard deviation of those values is considered to be the standard deviation for the corresponding empirical moment. One may feel uneasy about the bootstrapping of the autocorrelation functions at the longer lags since the method alters the temporal order of the return series. However, the block size in our block bootstrapping method is 1800, which is 9The Monte Carlo simulated distance valueD is dependent on the estimated set of parameters ˆθ. 18 AUGUST 30, 2022 signiﬁcantly larger than the longest lag (90) in the autocorrelation functions. Consequently, the impact of bootstrapped block re-ordering on the autocorrelation functions is negligible. With the standard deviation on hand, the corresponding conﬁdence interval for each speciﬁc moment is immediately available. In this way an intuitive criterion for assessing a simulated return series is obtained: if all of its moments are contained in the conﬁdence intervals, the simulated return series cannot be rejected as being incompatible with empirical data. Nonetheless, one single simulation is not sufﬁcient to evaluate a model as a whole due to the sample variability. In addition, it is likely that for one simulated return series some moments are contained in the conﬁdence interval while others are not. It goes without saying that considering multiple simulation runs of the model will provide a more exhaustive assessment of the model performance. Speciﬁcally, for each simulation run the conﬁdence interval check is repeated. We count the number of Monte Carlo simulation runs in which the single moments are contained in the corresponding conﬁdence intervals. The corresponding percentage numbers out of all Monte Carlo runs are deﬁned as the moment coverage ratio. Since the model is calibrated by each trading day, Monte Carlo simulation is run for each trading day and the corresponding moment coverage ratios are calculated to evaluate the calibrated model. Table 4 presents the results of the moment coverage ratios calculation. Except for the volatility moment on May 3rd and the 90-lag squared return autocorrelation moment on May 4th, all other moment coverage ratios are higher than 50%. According to the analysis in Franke and Westerhoff (2012), the higher than 50% moment coverage ratio represents a terriﬁc performance of the model. In addition, almost half of the moment coverage ratios are even higher than 90%, which indicates that our calibrated model has an excellent ability to reproduce realistic stylised facts. Overall, with respect to the selected moments, the calibrated model’s capability of matching empirical moments and reproducing realistic stylised facts is highly remarkable. Table 4 Moment coverage ratios of the calibrated model Moment Date 20100503 20100504 20100505 20100506 Hill estimator (inverse) 98.3% 66.7% 98.3% 100.0% V olatility 0.0% 85.0% 100.0% 56.7% Return autocorrelation (30 lags) 85.0% 78.3% 50.0% 90.0% Return autocorrelation (60 lags) 100.0% 98.3% 96.7% 96.7% Return autocorrelation (90 lags) 98.3% 60.0% 100.0% 58.3% Squared return autocorrelation (1 lag) 100.0% 98.3% 95.0% 93.3% Squared return autocorrelation (30 lags) 78.3% 51.7% 71.7% 98.3% Squared return autocorrelation (60 lags) 88.3% 10.0% 80.0% 73.3% Squared return autocorrelation (90 lags) 91.7% 46.7% 76.7% 51.7% 5 2010 Flash Crash Scenarios As a real-world application, the proposed model is used to investigate market dynamics during ﬂash crash events and the conditions for the occurrence of ﬂash crash scenarios. This section will present the reproduction and investigation of a famous historical ﬂash crash event - the ﬂash crash on May 6th, 2010. In the next section, we will investigate conditions for the occurrence of mini ﬂash crash events. 5.1 Simulating Historical Flash Crash We simulate the 2010 Flash Crash within the framework of our high-frequency ﬁnancial market simulator. The ﬂash crash happened in the afternoon trading session on May 6th, 2010, starting at around 14:30. As mentioned before, 19 AUGUST 30, 2022 the model parameters are calibrated to the data in the morning trading session (8:00-12:30) to avoid overﬁtting 10. According to the CFTC-SEC staff report, an automated execution algorithm, which aimed at selling a large number of contracts, was identiﬁed as one important trigger for the ﬂash crash. Consistent with this report, an institutional trader is introduced in the simulator to mimic the automatic Sell Algorithm. The institutional trader will initiate a Sell Algorithm that intends to sell a large quantity of contracts at 14:30 in our simulator. The parameters associated with the institutional traders are tuned to reproduce realistic ﬂash crash behaviours as in historical data. We present the trading conﬁguration of the institutional trader in the subsequent session, followed by a detailed analysis of the market dynamics during the simulated ﬂash crash event. 5.1.1 Introduction of Institutional Trader (INS) The institutional trader is specially designed to replicate the behaviour of the large institutional trader who initiated the sell program to sell a large quantity of E-mini contracts on May 6th, 2010. In the beginning, the institutional trader has a large inventory ofQ E-mini contracts. The institutional trader will start a sell program to sell the inventory at 14:30 in the simulation. Consistent with the historical scenarios, the sell program in the simulation is executed via an automated execution algorithm that is programmed to submit orders into the market to target a certain execution rate, which is a percentage of the market trading volume calculated over the previous minute. The execution rate is denoted asr, which is set to 9% in our simulation according to SEC and CFTC (2010). Note that the Sell Algorithm only considers total trading volume in the market, taking no account of the market price or time. This procyclical behaviour is potentially one causal factor in the occurrence of ﬂash crash events. As for speciﬁc trading behaviours, the institutional trader always keeps count of the total trading volumeV of the last minute, and submits a market sell order everyn seconds. For each market order, the volume would be V∗r∗ n 60, where n 60 is a scaling factor ensuring the target execution rater is achieved by the sell program. The institutional trader continues trading until all the inventory is cleared. Algorithm 7 describes the trading behaviours of the institutional trader in detail11. Algorithm 7 Institutional Trader Logic 1: Initialisen,r,Q 2: for each simulation step do 3: V ← total trading volume in the market for the last minute 4: if (simulation timestamp> 14 : 30 )∧(Q> 0) then 5: vol←V∗r∗ n 60; 6: if (step_seconds mod n) == 0 then 7: Submit a market sell order with volumevol 8: Q←Q−vol 9: else 10: No action taken 11: end if 12: else 13: No action taken 14: end if 15: end for 5.1.2 Market Behaviours during Flash Crash To generate a realistic ﬂash crash event, we ﬁne-tune the parameters of the newly introduced institutional trader. According to SEC and CFTC (2010), the ﬂash crash event is potentially caused by the "hot-potato" effect among high- frequency market makers and the mismatch of the trading frequency between different types of traders. Consequently, we also tune the market maker inventory limit and the trading frequency of fundamental traders. The effect of these parameters on the ﬂash crash event will be presented in subsequent sessions. All other model parameters are ﬁxed and are given exactly the same values that are calibrated to the morning trading session data on May 6th, 2010. This conﬁguration helps to reduce the degree of freedom and avoid the potential problem of overﬁtting. The resulting simulation of the price time series mimics the real-world ﬂash crash event. Figure 4 presents such a single simulation of the price trajectory that undergoes a ﬂash crash scenario. The corresponding parameter conﬁguration is shown in Appendix C. Figure 5 presents a comparison between simulated trading volume and historical trading volume during 10Except for market maker inventory limit and fundamental trader trading frequency, which are key to generating realistic ﬂash crashes. 11Thestep_seconds in the institutional trader logic is the number of seconds since the beginning of the simulation. 20 AUGUST 30, 2022 the whole day. Carefully examining such a single simulation provides useful insights into how the trading behaviour of different types of traders interact to bring about a ﬂash crash scenario. Fig. 4 One single simulation of the 2010 Flash Crash event. Red line is the historical price; green line is the simulated price; blue line is the fundamental value extracted by Kalman Smoother Fig. 5 Comparison between simulated volume and historical volume on May 6th, 2010 By visual inspection, the simulation accurately replicated the deﬁning characteristics of a ﬂash crash. Figure 6 presents the total inventory level for each type of trader around the simulated ﬂash crash event, and the market sell order volume of the institutional trader. To assist with detailed inventory analysis during the ﬂash crash event, Figure 7 presents the inventory level for each type of traders against simulated price during the time interval from 14:30 to 14:50. Figure 8 displays the market depth for both sides of the simulated limit order book, and the comparison between simulated bid-ask spread and historical bid-ask spread. Detailed examination shows that the simulated ﬂash crash accurately matches the market dynamics during the historical 2010 Flash Crash. The dynamics around the simulated ﬂash crash event are as follows. • The overall market sentiment in the simulation is negative, as we can see that the fundamental value is broadly decreasing before 14:00. At 14:00, according to Figure 6 the fundamental traders accumulate a negative inventory due to continuously decreasing fundamental value, while market makers accumulate a positive inventory. Before the ﬂash crash event, the market depth for both sides of the limit order book is relatively stable, while the simulated bid-ask spread is at a relatively low level. • At 14:30 in the simulated market, the market price has already dropped by 2.63% compared to the opening price level. Regardless of the downward market trend, the institutional trader initiates a sell program to sell a large number of inventories, which is 120,000 in our simulation. The institutional trader decides to execute the sell program via an automated execution algorithm, which is set to feed market selling orders into the market to target an execution rate of 9%. That is, for each minute the institutional traders aim to sell 9% of the market trading volume calculated over the previous minute. Neither price nor time is considered by the Sell Algorithm. Refer to Algorithm 7 for speciﬁc trading logic of the institutional trader. 21 AUGUST 30, 2022 • In our simulation, market makers correspond to the high-frequency traders in the real market. The above selling pressure is initially absorbed by market makers in our simulated market, which is consistent with the dynamics in the historical market (SEC and CFTC 2010). This is shown by the inventory change for each type of traders in Figure 7. From 14:30:00 to 14:40:50, the total inventory for market makers is rapidly increasing, while the total inventory for low-frequency fundamental traders barely changed. During this approximately 11-minute time period, the price undergoes a further 2.61% drop. At 14:40:50, the market depth in the limit order book has slightly decreased and the bid-ask spread has slightly increased. The scale of change for the market depth and bid-ask spread is restricted because of the existence of market makers. • In addition to the above observations, the market transacted volume is continuously increasing during the above 11-minute time interval due to the trading activities of the Sell Algorithm, as shown in Figure 5. Because of its procyclical nature, the Sell Algorithm used by the institutional trader responds to the increased volume by increasing the volume of sell orders that it is feeding into the market, even though the orders that it already submitted to the market were not yet fully absorbed and have caused non-trivial market turbulence. The increasing order volume of the institutional trader is shown in panel (b) of Figure 6. • As market makers are the buyers of the initial batch of orders sent by the institutional trader, they have accumulated massive temporary long positions of the contracts. Nevertheless, the inventory of market makers cannot accumulate inﬁnitely. At 14:40:50, the inventory limits for many market makers are exceeded. At this point, a dramatic and signiﬁcant market crash starts. Those market makers, who have accumulated excessive positions than their inventory limits, stop providing liquidity and begin to aggressively sell their inventories in order to reduce their temporary long positions. This is consistent with the typical trading practice that a market maker tends to maintain a relatively small aggregate inventory for the purpose of risk management. Consequently, these market makers contribute further selling pressure to the market in addition to the Sell Algorithm. Still lacking sufﬁcient demand from fundamental traders, the aggregate sell volume is consumed by remaining market makers who are still quoting in the market. As a result, more market makers accumulate excessive positions than their inventory limits, which in turn forces them to sell their long positions to the market. The same positions rapidly pass among all market makers. Such so-called "hot-potato" effect quickly sweep almost all market makers in the market, resulting in a dramatic price drop and quoting suspension of almost all market makers. • The combined selling pressure from the Sell Algorithm and market makers drove the price down by more than 4.16% in less than two minutes from 14:40:50 to 14:42:20, with the price reaching its intra-day low of 1053.5. Along with the price plunge, the market suffers from great liquidity loss. The liquidity loss can be reﬂected by the sharp decrease of market depth during the simulated ﬂash crash event. In the simulated morning trading session, the average market depth for both bid and ask sides are around 5000. In contrast, during the simulated large price plunge that starts at around 14:40, the market depth for both bid and ask sides are less than 1000, even reaches 0 in bid side for more than 1 minute. The signiﬁcant liquidity loss in our simulation is mostly because of the withdrawal of market makers from the market. The withdrawal of market makers in our simulation is consistent with empirical ﬁndings in SEC and CFTC (2010), which states that real market makers did stop trading during the 2010 Flash Crash event. According to Figure 8, the market depth for both sides of the limit order book dropped dramatically during this time period. There is less than 1% of bid-side market depth observed during normal trading hours, with even zero bid-side market depth for around 30 seconds in the middle of 14:41. The bid-ask spread widens dramatically, reaching more than 20 ticks at this short time interval. • As price drops quickly, the demand from fundamental traders gradually increases according to Equation 1. Figure 7 shows that fundamental traders do absorb a portion of selling volume during the sharpest price drop. However, the sudden decline in both price and liquidity indicates that the price was moving so fast that fundamental traders were incapable of providing enough buying support. • After the price hits the intra-day low level, the demand from fundamental traders ﬁnally increased to a level that is able to counteract the selling pressure from the institutional trader. Starting at 14:42:20, the price hovers at the lower level for approximately one minute and then starts to bounce back quickly towards the fundamental value. The Sell Algorithm continues to feed sell orders to the market until about 14:47, at which point the inventory of the institutional trader has been emptied. The above is a detailed analysis of the market dynamics of a simulated ﬂash crash event. The simulated dynamics accurately match the dynamics of the historical 2010 Flash Crash event. Both simulated ﬂash crash and historical ﬂash crash have an amplitude of around 7% (starting from 14:30:00), and both prices undergo a similar "ﬂash crash" shape. A large Sell Algorithm is replicated to trigger the simulated ﬂash crash, and is executed for around 17 minutes, which is close to the 20 minutes execution time of the historical Sell Algorithm. The overall liquidity loss during the ﬂash crash is replicated accurately, with decreased market depth and enlarged bid-ask spread as emergent properties of the 22 AUGUST 30, 2022 simulation. We also reproduce realistic patterns in the simulated market trading volume. The detailed progress of the simulated ﬂash crash also matches the empirical analysis of the historical ﬂash crash event. In the subsequent section we will explore the conditions that inﬂuence the severity of the ﬂash crash event. Fig. 6 (a): Total inventory level for each type of trader, around the simulated ﬂash crash event (14:00 - 15:15). (b): The volume change for the selling orders of the institutional trader, during the time when institutional trader is active Fig. 7 Detailed simulated mid-price against the inventories of each category of trader from 14:30 to 14:50. (a): Simulated and historical price from 14:30 to 14:50. (b): Total inventory level for each type of trader during time period from 14:30 to 14:50 23 AUGUST 30, 2022 Fig. 8 (a): Simulated market depth (total resting volume) of bid-side limit order book. (b): Simulated market depth (total resting volume) of ask-side limit order book. (c): Bid-ask spread in the simulated limit order book. (d): Bid-ask spread in the historical limit order book. All four panels display time period spanning from 12:30 to 16:15 5.2 Flash Crash Under Different Conditions The above presents an analysis of the market dynamics during the simulated ﬂash crash event. A natural question to follow is what factors contribute to the sharp price drop. One signiﬁcant advantage of the agent-based model is the ability to be simulated multiple times under different conditions to reproduce realistic market events, while the historical event only happens once. This makes agent-based model a perfect testbed for exploring the conditions that lead to various rare market events, such as the ﬂash crash. In this section, we explore the conditions that would inﬂuence the severity of ﬂash crash events. To measure the severity of ﬂash crash events, we deﬁne the amplitude of the ﬂash crash event in our simulation as the maximum percentage price drop after 14:00. Speciﬁcally, the ﬂash crash amplitude Amp is calculated as below: Amp =|TWAP 14:00−14:05−Pmin TWAP 14:00−14:05 | (12) whereTWAP 14:00−14:05 is the time-weighted average price of time interval between 14:00 and 14:05, whilePmin is the lowest price during the ﬂash crash simulation. The main methodology applied here is Monte Carlo simulation experiments under controlled conditions. The conditions are represented by model parameters. Each combination of model parameters corresponds to a speciﬁc market condition conﬁguration. For each combination of model parameters, multiple simulations are carried out. For each simulation, the amplitude of the simulated ﬂash crash is calculated. In this way a distribution of ﬂash crash amplitudes is obtained. To reduce the inﬂuence of extreme values, the 50% quantile of all the Monte Carlo simulated amplitudes is deﬁned as the ﬂash crash amplitude associated with the condition that is represented by the speciﬁc combination of model parameters. The 40% and 60% quantile of the simulated ﬂash crash amplitudes are also recorded. To explore how one speciﬁc condition affects the severity of ﬂash crash events, we change the corresponding model parameter and repeat the above Monte Carlo simulation to get the associated ﬂash crash amplitude. The other model parameters are given the previous calibrated values and are kept ﬁxed during this experimental process. This allows us to observe how the ﬂash crash amplitude changes when only one speciﬁc model parameter changes. In particular, we are interested in three model parameters that relate closely to the ﬂash crash amplitude: the percentage of volume for the Sell Algorithm (r), the inventory limit for each market maker (εMM limit), and the trading frequency for fundamental 24 AUGUST 30, 2022 traders (FTfreq ). Figure 9 presents the relationships between these model parameters and the simulated ﬂash crash amplitude. Detailed analysis is as follows. Fig. 9 (a): Relationship between the amplitude of simulated ﬂash crashes and the inventory limit of market makers. (b): Relationship between the amplitude of simulated ﬂash crashes and the percentage of volumer for the Sell Algorithm (Institutional Trader). (c): Relationship between the amplitude of simulated ﬂash crashes and the trading frequency of fundamental traders. Percentage of Volume for the Sell Algorithm One important parameter that characterises the Sell Algorithm is the percentage of volumer, which determines the target execution rate of the Sell Algorithm. Speciﬁcally,r is the percentage of the market trading volume calculated over the previous minute that the Sell Algorithm aims to execute. Monte Carlo simulation is carried out with different values forr, while other model parameters are given the previous calibrated values and are strictly kept constant. Panel (a) in Figure 9 shows the relationship between the simulated ﬂash crash amplitude and the percentage of volumer. It is shown that when r is small, the amplitude of the ﬂash crash is limited. When r is increased, the ﬂash crash amplitude is also enlarged. Within a certain range, the more aggressive the Sell Algorithm (largerr), the more severe the ﬂash crash event (larger amplitude). This phenomenon is consistent with our intuition. One interesting phenomenon is that afterr exceeds 5%, the ﬂash crash amplitude barely changes even though we continue to increase the value ofr. The reason is that as long as the price reaches a certain lower level, the demand generated from fundamental traders is large enough to digest the inventory of the institutional trader. Since the total inventory of the institutional trader is ﬁxed, the lowest price that could be reached during the simulation barely changed. Consequently, the ﬂash crash amplitude stops increasing despite larger values forr. The lessons learned from this experiment mainly involves the choice of the algorithmic trading strategies for large institutional traders. The market impact of an algorithmic trading strategy may contradict our intuition, as is the case here whenr is larger than 5%. Instead, the complex interaction between an algorithmic trading strategy and other market participants is likely to cause unexpected consequences. It is strongly recommended that institutional traders deploy agent-based ﬁnancial market simulation to explore potential consequences before choosing a speciﬁc algorithmic trading strategy. Inventory limit for market makers Both empirical and simulation analyses indicate that high-frequency market makers play an important role in the ﬂash crash event. Though market makers initially absorb lots of selling pressure from the institutional trader, they quickly turn into aggressive sellers after their inventory limits are exceeded, creating the "hot-potato" effect that exacerbates the crash. The inventory limitεMM limit plays an important role in controlling the signiﬁcance of the "hot-potato" effect. Consequently, the value of εMM limit also inﬂuences the ﬂash crash amplitude. We run Monte Carlo simulations with different values forεMM limit. Other parameters are given the previous calibrated values and are kept constant. Panel (b) in Figure 9 presents the relationship between the simulated ﬂash crash amplitude and the inventory limit for each market makerεMM limit. It is shown that the functional relationship between ﬂash crash amplitude and market maker inventory limit is not monotonous. When the εMM limit is relatively small (smaller than 8000 in our simulation), the ﬂash crash amplitude is an increasing function with regard toεMM limit. This is because the larger theεMM limit, the more inventory that the market makers will accumulate. With more accumulated inventory, the market makers will create much more selling pressure at the point when their inventory limits are exceeded, resulting in a more severe crash. However, the ﬂash crash amplitude is decreasing on increasing the value ofεMM limit if theεMM limit is larger than a certain level (around 8000 in our simulation). This is because the large enoughεMM limit makes it possible for market makers to absorb a larger portion of selling pressure 25 AUGUST 30, 2022 from the Sell Algorithm. As a result, there are fewer market makers whose inventory limits are reached, curtailing the "hot-potato" effect during the ﬂash crash. In extreme cases when inventory limits for market makers are inﬁnite, the market makers will absorb all selling pressure in the market and there will be no ﬂash crash event. The analysis here emphasizes the importance of risk management for high-frequency market makers. Since all market makers have some sort of inventory control, the decreasing part of panel (b) in Figure 9 is hardly feasible in the real-world trading environment. Instead, most real-world market makers have inventory limits that lie on the increasing part of the curve. An individual market maker may consider his own inventory limit to be proper; however, multiple "proper" inventory limits combined may lead to a signiﬁcant crash under stressed scenarios due to the "hot-potato" effect. In order to foster a smooth and stable market, experimental results suggest that policymakers could impose certain inventory limits on all high-frequency market makers. Trading frequency for fundamental traders According to Karvik et al. (2018), the mismatch of trading frequency between different types of traders is an important factor that leads to ﬂash crash scenarios. The ﬂash crash happens when the market is dominated by the procyclical behaviours of high-frequency market participants. The price moves so fast that lower frequency fundamental traders are unable to supply enough buy-side liquidity. So what will happen if we change the relative frequency between the market makers and fundamental traders in our simulation? Experiments are carried out with different trading frequencies for fundamental traders. The trading frequency of fundamental traders is changed by changing SFT interval, which is the interval between actions from the same fundamental traders. Speciﬁcally, once a fundamental trader submits an order to the market, the same fundamental trader is not able to participate in the simulated market within the subsequentSFT interval steps. Only afterSFT interval step can this fundamental trader submit another order to the market. In the default calibrated simulationSFT interval is 100, while the same interval for market makers is 1. In other words, market makers can act in every simulation step, while a fundamental trader can only act once in every 100 steps. The smaller the SFT interval is, the higher the trading frequency for fundamental traders. If SFT interval has value 1, the fundamental traders would have the same trading frequency as market makers, creating the imaginary "high-frequency fundamental traders". Panel (c) in Figure 9 presents how the ﬂash crash amplitude changes when the trading frequency of fundamental traders changes. The ﬁgure indicates that there is a monotonous relationship between ﬂash crash amplitude and the trading frequency of fundamental traders. Note that the larger the interval is, the lower the trading frequency is. Thus the ﬂash crash amplitude is decreasing when we increase the trading frequency of fundamental traders. If the fundamental traders have the same trading frequency as the market makers, the ﬂash crash amplitude becomes small enough that the ﬂash crash turns into a small shock in the market. The analysis here supports the argument that the mismatch of trading frequency between different types of traders potentially leads to ﬂash crash events. There is hardly an imaginary "high-frequency fundamental trader" in the real-world trading environment. Thus practical trading environment corresponds to the right-hand part of the functional relationship in Panel (c) of Figure 9, where fundamental traders act at a lower frequency. The results indirectly show that high-frequency trader is an important factor in the occurrence of ﬂash crash scenarios. 6 Mini Flash Crash Scenarios The above section provides an analysis of the occurrence of ﬂash crash events. The 2010 Flash Crash is so large that no following events have rivalled its depth, breadth, and speed of price movement (Paddrik et al. 2017). However, ﬂash crashes on a smaller scale do occur more frequently. Johnson et al. (2012) identify more than 18,000 mini ﬂash crash incidents between 2006 and 2011 in US equity markets. Those mini ﬂash crashes are characterised to be abrupt and severe price changes over a short period of time. One natural question is how those mini ﬂash crashes happened. As a second application for the proposed agent-based model, we investigate and analyse the causes of mini ﬂash crashes in the framework of our agent-based ﬁnancial market simulation. An innovative "Spiking Trader" is introduced to the market to mimic the trigger of mini ﬂash crash events. A typical mini ﬂash crash event in our simulation is analysed in detail, followed by experiments for exploring the conditions for mini ﬂash crash events. 6.1 Introduction of Spiking Trader (ST) In the current literature, there is a growing consensus that the mini ﬂash crashes result from interactions between various trading algorithms that operate at or beyond the limits of human response times, such as the procyclical behaviours of high-frequency market participants. However, there are various triggers for mini ﬂash crash events. According to Karvik et al. (2018), one speciﬁc trigger could be orders that are large relative to the supply of available 26 AUGUST 30, 2022 limit orders, which bring price shocks to the market. To mimic the occasional price shock in the market, a type of trader agent called "Spiking Trader" is introduced to our agent-based artiﬁcial ﬁnancial market. The proposed spiking trader mainly creates price shocks to the market, either upward or downward. Initially the spiking trader is inactive. For each simulation step, there is a small probability that a spiking trader is activated. Once activated, the spiking trader will submit market orders of the same direction for several consecutive simulation steps, creating price shocks in one direction. A spiking trader is associated with three parameters: Nspike,µspike, andVspike. Nspike represents the number of consecutive orders to be submitted after the spiking trader is activated.µspike is the probability of being activated in a certain simulation step. Vspike is the volume of the orders from spiking traders. Detailed trading logic for spiking traders is shown in Algorithm 8. Note thatNST spiking traders are introduced to the agent-based simulation model. In our experiments,NST has value 2. Algorithm 8 Spiking Trader Logic 1: InitialiseNspike,µspike,Vspike 2: Status← 0;D← Sell 3: for each simulation step do 4: ifStatus> 0 then 5: Submit a market order with volumeVspike, directionD 6: Status←Status− 1 7: else 8: ifp∈U(0, 1)<µ spike then 9: ifp∈U(0, 1)< 0.5 thenD← Sell elseD← Buy end if 10: Status←Nspike 11: else 12: No action taken 13: end if 14: end if 15: end for 6.2 Mini Flash Crash Analysis To investigate mini ﬂash crash events, there are some modiﬁcations to the simulation conﬁguration. The number of market makers in the simulation is reduced. Our experiments show that this increases the probability of the occurrence of mini ﬂash crash events. The reason is that less market makers will lead to thinner market depth, generating more mini ﬂash crash events for scrutiny. The institutional trader is removed from the market; while two spiking traders are introduced to the market simulation. Other model parameters are the same as the simulation for the 2010 Flash Crash. Detailed model parameters for mini ﬂash crash simulation are shown in Appendix D. Figure 10 presents a typical mini ﬂash crash scenario in our simulation. The price drops nearly 80 basis points in just several seconds, and then bounces back towards the fundamental value. Figure 11 shows the inventory level for each type of trader against simulated price during the mini ﬂash crash scenario. According to Figure 11, the trigger and dynamics for that speciﬁc simulated mini ﬂash crash are very straightforward: • At 12:08:38, a spiking trader is activated to bring downward shocks to the market. The spiking trader submits sell orders to the market in the next 2 seconds. Those sell pressure in the 2-second interval is mainly absorbed by market makers. • Having absorbed the sell orders from spiking trader, one market maker accumulates a relatively large inventory at 12:08:40 and the inventory limit is reached. For risk management purposes, the market maker decides to reduce the position and then temporarily withdraw from the market. The sell orders from this market maker are digested by other market makers. • The same high-frequency dynamic happens between 12:08:40 and 12:08:42. During this small time period, the same positions transfer between different market makers, creating the "hot-potato" effect on a smaller scale. Several market makers withdraw from the market temporarily after emptying their inventory. • At 12:08:42, only 4 seconds after the spiking trader is activated, the market suffers from the liquidity loss because of the withdrawal of some market makers. The sell orders from the remaining market makers create dramatic market impacts due to thin liquidity, dragging the price down for more than 60 basis points in 5 seconds. 27 AUGUST 30, 2022 • At 12:08:47, the price has dropped 80 basis points compared to the price level at 12:08:38. The price then stops dropping and then gradually bounces back to the original level. Note that in the above simulation, the fundamental traders are conﬁgured to have a trading interval of 100 steps, which is the calibrated value from Section 4. The speciﬁc simulated mini ﬂash crash event happens in a time horizon that is shorter than the horizon over which lower frequency fundamental traders observe the market. This is shown in Figure 11, where the inventory for fundamental traders hardly changed during the mini ﬂash crash event. The analysis shows that the mini ﬂash crash events result from the procyclical behaviours among high-frequency market makers, precipitated by price shocks that are created by spiking traders or other market participants. Fig. 10 One typical simulated mini ﬂash crash event. Red line is the historical price; green line is the simulated price; blue line is the fundamental value Fig. 11 Detailed simulated price against the inventories of each type of trader during the simulated mini ﬂash crash event. (a): Simulated and historical price from 12:08:30 to 12:09:00. (b): Total inventory level for each type of trader during time period from 12:08:30 to 12:09:00 6.3 Conditions for Mini Flash Crash Scenarios In Section 5.2 we explore how different conditions inﬂuence the amplitude of large ﬂash crash events. Here we address the question that how those conditions inﬂuence the characteristics of mini ﬂash crash events. Since the institutional trader is removed from the simulation, two conditions that are unrelated to the institutional trader are considered: market makers inventory limit and trading frequency of fundamental traders. Unlike the colossal ﬂash crashes that happen extremely rarely, mini ﬂash crashes occur more frequently in modern ﬁnancial markets where high-frequency trading contributes to a vast portion of transactions. Consequently, the characteristic of mini ﬂash crash events is twofold: the frequency for the occurrence of mini ﬂash crash events and the crash severity once a mini ﬂash crash occurs. To explore the characteristics of mini ﬂash crashes under different conditions, Monte Carlo simulation is carried out. For the purpose of consistency, the simulation also mimics the E-mini futures market on May 6th. The simulation spans from 8:00 to 12:30 on May 6th, 2010, excluding the afternoon trading session to reduce the inﬂuence of the large historical ﬂash crash event. Except for the two model parameters that represent the two conditions that are of 28 AUGUST 30, 2022 interest, other model parameters are assigned the same value as the calibration results and are strictly kept ﬁxed12. For each parameter combination, which represents a speciﬁc condition, we run 60 simulations and calculate the average frequency for the occurrence of mini ﬂash crash events and the average amplitude for the mini ﬂash crash events. The only remaining question to solve is how to count the mini ﬂash crashes and how to measure the amplitude of a mini ﬂash crash. Following Karvik et al. (2018), a mini ﬂash crash is classiﬁed as a k standard deviation move in price, which reverses over a horizon that is less than certain time periods. Thek has value 2, 3, 4 in our experiments. Note that because the spiking trader can create both upward and downward price shock, we also consider the upward "ﬂare up" event as another form of mini ﬂash crash13. Speciﬁcally, in our experiments ak-sd mini ﬂash crash is deﬁned to be the peak or trough price behaviour inside a 10-minute interval, where the price moves more thank standard deviations and then bounces back. The k standard deviation is calculated by reference to the minute-level return. Inspired by topography, the amplitude of the mini ﬂash crash event is then deﬁned to be the prominence of the peak or trough price trajectory. A speciﬁc method to calculate the prominence can be found in Virtanen et al. (2020). We calculate the average number of the occurrence of mini ﬂash crash and the average amplitude for the mini ﬂash crash events under different conditions. The results are shown in Figure 12 and Figure 13. Figure 12 presents how the average number of mini ﬂash crashes per simulation changes when the inventory limit of market makers and trading frequency of fundamental traders vary. As shown in panel (a), increasing the inventory limit will decrease the average number of mini ﬂash crashes in our simulation, indicating a lower frequency for the occurrence of mini ﬂash crash events. This result is consistent with our intuition. The larger the inventory limit for market makers, the more selling pressure market makers are able to absorb. Thus the "hot-potato" effect is less probable to appear with a larger inventory limit for market makers, resulting in fewer mini ﬂash crashes. As for the trading frequency of fundamental traders, however, the frequency of the occurrence for mini ﬂash crash events barely changes when we vary the trading frequency parameter of fundamental traders. This is presented in panel (b) of Figure 12. One possible explanation is that mini ﬂash crash events happen in an extremely short time scale and the amplitude is relatively small. Consequently, fundamental traders are hardly able to nor willing to participate during the course of the mini ﬂash crash events. Figure 13 presents how the average amplitude of mini ﬂash crashes changes when the inventory limit of market makers and trading frequency of fundamental traders vary. As demonstrated by Panel (a) in Figure 13, the functional relationship between mini ﬂash crash amplitude and market maker inventory limit is not monotonous. The average mini ﬂash crash amplitude is an increasing function with regard to market maker inventory limit when the inventory limit is small, while it turns into a decreasing function when the market maker inventory limit is large enough. The logic here is very similar to the analysis in Section 5.2. While the market maker inventory limit is small, increasing the inventory limit will result in more selling pressure when the inventory limit is hit, leading to a larger crash amplitude. However, a large enough market maker inventory limit would absorb most shocks in the market, restricting the scale of the mini ﬂash crash events. Moving on to panel (b) in Figure 13, we observe no obvious inﬂuence of fundamental traders trading frequency on the amplitude of mini ﬂash crash events. This phenomenon once again demonstrates that fundamental traders hardly participate during the course of mini ﬂash crash events. Fig. 12 (a): Relationship between the average number of mini ﬂash crashes per simulation and the inventory limit of market maker. (b): Relationship between the average number of mini ﬂash crashes per simulation and the trading frequency of fundamental traders. 12Due to no calibration results, the model parameters for the newly introduced spiking trader are given values heuristically. 13The deﬁnition for "ﬂare up" and "ﬂash crash" are symmetrical: "ﬂare up" is a rapid price rise followed by a price drop. 29 AUGUST 30, 2022 Fig. 13 (a): Relationship between the average amplitude of simulated mini ﬂash crashes and the inventory limit of market maker. (b): Relationship between the average amplitude of simulated mini ﬂash crashes and the trading frequency of fundamental traders. 7 Conclusion and Future Work 7.1 Summary of Achievements A novel high-frequency agent-based ﬁnancial market simulator is implemented to generate a realistic high-frequency simulated ﬁnancial market. Each simulation step corresponds to 100 milliseconds in the real-world trading environment. Full exchange protocols (limit order books) are implemented to simulate the order matching process. In this way, we provide a microstructure model of a single security traded on a central limit order book in which market participants follow ﬁxed behavioural rules. The model is calibrated using the machine learning surrogate modelling approach. Statistical test and moment coverage ratio results show that the simulation is capable of reproducing realistic stylised facts in ﬁnancial markets. The simulator is then employed to explore the dynamics during ﬂash crash episodes and the conditions that affect ﬂash crash episodes. Under the framework of the proposed high-frequency agent-based ﬁnancial market simulator, the 2010 Flash Crash is realistically simulated by introducing an institutional trader that mimics the real-world Sell Algorithm on May 6th, 2010. We investigate the market dynamics during the simulated ﬂash crash and show that the simulated dynamics are consistent with what happened in historical ﬂash crash scenarios. We then explore the conditions that could inﬂuence the characteristics of the 2010 Flash Crash. It is found that three conditions signiﬁcantly affect the amplitude of the 2010 Flash Crash: the percentage of volume of the Sell Algorithm, market maker inventory limit, and the trading frequency of fundamental traders. In particular, we found that the relationship between the amplitude of the simulated 2010 Flash Crash and the POV of the Sell Algorithm is not monotonous, and so is the relationship between the amplitude and the market maker inventory limit. For the trading frequency of fundamental traders, the higher the frequency, the smaller the amplitude of the simulated 2010 Flash Crash. Similar analysis is carried out for mini ﬂash crash events. An innovative type of trader called "Spiking Trader" is introduced to the agent-based ﬁnancial market simulator, creating more price shock and precipitating more mini ﬂash crash events. Market dynamics for a typical simulated mini ﬂash crash event are analysed. We also explore the conditions that could inﬂuence the characteristics of mini ﬂash crash events. Experimental results show that market maker inventory limit signiﬁcantly affects both the frequency and amplitude of mini ﬂash crash events. However, the trading frequency of fundamental traders shows no obvious inﬂuence on mini ﬂash crash events in our experiments. 7.2 Future Work During the 2010 Flash Crash, there are lots of cross-market arbitrageurs who transferred the selling pressure to the equities markets by opportunistically buying E-Mini contracts and simultaneously selling products like SPY . This cross-market mechanism has not yet been implemented in our agent-based modelling framework. One future direction is to implement simulated markets for two correlated securities and explore the contagion during stressed scenarios. Another extension is to use the proposed agent-based ﬁnancial market simulation framework for examining how regulatory policy interventions could inﬂuence the current market dynamics. For example, whether a circuit breaker in the market would help stabilize ﬁnancial markets and curb the severity of ﬂash crash scenarios. Last but not the least, an examination of possible indicators of an imminent ﬂash crash event is another interesting future extension of this work. 30 AUGUST 30, 2022 References Borkovec, M., Domowitz, I., Serbin, V ., and Yegerman, H. (2010). Liquidity and price discovery in exchange-traded funds: One of several possible lessons from the ﬂash crash. The Journal of Index Investing, 1(2):24–42. Byron, M. Y ., Shenoy, K. V ., and Sahani, M. (2004). Derivation of kalman ﬁltering and smoothing equations. In Technical report. Stanford University. Chiarella, C. (1992). The dynamics of speculative behaviour. Annals of operations research, 37(1):101–123. Cont, R. (2007). V olatility clustering in ﬁnancial markets: Empirical facts and agent-based models. In Long memory in economics, pages 289–309. Springer. Darley, V . and Outkin, A. (2007). A NASDAQ market simulation: insights on a major market from the science of complex adaptive systems, volume 1. World Scientiﬁc. Franke, R. and Westerhoff, F. (2012). Structural stochastic volatility in asset pricing dynamics: Estimation and model contest. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 36(8):1193–1211. Gode, D. K. and Sunder, S. (1993). Allocative efﬁciency of markets with zero-intelligence traders: Market as a partial substitute for individual rationality. Journal of political economy, 101(1):119–137. Golub, A., Keane, J., and Poon, S. (2012). High frequency trading and mini ﬂash crashes. Available at SSRN 2182097. Hayes, R., Todd, A., Chaidarun, N., Tepsuporn, S., Beling, P., and Scherer, W. (2014). An agent-based ﬁnancial simulation for use by researchers. In Proceedings of the Winter Simulation Conference 2014, pages 300–309. Hill, J. B. (2010). On tail index estimation for dependent, heterogeneous data. Econometric Theory, 26(5):1398–1436. Johnson, N., Zhao, G., Hunsader, E., Meng, J., Ravindar, A., Carran, S., and Tivnan, B. (2012). Financial black swans driven by ultrafast machine ecology. arXiv preprint arXiv:1202.1448. Karvik, G., Noss, J., Worlidge, J., and Beale, D. (2018). The deeds of speed: an agent-based model of market liquidity and ﬂash episodes. Bank of England Working Paper. Kirilenko, A., Kyle, A. S., Samadi, M., and Tuzun, T. (2017). The ﬂash crash: High-frequency trading in an electronic market. The Journal of Finance, 72(3):967–998. Kyle, A. S. and Obižaeva, A. (2020). Large bets and stock market crashes. CEFIR. Lamperti, F., Roventini, A., and Sani, A. (2018). Agent-based model calibration using machine learning surrogates. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 90:366–389. LeBaron, B. (2001). A builder’s guide to agent-based ﬁnancial markets. Quantitative ﬁnance, 1:254–261. Madhavan, A. (2012). Exchange-traded funds, market structure, and the ﬂash crash. Financial Analysts Journal, 68(4):20–35. Majewski, A., Ciliberti, S., and Bouchaud, J. P. (2020). Co-existence of trend and value in ﬁnancial markets: Estimating an extended chiarella model. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 112:103791. McGroarty, F., Booth, A., Gerding, E., and Chinthalapati, V . R. (2019). High frequency trading strategies, market fragility and price spikes: An agent based model perspective. Annals of Operations Research, 282(1):217–244. Menkveld, A. (2013). High frequency trading and the new market makers. Journal of ﬁnancial Markets, 16(4):712–740. Menkveld, A. and Yueshen, B. Z. (2019). The ﬂash crash: A cautionary tale about highly fragmented markets. Management Science, 65(10):4470–4488. O’Hara, M. (1995). Market Microstructure Theory. Wiley. Paddrik, M., Hayes, R., Scherer, W., and Beling, P. (2017). Effects of limit order book information level on market stability metrics. Journal of Economic Interaction and Coordination, 12(2):221–247. Paddrik, M., Hayes, R., Todd, A., Yang, S., Beling, P., and Scherer, W. (2012). An agent based model of the e-mini s&p 500 applied to ﬂash crash analysis. In 2012 IEEE Conference on Computational Intelligence for Financial Engineering and Economics (CIFEr), pages 1–8. Paulin, J., Calinescu, A., and Wooldridge, M. (2019). Understanding ﬂash crash contagion and systemic risk: A micro–macro agent-based approach. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 100:200–229. Ralaivola, L. and d’Alche Buc, F. (2005). Time series ﬁltering, smoothing and learning using the kernel kalman ﬁlter. Proceedings of 2005 IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 3:1449–1454. SEC and CFTC (2010). Findings regarding the market events of may 6, 2010. Washington DC. Sewell, M. (2011). Characterization of ﬁnancial time series. Research Note, 11(01):01. 31 AUGUST 30, 2022 Todd, A., Beling, P., Scherer, W., and Yang, S. Y . (2016). Agent-based ﬁnancial markets: A review of the methodology and domain. In 2016 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), pages 1–5. Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., Haberland, M., Reddy, T., Cournapeau, D., Burovski, E., Peterson, P., Weckesser, W., Bright, J., van der Walt, S. J., Brett, M., Wilson, J., Millman, K. J., Mayorov, N., Nelson, A. R. J., Jones, E., Kern, R., Larson, E., Carey, C. J., Polat, ˙I., Feng, Y ., Moore, E. W., VanderPlas, J., Laxalde, D., Perktold, J., Cimrman, R., Henriksen, I., Quintero, E. A., Harris, C. R., Archibald, A. M., Ribeiro, A. H., Pedregosa, F., van Mulbregt, P., and SciPy 1.0 Contributors (2020). SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientiﬁc Computing in Python. Nature Methods, 17:261–272. 32 AUGUST 30, 2022 Appendices A Descriptions for All Model Parameters Table 5 Descriptions for All Parameters involved in the proposed agent-based model Parameter Description Parameter Description κ1 FT: Coefﬁcient for linear demand component κ2 FT: Coefﬁcient for polynomial demand component NFT FT: Number of FT SFT interval FT: Interval between fundamental trading activities. βL LMT: Coefﬁcient for demand calculation αL LMT: Coefﬁcient for demand calculation NLMT LMT: Number of LMT βS SMT: Coefﬁcient for demand calculation NSMT SMT: Number of SMT αS SMT: Coefﬁcient for demand calculation σNT NT: Coefﬁcient for demand calculation NNT NT: Number of NT γ LMT & SMT: Coefﬁcient for demand calculation δ NT, LMT & SMT: Limit order cancellation rate ρ NT, LMT & SMT: Ratio between probability of submitting a market order and probability of submitting a limit order V NT, FT, LMT, SMT, MM: Order volume µ𝓁 NT, LMT & SMT: Mean of the log-normal distribution from which limit order price distance is sampled Σ𝓁 NT, LMT & SMT: Standard deviation of the log-normal distribution from which limit order price distance is sampled NMM MM: Number of MM δMM MM: Limit order cancellation rate θMM MM: Probability of submitting a quote pMM edge MM: Maximum price distance of submitted order εMM limit MM: Position limit εMM safe MM: Safe position level εMM rest MM: Time length for the trading suspension NST ST: Number of ST Nspike ST: Number of consecutive orders to be submitted after ST is activated µspike ST: Probability of being activated in a certain simulation step Vspike ST: Order volume r INS: Target execution rate Q INS: Number of initial inventory n INS: Number of seconds between consecutive market sell orders 33 AUGUST 30, 2022 B Values for Fixed Model Parameters in Calibration Table 6 Values for ﬁxed model parameters in calibration Parameter κ1 κ2 NFT SFT interval Value N.A. N.A. 30 100 Parameter βL αL NLMT βS Value N.A. 0.001 30 N.A. Parameter NSMT αS σNT NNT Value 30 0.9 N.A. 30 Parameter γ δ ρ V Value 10 0.005 0.2 100 Parameter µ𝓁 Σ𝓁 NMM δMM Value N.A. 0.3 20 0.05 Parameter θMM pMM edge εMM limit εMM safe Value N.A. 4 5000 101 Parameter εMM rest NST Nspike µspike Value 12000 N.A. N.A. N.A. Parameter Vspike r Q n Value N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. C Values for Model Parameters in 2010 Flash Crash Simulation Table 7 Values for model parameters in 2010 Flash Crash simulation Parameter κ1 κ2 NFT SFT interval Value 0.1390 0.4562 30 100 Parameter βL αL NLMT βS Value 0.3017 0.001 30 0.1273 Parameter NSMT αS σNT NNT Value 30 0.9 0.3403 30 Parameter γ δ ρ V Value 10 0.005 0.2 100 Parameter µ𝓁 Σ𝓁 NMM δMM Value 1.9349 0.3 20 0.05 Parameter θMM pMM edge εMM limit εMM safe Value 0.6624 4 7000 101 Parameter εMM rest NST Nspike µspike Value 12000 N.A. N.A. N.A. Parameter Vspike r Q n Value N.A. 9% 120,000 12 34 AUGUST 30, 2022 D Values for Model Parameters in Mini Flash Crash Simulation Table 8 Values for model parameters in Mini Flash Crash simulation Parameter κ1 κ2 NFT SFT interval Value 0.1390 0.4562 30 100 Parameter βL αL NLMT βS Value 0.3017 0.001 30 0.1273 Parameter NSMT αS σNT NNT Value 30 0.9 0.3403 30 Parameter γ δ ρ V Value 10 0.005 0.2 100 Parameter µ𝓁 Σ𝓁 NMM δMM Value 1.9349 0.3 5 0.05 Parameter θMM pMM edge εMM limit εMM safe Value 0.6624 4 4000 101 Parameter εMM rest NST Nspike µspike Value 12000 2 4 0.005 Parameter Vspike r Q n Value 100 N.A. N.A. N.A. 35