THE SHORT-T ERM PREDICTABILITY OF RETURNS IN ORDER BOOK MARKETS : A DEEP LEARNING PERSPECTIVE Lorenzo Lucchese∗ Department of Mathematics Imperial College London lorenzo.lucchese17@imperial.ac.uk Mikko S. Pakkanen Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science University of Waterloo and Department of Mathematics Imperial College London mikko.pakkanen@uwaterloo.ca Almut E. D. Veraart Department of Mathematics Imperial College London a.veraart@imperial.ac.uk October 10, 2023 ABSTRACT In this paper, we conduct a systematic large-scale analysis of order book-driven predictability in high-frequency returns by leveraging deep learning techniques. First, we introduce a new and robust representation of the order book, the volume representation. Next, we carry out an extensive empirical experiment to address various questions regarding predictability. We investigate if and how far ahead there is predictability, the importance of a robust data representation, the advantages of multi-horizon modeling, and the presence of universal trading patterns. We use model confidence sets, which provide a formalized statistical inference framework particularly well suited to answer these questions. Our findings show that at high frequencies predictability in mid-price returns is not just present, but ubiquitous. The performance of the deep learning models is strongly dependent on the choice of order book representation, and in this respect, the volume representation appears to have multiple practical advantages. 1 Introduction 1.1 Financial markets and exchanges: the rise of High-Frequency traders A financial market is an ensemble of market agents willing to buy or sell a certain financial security, such as a stock, bond, or derivative. Today most trades take place on electronic exchanges, virtual places that bring together buyers and sellers, facilitating the occurrence of transactions. At the time of writing, the two largest U.S. equity exchanges by market capitalization are the NYSE, a hybrid (floor and electronic) auction market accounting for 20% of the U.S. equities market transactions, and the Nasdaq, a fully electronic dealer market executing about 16% of such trades (source: Cboe Exchange, Inc.). Both of these markets allow traders to access live order book information, i.e. the collection of all standing orders for a given security. In theory, this allows for symmetric information across traders, which should all have access to the same data regarding market depth, liquidity, and price discovery dynamics. In practice, traders have access to different technology, receiving market data and submitting orders at different latencies. In the quest to exploit the advantages gained by faster access to markets, almost two decades ago, a new market ∗This research has been supported by the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Mathematics of Random Systems: Analysis, Modelling and Simulation (EP/S023925/1). We would like to thank Thomas Oliver (InferStat) for helpful discussions on the subject. arXiv:2211.13777v3 [q-fin.CP] 8 Oct 2023 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets participant emerged. These market players are today known as High-Frequency Traders (HFTs) and, over the years, have rapidly grown to represent a significant share of the market (Abergel et al., 2014). Their role has since been the object of a fierce debate: their critics claim HFTs engage in predatory – and sometimes illegal – behavior, while their supporters believe HFTs to be overall beneficial to the market by providing liquidity, reducing spreads, and helping price discovery dynamics. In this paper, we will not delve into questions regarding the legitimacy of HFT practices, but we will instead aim to independently analyze the value of immediate access to order book information. Over the past few decades, HFT companies have engaged in a fierce race to zero latency, making vast economic efforts to reduce their latency by just a few microseconds. What we aim to explore in this research is one of the possible reasons why such a race happened in the first place. Specifically, we will be analyzing the predictive value of order book data, i.e. to what extent can a trader with immediate access to the order book predict the future direction of the market? It is also important to note that, over the past couple of decades, the trading process has become increasingly complex due to market fragmentation, availability of new technologies such as smart order routers (SORs), and – sometimes controversial – regulation, e.g. RegNMS (US Securities and Exchange Commission, 2005) and MiFID (European Parliament and Council, 2004). While practices that exploit arbitrage between competing trading venues exist, in this research, we will assume the trader has access to a single electronic order book-based exchange, namely the Nasdaq. 1.2 Order book predictability: asking the right questions As discussed in the opening paragraph, we would like to explore whether, contrary to low-frequency returns, ultra- high-frequency returns tend to display predictability. Empirical studies (Sirignano and Cont, 2019) have shown that price formation dynamics, i.e. next mid-price moves, are predictable. In this paper, we will try to understand whether such predictability persists at longer horizons. Intuitively, predictability in high-frequency returns may be understood to arise simply from the way an order book market is structured, i.e. the side of the order book with less liquidity is more likely to erode faster, resulting in a price increase/decrease, or as the product of recurring trading patterns in response to liquidity information. The approaches considered in the literature for forecasting high-frequency returns from order book data can be roughly divided into two categories: relatively simple models built on carefully handcrafted features (Aït-Sahalia et al., 2022) and more sophisticated architectures applied directly to raw order book data (Zhang et al., 2019; Zhang and Zohren, 2021; Kolm et al., 2021). In this research, we will focus on the latter class of models, leveraging the ability of deep learning techniques to learn complex dependence structures. We will consider a specific class of deep learning models, introduced by Zhang et al. (2019), designed to extract features from order book data. There is empirical evidence (Bengio et al., 2013) which suggests that, although deep learning models can extract complex features, the way data is represented may have a significant impact on model performance. We will hence explore how model performance varies when changing the way the order book data is arranged. Equipped with this class of models, we will aim to investigate the following questions, which naturally arise from our preceding discussion: 1. Do high-frequency returns display order book-driven predictability? If so, how far ahead can we predict? 2. Which order book representations perform best? 3. Can we use a single model across multiple horizons? 4. Can we use a single model across multiple stocks? We aim to answer all these questions in a formalized statistical inference framework based on model confidence sets (Hansen et al., 2011). 1.3 Related work and contributions It is important to note that mathematical modeling of order book dynamics is a very broad and active area of research: ranging from Hawkes process models for order and trade events in continuous time (Bacry and Muzy, 2014; Large, 2007) to discrete-time synthetic data-driven order book generation (Byrd et al., 2020; Coletta et al., 2022). The work presented in this paper can be seen as contributing to two parallel research streams in the literature for order book-driven mid-price predictions. On one hand, we expand on the deep learning ideas discussed in Zhang et al. (2019); Zhang and Zohren (2021); Kolm et al. (2021) by introducing new data representations and carrying out a disciplined comparison between the specifications. On the other, we explore a set of questions related to short-term price predictability in a similar spirit to Aït-Sahalia et al. (2022) but under a different class of models. In the broader context of the questions addressed in this paper, related works are those of Sirignano and Cont (2019), exploring the universality of order book dynamics, and Wu et al. (2021), advocating for robust representations of order books. We base our experimental procedure on model confidence sets, introduced by Hansen et al. (2011). We believe this formalized statistical inference framework perfectly suits our aim of addressing questions that require comparisons between multiple models and benchmarks. 2 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets The two main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows. First, we introduce a deep learning model for mid-price forecasting based on a more robust representation of the order book, which we will refer to as deepVOL. This representation allows us to easily adapt the model to the setting where more granular L3 data2 is available. Second, we provide new empirical results addressing essential questions regarding short-term price predictability in a disciplined experimental framework. 2 The space of models under consideration 2.1 The order book At a given point in time, an order book contains all the (visible) buy and sell orders placed for a given security on a specific exchange. The lowest ask price, resp. the highest bid price, is known as the first ask order book level, resp. the first bid order book level. Subsequent levels are defined accordingly. An example of a 10-level order book snapshot is displayed in Figure 1. We note that in electronic exchanges, orders can be submitted on an evenly spaced discrete set of prices, known as ticks. The smallest price increment is known as the tick size, for most U.S. traded stocks, it corresponds to $0.01. It is important to note that not all tick prices may have standing orders; therefore, the first 10-level ask/bid prices may not coincide with the first 10 ask/bid tick prices. 11.76 11.77 11.78 11.79 11.80 11.81 11.82 11.83 11.84 11.85 11.86 11.87 11.88 11.89 11.90 11.91 11.92 11.93 11.94 11.95 price ($) 0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 volumes Figure 1: A sample snapshot of an order book. Ask (resp. bid) volumes are denoted by red (resp. green) bars. The lighter green shaded area represents the change in the order book shape when some of the liquidity at the best bid price is removed. There are three main types of actions that traders can request on an exchange: • a limit order: an order to buy a given quantity of the security at a given price; • a market order: an order to buy a given quantity of the security at the best available price; • a cancellation or partial deletion: an order to fully or partially delete a standing limit order. Note that while market orders are always immediately executed once posted, passive limit orders, i.e. orders which do not cross the spread, will sit in the order book until they are matched. A limit order entering the market at a tick price where other limit orders are already present will be added at the end of the standing queue. Trades occur each time a market order or aggressive limit order is posted, the requested volume is matched to the standing limit orders according to price-time priority. We will not delve into the detailed characteristics of all the different order types which exist, but it suffices to point out that the three actions described above represent the fundamental drivers of the evolution of order books. For example, in Figure 1, the change in order book shape may be due to either a (partial) deletion of a first-level buy limit order or the execution of a sell order (either a market order or an aggressive limit order). During trading hours, electronic exchanges operate continuously, and for this reason, order books are sometimes referred to as continuous books. Exchanges such as the Nasdaq time stamp each event at nanosecond precision. Between different stocks, the level of trading activity may vary significantly, and the time elapsed between consecutive events may differ by orders of magnitude. For this reason, we define an alternative time clock: a discrete order book clock, which increments by one each time an action is executed on the order book. Throughout our discussion, we will explore questions of predictability with respect to this order book clock, which is the same as the one considered in Ntakaris et al. (2018). Some authors, for example, Aït-Sahalia et al. (2022) consider alternative order book-driven time clocks, such as transaction clocks and volume clocks. 2See Section 2.1 for the definitions of L1, L2 and L3 order book data. 3 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets We understand that models based on order book-specific clocks might be challenging to use in practical trading applications. However, we believe order book-based clocks provide a more natural measure of time for exploring predictability and are more suitable for comparing results across stocks than physical time: a 100ms time horizon has a significantly different meaning for stocks with different levels of trading activity. Another important observation is that order book data might not be accessed by all market participants at the same level of granularity. The Nasdaq Quotation Dissemination Service makes the following distinctions: • L1 data: the best bid and ask prices and corresponding volumes; • L2 data: all available bid and ask prices and corresponding volumes; • L3 data: all available bid and ask prices and corresponding volumes split among the orders in the queue. We will be comparing the performance of models when different levels of data granularity are available. Figure 2 provides a visual comparison of L1, L2, and L3 data. 11.76 11.77 11.78 11.79 11.8 11.81 11.82 11.83 11.84 11.85 11.86 11.87 11.88 11.89 11.9 11.91 11.92 11.93 11.94 11.95 0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 volumes L1 data 11.76 11.77 11.78 11.79 11.8 11.81 11.82 11.83 11.84 11.85 11.86 11.87 11.88 11.89 11.9 11.91 11.92 11.93 11.94 11.95 0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 volumes L2 data 11.76 11.77 11.78 11.79 11.80 11.81 11.82 11.83 11.84 11.85 11.86 11.87 11.88 11.89 11.90 11.91 11.92 11.93 11.94 11.95 price ($) 0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 volumes L3 data Figure 2: L1, L2 and L3 representations of the order book in Figure 1. We introduce the following notation: at timet∈ Z we denote by • p(l) x,t,v (l) x,t forl = 1, 2,... thel-th level ask/bid price and volume, forx∈{a,b}; • mt = p(1) b,t +p(1) a,t 2 the mid-price; 4 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets • π(j) x,t,s (j) x,t forj = 1, 2,... thej-th ask/bid tick price from the mid and corresponding volume forx∈{a,b}, i.e. this is defined recursively as π(1) x,t = mt ifmt∈T , mt± ϑ 2 ifmt /∈T , π(j) x,t =π(j−1) x,t ±ϑ forj = 2, 3,..., whereϑ is the tick size,T ={kϑ :k∈ N} is the set of possible tick prices and± depends onx∈{a,b}. • q(i,k) x,t fork = 1, 2,... the queue corresponding to volumes(i) x,t and ordered by time priority. 2.2 Predictability of returns We will explore models that aim to identify short-term predictability in returns. We first introduce the familiar regression framework for return predictions. We then rephrase the task in terms of a classification problem, extending the definition of predictability to this setting. We will be exploring predictability arising from past order book data and thus we define the informationσ-algebraFt to be Ft =σ(xt,..., xt−T+1), where xt,..., xt−T+1 are order book derived features at timest,...,t −T + 1 for some look-back window of length T . Predictions in the regression framework Let us first consider the regression setting. At time t we denote by rt,t+h∈ R theh-step ahead mid-price return, as defined in 3.2.2. Given order book information at time t,Ft, there exists a measurable functiong such that E[rt,t+h|Ft] =g(xt,..., xt−T+1), or, equivalently, rt,t+h =g(xt,..., xt−T+1) +ϵt, for some mean-zero noise variable ϵt orthogonal to the space ofFt-measurable random variables. A prediction is defined to be anyFt-measurable random variable and the best prediction is theFt-measurable random variabler(t) t,t+h which minimizes the expected cost E[C(r(t) t,t+h,rt,t+h)], for some appropriate cost functionC : R× R→ R. In the case of quadratic costC(r1,r 2) = (r1−r2)2, we have r(t) t,t+h = E[rt,t+h|Ft] =g(xt,..., xt−T+1). Different choices of cost function are possible, for example, whenC is absolute cost, i.e.C(r1,r 2) =|r1−r2|, the best prediction is given by the conditional median ofrt,t+h givenFt. Given a parametric family of models{gθ(·)}θ∈Θ and an observed training data setDtrain ={(xt,..., xt−T+1,rt,t+h)}t∈Itrain one can first learn a functiongˆθ approximating g and then produce the return predictions ˆr(t) t,t+h =gˆθ(xt,..., xt−T+1), for test data pointsDtest ={(xt,..., xt−T+1,rt,t+h)}t∈Itest. Assuming returns to be stationary, we say that there is order book-driven predictability if the learned predictions outperform an unpredictive benchmark prediction on the testing set with respect to the chosen cost functionC(·,·). Predictions in the classification framework In this paper, we will discretize the space of returns by grouping mid-price movements as downward, no-change, and upward 3. We hence introduce the discretized return random variable ct,t+h =    ↓ ifrt,t+h∈ (−∞,−γ), = ifrt,t+h∈ [−γ, +γ], ↑ ifrt,t+h∈ (+γ, +∞), 3We believe that, for high-frequency returns, a classification framework is more natural: mid-prices move in (half)-tick increments, and hence the corresponding returns live on a discrete lattice (see Section 3.2.2). Moreover, grouping returns in three classes (downward, no-change, and upward) significantly reduces the effects of idiosyncratic noise while preserving the ability to investigate questions regarding predictability. 5 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets for an appropriate choice of γ >0, cf. Section 3.2.2. Instead of modeling only the expected conditional return, in the classification setting, one aims to approximate the whole conditional distribution, i.e. find measurable functions p↓,p =,p↑ such that P(ct,t+h =∗|Ft) =p∗(xt,..., xt−T+1), for∗∈{↓ , =,↑}. The discretized return prediction for an unobserved sample is then given by the minimizer of the expected misclassification cost: ˆct,t+h = argmin ∗∈{↓,=,↑} X ⋆∈{↓,=,↑} c∗|⋆p⋆,ˆθ(xt,..., xt−T+1), where the parametric conditional probabilities p↓,ˆθ,p =,ˆθ,p↑,ˆθ are learnt from a training data set Dtrain = {(xt,..., xt−T+1,ct,t+h)}t∈Itrain andc∗|⋆ is the misclassification cost of a∗ observation classified as a⋆. Assuming the return process is stationary, we say that there is order book-driven predictability if the learned predictions outperform an unpredictive benchmark prediction on a test set in terms of total misclassification cost. Specifying an appropriate cost function is task-dependent. For example, a trader using the predictions as trading signals might be more interested in the correctness of up and down predictions than no-change ones. On the other hand, a market maker might prioritize the correctness of no-change predictions when using these to decide whether to tighten quoted spreads. In both cases, the consequences of different types of errors are asymmetric and heavily impact the choice of the cost matrix C ={c∗|⋆}∗,⋆∈{↓,=,↑}. In the classification framework an alternative approach is to compare the predicted conditional distributions,{p∗(xt,..., xt−T+1)}∗∈{↓,=,↑} to the realized outcomes directly. This approach does not require specifying a cost matrixC nor a return prediction. The predicted conditional distribution (the output of our model) is directly compared with the observed data via a suitable “distance” on the space of probability measuresP({↓, =,↑}), where realized returns are encoded as Dirac measures. A natural choice of such “distance” is given by the categorical cross-entropy, as this can be interpreted (under appropriate assumptions) as the (log)-likelihood of the test set: − log P(Dtest|θ)∝− 1 |Itest| X t∈Itest X ∗∈{↓,=,↑} 1{ct,t+h=∗} logp∗,ˆθ(xt,..., xt−T+1), where the model parameters ˆθ are learnt from the training setDtrain. As this paper does not target a specific trading strategy but is more concerned with general predictability questions, we will be evaluating our models based on the categorical cross-entropy loss. In the following, we will thus say that there is order book-driven predictability if the learned conditional distributions outperform an unpredictive benchmark distribution on a test set relative to categorical cross-entropy loss. As discussed in Appendix A.1, the natural choice for the loss used in training will also be categorical cross-entropy. Note that in both the regression and classification framework, we compare the learned predictions with those obtained from an unpredictive benchmark model to determine whether there is predictability by using a score/cost function. Simply comparing point estimates of the scores does not provide a sound statistical argument answering the question of whether there is predictability: the difference in score may simply be due to statistical variability. This is where the model confidence set (Hansen et al., 2011) procedure comes in. As we will discuss in Section 4 this provides a statistical testing framework to determine whether the learned models statistically outperform the unpredictive benchmark, i.e. whether there is predictability. Remark 2.1. It is clear that the definition of predictability is intrinsically tied to that of unpredictive benchmark. Different choices for unpredictive benchmark models are possible, for example, in the regression framework, a natural choice is given by (a version of) the efficient market hypothesis (EMH) (Fama, 1970). In this case, the unpredictive hypothesis assumes the conditional expected return to be 0. Under the classification framework, the simple EMH does not translate into a clear-cut model for the conditional distribution of returns. In this setting, we consider as a natural unpredictive hypothesis a slightly stronger version of the EMH: under the unpredictive benchmark, returns are assumed to be IID and independent of any information up to timet. The unpredictive benchmark conditional distribution will therefore be given by the empirical distribution of the training set. As a side remark, we believe it is important to note the EMH was originally proposed in a very different market environment and at significantly higher latencies than the ones considered in this paper. Nevertheless, we believe the EMH provides a natural unpredictive benchmark hypothesis when testing for predictability. As mentioned in Section 1.2, there are two main approaches considered in the literature for exploring the short-term predictability of returns in order book markets: the first considers carefully handcrafted features xt,..., xt−T and relatively simple specifications for the prediction functionsg or (p↓,p =,p↑), e.g. linear specifications or decision trees, the second – which we will explore in this paper – uses raw order book featuresxt,..., xt−T as inputs to more complex 6 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets prediction functions, e.g. deep neural network architectures. We will assume the reader is familiar with deep learning techniques and thus give a brief overview of the relevant concepts in Appendix A.1, more detailed expositions can be found in Goodfellow et al. (2016). 2.3 Deep learning models for short-term return predictions in order book markets In the previous section, we set up the learning framework for the return prediction task. We now discuss how the neural networks covered in Appendix A.1 can be combined to model price formation mechanisms and predicth-step ahead high-frequency returns. We will consider a specific class of deep learning models based on the deepLOB architecture (Zhang et al., 2019). 2.3.1 deepLOB, (Zhang et al., 2019) This network acts on raw order book input. A CNN module and an inception module feed into an LSTM layer which produces the final classification output. The CNN and inception module aim to extract short-term spatio-temporal features in the data, while the LSTM module works on longer-term dependencies. Figure 3: Core modules of network architectures. The deepLOB architecture is summarized in Figure 3 and is made up of the following components: • Input. The firstL level raw order book information - price and volume - with a look-back window of lengthT is used as input. The input at timet is thus a (T× 4L) array given by {xt−τ}τ=0,...,T−1 = n p(l) a,t−τ,v (l) a,t−τ,p (l) b,t−τ,v (l) b,t−τ o τ=0,...,T−1,l =1,...,L ∈ RT×4L. A feature-wise rolling window z-score standardization is applied to the input, i.e.v(1) a,t−τ is standardized using the mean and standard deviation of the first level ask volumes over the previous five days. • CNN module. Convolutions are applied to the data in both the spatial and temporal dimensions. The spatial convolutions aim to aggregate information across order book levels, and the temporal convolutions can be understood as smoothing operations. The CNN module is summarized in Figure 4. • Inception module. This module up-samples the convoluted data by applying various temporal convolutions with different filter lengths (time-window). Each temporal convolution can be interpreted as a (weighted) moving average. It is similar in spirit to the computation of technical indicators, but the frequencies at which this is applied are substantially different. • LSTM. The Long Short-Term Memory layer takes the multidimensional time series produced by the inception module and feeds it through a recurrent network structure aimed at extracting longer-term dependencies among the data. The last hidden state of the LSTM is passed through a dense layer with a softmax activation function to produce theh-step ahead return prediction↓, = or↑. The exact details of the deepLOB architecture can be found in Table 13. 2.3.2 deepOF, (Kolm et al., 2021) In the deepLOB model order book states, which are non-stationary, are mapped to a stationary quantity, returns. While in theory, this shouldn’t be a problem (due to universality property of deep neural networks), Kolm et al. (2021) argue that using some form of stationary input might improve model performance by facilitating the training procedure. 7 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets Figure 4: CNN module deepLOB. Figure 5: Inception module and LSTM layer. A stationary order book quantity is order flow. First-level order flow describes the net flow of orders at the best bid and ask. This was introduced in Cont et al. (2013) to explore the price impact of order book events. This single quantity parsimoniously models the instantaneous effect of order book events on prices. The first-level bid and ask order flows corresponding to the order book event occurring at timet (in order book time) are defined by: bOF (1) t =    v(1) b,t ifp(1) b,t >p (1) b,t−1, v(1) b,t−v(1) b,t−1 ifp(1) b,t =p(1) b,t−1, −v(1) b,t−1 ifp(1) b,t <p (1) b,t−1, and aOF (1) t =    −v(1) a,t−1 ifp(1) a,t >p (1) a,t−1, v(1) a,t−v(1) a,t−1 ifp(1) a,t =p(1) a,t−1, v(1) b,t ifp(1) a,t <p (1) a,t−1. 8 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets The difference between the two is known as order flow imbalance: OFI (1) t =bOF (1) t −aOF (1) t . Bid order flow corresponds to the net change in volume at the best bid level; the three cases in the definition can be understood as: • a new bid order being placed at a higher price than the current best bid; • the order volume at the best bid price increasing or decreasing; • the entire volume at the best bid price being consumed, thus decreasing the best bid price. Note that, as discussed in Section 2.1, volumes can increase or decrease due to orders being placed, executed, or canceled. A similar interpretation holds for ask order flow. In Xu et al. (2019) the authors explore flows of volumes at deeper levels in the order book, by introducing multi-level order flow. The definitions are exactly as above with superscript (1) replaced by general (l). We note that in both Cont et al. (2013) and Xu et al. (2019) the authors investigate the explanatory power of (multi-level) order flow imbalance for price changes, i.e. the relationship between contemporaneous order flow imbalance and price changes. In our setting, as in Kolm et al. (2021), we are instead interested in exploring the predictive power of order flow, i.e. the relationship between past order flow and future price changes. We will hence refer to deepOF as the deepLOB architecture with stationary order flow input, i.e. a (T× 2L) array given by {xt−τ}τ=0,...,T−1 = n aOF (l) t−τ,bOF (l) t−τ o τ=0,...,T−1,l =1,...,L ∈ RT×2L. The order flow input enters the CNN module in Figure 4 at the second convolutional layer. The rest of the architecture is exactly the same as deepLOB, as detailed in Table 13. We note that the first convolutions applied to the order flow input, i.e. the second convolutional layer in Figure 4, aggregate information across bid and ask order flows, essentially computing a weighted order flow imbalance. Remark 2.2. The original deepOF specification in Kolm et al. (2021) was structured as a (multi-horizon) regression task. In their setting, the last layer of the deep neural network maps each prediction to R instead ofP({↓, =,↑}). Moreover, as discussed in Section 2.5, the way multi-horizon predictions are produced in the original work does not rely on the encoder-decoder structure we use for our multi-horizon models. Another slight difference with the experiments in Kolm et al. (2021) is in the standardization procedure: instead of standardizing each feature by its training mean and standard deviation, we use a rolling window approach. 2.4 deepVOL 2.4.1 The need for a robust representation As discussed in the previous Section the main difference between deepLOB and deepOF is in the way the data is fed into the model. While deepLOB uses raw order book data as input, deepOF uses a derived quantity, order flow. In general, the success of deep learning tasks is highly dependent on the way the data is represented. The task of predicting returns in order book markets is no exception. In order to achieve the best possible results, one should adopt a robust representation of the data. Wu et al. (2021) identify five main desiderata for a robust representation of order book data: • Region of interest: the entire order book may contain a wide range of prices, the data representation should select a region of interest based on a complexity-performance trade-off. • Efficiency: the data representation should avoid excessive dimensionality. • Validity: the data representation should have a simple definition of valid manipulations. • Smoothness: the data representation should be robust to small perturbations. • Compatibility: the data representation should be compatible with the deep learning architecture. We note the order book representations used in deepLOB and deepOF do not conform to these desiderata. Order book states organized by ‘level’ do not have a simple validity (price and volume information are intrinsically tangled and would loose their significance if treated separately in a black box algorithm), are not robust to small perturbation (small orders added at empty ticks completely change the order book feature vector), and are incompatible with deepLOB’s CNN module (the spatial structure is not homogeneous as there is no fixed interval between levels). It turns out that while the ‘level’ representation of the order book may be easily understandable by humans it is less so for statistical 9 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets models. In addition to not satisfying the desiderata, this representation does not respect the following fundamental but implicit assumption of deep learning models: signals at the same entry of the input should come from the same source. In the ‘level’ representation, as new order book events happen, the same signal (i.e. a posted order) may move between levels. We, therefore, introduce volume features, which provide a robust representation of order book data. Fixing a window of sizeW >0 we define: {xt−τ}τ=0,...,T−1 = n s(W) b,t−τ,...,s (1) b,t−τ,s (1) a,t−τ,...,s (W) a,t−τ o τ=0,...,T−1 , wheres(j) x,t−τ forx∈{a,b} are the bid/ask volumes corresponding to thej-th price from the midπ(j) x,t−τ , as defined in Section 2.1. We note that the volume representation indeed satisfies the five desiderata: a region of interest is identified (via the windowW >0), it is efficient (for the same dimension of input it may convey more or less information than the ‘level’ representation, depending on how sparse the orders are placed in the order book), it has a simple validity (all entries are in the same units), it is robust to small perturbations (new orders at empty levels minimally affect the feature) and is compatible with the CNN architecture (the spatial structure of the volumes is homogeneous). An intuitive visualization of this representation as a one-dimensional gray-scale strip is given in Figure 6, when including a time dimension this naturally becomes a two-dimensional gray-scale image. The main drawback of the volume representation is that when orders are placed far apart in the order book it is sparse and a larger windowW >0 may be required. Our definition of volume features is similar to the mid-price-centered moving window representation of Wu et al. (2021), with the latter living in R2W+1 instead of R2W and using± signs to distinguish between bid and ask volumes. The need for a new, more robust representation of the order book was reached independently. Figure 6: Gray-scale visualization of the volume representation of the order book in Figure 1. In order to use the deepLOB architecture with this new data representation, we must adapt the CNN module. In particular, we fold the volume input into a three-dimensional array n s(j) x,t−τ o τ=0,...,T−1,j =1,...,W,x∈{a,b} ∈ RT×W×2, and feed this into a three-dimensional convolutional layer with a (2× 2× 1) filter and (1× 1× 1) stride. This layer aims to extract imbalances in the order book by comparing volumes on the two sides of the mid-price. The CNN module with the appropriate changes is depicted in Figure 7. The rest of the deepVOL architecture is exactly the same as deepLOB with one slight difference in the way the data is normalized. Thinking of the volume representation as a gray-scale image a natural choice of normalization is n s(j) x,t−τ o τ,j,x 7→ 1 max τ,j,x s(j) x,t−τ n s(j) x,t−τ o τ,j,x , instead of the rolling window standardization we apply to deepLOB and deepOF features. Remark 2.3. One could define a volume flow quantity based on the distance from the mid, in the same way order flow describes the flow of orders based on the level. Following the same motivation for considering order flow in deepOF presented in Section 2.3.2, one could consider using a volume flow quantity as input to the deep learning architectures with the desired robust representation properties. 2.4.2 L3 volume features All models considered so far, deepLOB, deepOF, and deepVOL use L2 data as input. If one has access to more granular data, i.e. L3 data breaking down each volume queue into single orders, one might be interested in trying to leverage this information to obtain higher predictive performance. We thus define a natural extension of the volume representation considered in the previous section. Let us denote by (q(j,1) x,t ,q (j,2) x,t ,... )∈ RN forx∈{ a,b} the queue at the j-th bid/ask price from the mid π(j) x,t as introduced in Section 2.1. Hereq(j,k) x,t denotes the volume of thek-th order in the queue sorted by time priority and is 10 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets Figure 7: CNN module deepVOL. set to zero if there is no such order. The aggregated volume atπ(j) x,t is given by: s(j) x,t = X k≥1 q(j,k) x,t . A natural extension of the volume representation would therefore be to consider {(q(j,1) x,t−τ,q (j,2) x,t−τ,... )}τ=0,...,T−1,j =1,...,W,x∈{a,b}∈ RT×W×2×N. Unfortunately, this is an infinite-dimensional array that cannot be directly fed into machine learning models. We therefore cut off the queue at a given depth level. In order to avoid discarding precious information, we aggregate all orders sitting past the maximum depth level at the end of the queue. For a given depth levelD> 0, we thus consider the L3 volume feature     q(j,1) x,t−τ,...,q (j,D−1) x,t−τ , X k≥D q(j,k) x,t−τ      τ=0,...,T−1,j =1,...,W,x∈{a,b} ∈ RT×W×2×D. Remark 2.4. A similar approach to the one used for cutting off the queue might be applied to aggregate volumes sitting deeper in the order book when deriving L2 representations. This would give a better idea of the total liquidity in the order book. In order to extract relevant information from the queue, we add an initial convolutional layer, which maps each queue to a weighted sum of the order sizes. The weighted aggregated volumes are then fed into the deepVOL architecture as above. The resulting CNN module is summarized in Figure 8. Figure 8: CNN module deepVOL L3. Abusing notation slightly we denoteP k≥Dq(j,k) x,t−τ byq(j,D) x,t−τ . The full architectures for deepVOL and deepVOL L3 are detailed in Table 14. 11 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets 2.5 Multi-horizon models So far we considered single horizon models, i.e. order book inputxt is mapped to a three class distribution (p↓,p =,p↑) corresponding to the discretized returnct,t+h at fixed horizonh. In the following, we consider a generalization of the architectures considered thus far to the setting where the forecasting horizon is a vector h = (h1,...,h K). In this case the modelling task consists in predicting the distributions of the discretized returnsct,t+h = (ct,t+h1,...,c t,t+hK). The simplest way of adjusting the current models to the multi-horizon framework would be to replace the last softmax layer in Figure 5 withK parallel dense softmax layers. The last hidden state of the LSTM module would hence be mapped to an array of size 3×K, corresponding toK distributions over three classes. A similar architecture – though in the regression framework – is considered in Kolm et al. (2021). While this approach is perfectly valid it does not make use of the sequential nature of the task, potentially neglecting an important structural feature of the data. In this paper, we will be leveraging architectures inspired by machine translation which are naturally suited for sequential forecasting. Specifically, we will be considering encoder-decoder models: an encoder maps the input data to a latent summary state (also known as context vector) and then a decoder rolls forward predictions sequentially. In this context letzt−T+1,...,z t denote the lastT hidden states of an encoder at timet, then a decoder rolls forward predictions by: z′ 0 =zt,p 0 = ˆp0, ck =h(zt−T+1,...,z t), z′ k =f([z′ k−1,ck],pk−1), pk =g(z′ k−1,ck), fork = 1,...,K . Here h(·) is a function acting on the hidden states of the encoder to extract the context vector ck (this may possibly depend on other inputs as well, such as previous hidden states of the decoder),f(r,p ) is a recurrent layer with recurrent inputr and exogenous inputp,g(·) is an output layer depending on both the decoder hidden state and the context. The general mechanism of such encoder-decoder architecture is visualized in Figure 9. Figure 9: A general encoder-decoder architecture. In our experiments, we will consider a sequence-to-sequence decoder (Cho et al., 2014), the simplest example of such architecture. In this setting we setck≡zt, implicitly assuming that at every forecasting horizon, the last hidden state of the encoder summarizes all the relevant information required to make the prediction. More complex architectures exist, for example, Luong et al. (2015) introduce an attention-based decoder that uses a weighted combination of all the hidden states of the encoder as context vector. In this setting different weights are used at different forecasting horizons, selectively accessing hidden states of the encoder during decoding. While attention-based networks have been successfully applied for high-frequency mid-price predictions, cf. Zhang and Zohren (2021) and Tran et al. (2019), in this work, we wish to exemplify the potential of multi-horizon models and thus restrict ourselves to simple seq2seq decoders only. In the experiments, we setf(·) to be an LSTM andg(·) to be a dense layer with softmax activation. Moreoverp0 is initialized at ˆp0 = (0, 1, 0). Using multi-horizon forecasting was first proposed for deepLOB in Zhang and Zohren (2021): the LSTM module of the deepLOB architecture discussed in Section 2.3.1 acts as an encoder, mapping order book states to the LSTM final latent vectorzt = [ht,st]. A seq2seq decoder then rolls forward the prediction producing distributional forecasts at horizons h = (h1,...,h K). The LSTM module with seq2seq decoder is illustrated in Figure 10. Clearly, there is nothing 12 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets stopping us from applying the same multi-horizon structure to the output of deepOF and deepVOL convolutional modules. Full details of the multi-horizon architectures can be found in Table 13 and Table 14. Remark 2.5. We adopt the same multi-horizon framework as in Zhang and Zohren (2021), where the responsect,t+hk at horizonhk∈{h1,...,h K} corresponds to the return from timet to timet +hk. Alternatively, one might wish to consider as multi-horizon responses the subsequent incremental returns ct+hk−1,t+hk, i.e. the returns between time t+hk−1 and timet+hk. By choosing evenly spacedhk’s one would obtain more consistent responses across prediction time steps{1,...,K } and possibly improve the performance of the multi-horizon models. Figure 10: Inception module and LSTM layer with seq2seq decoder for multi-horizon forecasting. 3 Data set In this section, we introduce the data set used in the experiments presented in Section 4. First, we briefly describe how LOBSTER order book data is related to the Nasdaq ITCH feed. Next, we give details of how we process LOBSTER data to obtain features and responses for the experiments. We also provide some descriptive statistics of the data. We consider the same universe of stocks and trading period as in Kolm et al. (2021): through LOBSTER (Huang and Polak, 2011) we access one year of open (9:30 EST) to close (16:00 EST) trading data for 115 Nasdaq tickers from January 2, 2019, to January 31, 2020. To produce results in feasible computational time, we select a subset of 10 stocks, trying to preserve a sufficiently varied set of liquidity characteristics. The ten tickers and their liquidity characteristics are summarized in Table 1. For full details on how the 10 stocks were selected, see Appendix A.8. 13 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets Ticker Updates (000) Trades (000) Price Changes (000) Price (USD) Spread (bps) Volume (USD MM) LILAK 49.89 1.81 3.77 18.09 15.92 2.63 QRTEA 121.32 5.23 2.79 13.54 9.75 9.53 XRAY 83.07 5.41 7.11 52.32 4.35 21.67 CHTR 80.97 6.75 19.21 400.68 6.22 111.71 PCAR 131.38 6.85 13.03 70.63 3.82 34.43 EXC 298.32 7.58 7.21 47.35 2.45 37.55 AAL 398.13 13.15 10.99 30.65 3.88 50.29 WBA 328.5 13.2 15.18 57.81 2.54 75.19 ATVI 423.01 17.97 20.25 49.87 2.81 91.82 AAPL 1137.36 64.19 127.86 215.8 0.99 1156.3 Table 1: Selected stocks’ characteristics, daily averages. 3.1 LOBSTER data, Huang and Polak (2011) In Section 2.1 we described the basic mechanisms governing electronic exchanges such as the Nasdaq. Every day, trading activity on the Nasdaq alone results in hundreds of thousands of order book updates for each stock, cf. Table 1. To keep track of all events occurring on the exchange and communicate them efficiently to (subscribed) market participants the Nasdaq uses the TotalView-ITCH protocol. For efficiency, instead of streaming the entire state of the order book after each update, only information on the event changing the order book is sent out to market participants. An example of a (decoded) ITCH message is reported in Table 2, note these are timestamped at nanosecond precision. It is up to each market participant to store the current state of the order book and update it each time a new message arrives. Event ID Timestamp (sec) Event Type Order ID Size (shares) Price Direction ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1312 34714.133632201 deletion 206833312 2516 $11.86 sell ... ... ... ... ... ... Table 2: Example message from a LOBSTER message file. This example corresponds to the order book dynamics shown in Figure 1. The service LOBSTER provides to academic researchers is to reconstruct the historic order book from Nasdaq’s Historical TotalView-ITCH data. For each selected ticker and date, LOBSTER returns message and order book files subsampled at a given granularity. In practical terms, a10-level data granularity yields the set of messages corresponding to order book updates in the first 10 levels along with the corresponding reconstructed order book ‘chopped at 10 levels’. The evolution of the order book determined by the message in Table 2 is reported in Table 3. More information on the order book reconstruction algorithm used by LOBSTER can be found in Huang and Polak (2011) and on the website www.lobsterdata.com. Event ID Timestamp (sec) p(1) a v(1) a p(1) b v(1) b ··· p(10) a v(10) a p(10) b v(10) b ... ... ... ... ... ... ··· ... ... ... ... 1311 34713.685155243 $11.86 12000 $11.85 8800 ··· $11.95 500 $11.73 5500 1312 34714.133632201 $11.86 9484 $11.85 8800 ··· $11.95 500 $11.73 5500 ... ... ... ... ... ... ··· ... ... ... ... Table 3: Example order book update from a LOBSTER order book file. This example corresponds to the order book dynamics shown in Figure 1. 14 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets 3.2 Processed data From the historic LOBSTER order book data we build the features xt,..., xt−T+1 and the target responsesct,t+h. In the experiments in Section 4 we apply the learning framework of Section 2.2 with the deep learning models introduced in Section 2.3 to these feature-response pairs, using the model confidence set (MCS) procedure for model comparison. As previously discussed in Section 2.1 we will be measuring timet (and prediction horizonsh) using an order book-driven clock, ticking every time an event occurs on the order book. This clock corresponds to the Event ID in Table 2 and Table 3. Note we access LOBSTER data up to level 10, thus our order book clock is conditional on the updating event being in the first 10 levels. By construction, the data contains all information on new limit orders, market orders, and cancellations restricted to the first 10 levels. We apply some minor pre-processing steps to the LOBSTER data, summarized in Appendix A.3. 3.2.1 Features: order book, order flow and volume We start by discussing how to derive the features xt at each time pointt from the raw LOBSTER data, i.e. from Table 2 and Table 3. While it is quite simple to build L1/L2 order book, order flow and volume features, reconstructing L3 volume data requires a bit more work. The raw order book input xt used in deepLOB (Zhang et al., 2019) and described is Section 2.3.1 simply corresponds to the LOBSTER data in Table 3, i.e. att = 1312 the 10-level order book feature is given by xt =  p(1) a,t,v (1) a,t,p (1) b,t,v (1) b,t,...,p (10) b,t ,v (10) b,t  = (11.86, 9484, 11.85, 8800,..., 11.73, 5500). The features are standardized using a 5-day rolling window. To compute the order flow input xt used in deepOF (Kolm et al., 2021) we apply the equations given in Section 2.3.2 to the LOBSTER data in Table 3, i.e. att = 1312 the 10-level order flow feature is given by xt =  aOF (1) t ,bOF (1) t ,...,bOF (10) t  = (−2516, 0,..., 0). Again, the features are standardized using a 5-day rolling window. To construct the volume input xt at L2 granularity for the deepVOL model described in Section 2.4, we select only the volume information from Table 3 adding in zeros corresponding to empty price ticks, i.e. att = 1312 the volume feature with window sizeW = 10 is given by xt =  s(10) b,t ,...,s (1) b,t,s (1) a,t,...,s (10) a,t  = (1400,..., 8800, 9484,..., 500). Note that, in this example,s(10) b,t = 1400̸= 5500 =v(10) b,t since some bid price ticks are empty, cf. Figure 1. As discussed in Section 2.4, volume features are normalized using max-scaling over the whole input array (xt,..., xt−T+1). Finally, to construct the L3 volume features, one needs to work with the message file in Table 2 to keep track of the queues. For example, the volume queue at the first ask price, i.e.π(1) a,t = $11.86, given at timet = 1311 by  q(1,1) a,t ,q (1,2) a,t ,q (1,3) a,t ,q (1,4) a,t ,q (1,5) a,t  = (2516, 2000, 1484, 4500, 1500), is updated at timet = 1312 to  q(1,1) a,t ,q (1,2) a,t ,q (1,3) a,t ,q (1,4) a,t  = (2000, 1484, 4500, 1500), by the deletion in Table 2. All other queues are left unchanged. For more details on the complexities of reconstructing volume features from LOBSTER data see Appendix A.3.1. A deep dive into the distributions of the processed order book, order flow, and volume features is carried out in Appendix A.4.1. 3.2.2 Responses: categorical mid-price returns In this paper, we are interested in answering questions regarding the predictability of market returns. Inevitably, the way returns, i.e. the target responses, are defined has a profound effect on this analysis. Here, in line with the related literature, we treat the mid-price as the “true” price and define returns relative to it, but it is important to note that, by definition, this is not a tradable price. We define the return at horizonh as rt,t+h = m(k) t+h−mt mt , m(k) t+h = 1 2k + 1 kX i=−k mt+h+i, 15 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets where mt denotes the mid-price at time t and k is a fixed smoothing window. The mid-price mt is computed from Table 3 by 1 2  p(1) b,t +p(1) a,t  , i.e. at times t = 1311 andt = 1312 we have mt = $11.855. This definition is subject to two possible interpretations. Treating the smoothed mid-price as a de-noised estimate of the true (latent) priceh steps ahead, we can understand the return as the percentage change of the true (latent) price relative to the current mid. Alternatively, the return can be understood as the average return one would experience by entering a position at the current mid and exiting it roughly h steps ahead (assuming mid-mid trading). For all the horizons h∈{ 10, 20, 30, 50, 100, 200, 300, 500, 1000} which are considered in Section 4 we fixk = 5. In Appendix A.6 we discuss other methods for defining mid-price returns and their shortcomings. Remark 3.1. When defining the returns we assume immediate access to the order book. In practice though, hardware and software constraints lead to non-zero time lags when receiving messages and sending orders to the exchange. While, in our setting, such latencies have a negligible impact on the definition of returns, we discuss how their presence could be more precisely accounted for in Appendix A.7. All our experiments are carried out in a classification framework where the discretized returns are defined as ct,t+h =    ↓ ifrt,t+h∈ (−∞,−γ), = ifrt,t+h∈ [−γ, +γ], ↑ ifrt,t+h∈ (+γ, +∞), for someγ >0. In order to make the three classes roughly symmetric and as balanced 4 as possible, we empirically chooseγ from the training setDtrain by ˆγh =| ˆQh(0.33)| + ˆQh(0.66) 2 , where ˆQh is the empirical quantile function of the training set returns{rt,t+h}t∈Itrain. As discussed in Section 4, we will be splitting our dataD in disjoint windowsDw =Dw,train∪Dw,val∪Dw,test forw = 1,...,W . The choice ofγ will, therefore, be windoww and horizonh specific. Descriptive statistics of the target return labels for the first window w = 1 are reported in Appendix A.4.2. We note that, since stocks trade on a discrete grid of prices determined by the tick size5ϑ, also the mid-pricemt evolves on a discrete price (with steps of sizeϑ/2). One could thus define the dollar return fromt tot +h by the number of (half) ticks the mid-price moves, i.e. Rt,t+h =mt+h−mt∈{..., −ϑ,−ϑ/2, 0,ϑ/ 2,ϑ,... }≡{ ..., −2,−1, 0, +1, +2,... }. This return is by definition discretized, and thus one could directly apply classification models (grouping large negative and positive returns to obtain a finite number of classes). A similar approach is used in Sirignano and Cont (2019) when predicting the next change in mid-price. In our work, we consider the estimate for the “true” mid-price to be m(k) t+h = 1 2k + 1 kX i=−k mt+h+i, which lives on a much finer grid than mt+h: over the, possibly quite long, time horizon h multiple changes to the mid-price might occur. In this case the smallest change has little meaning and so we group the dollar returns Rt,t+h =m(k) t+h−mt∈  ..., − ϑ 2k + 1,− ϑ 4k + 2, 0, ϑ 4k + 2, ϑ 2k + 1,...  , into larger classes given by (−∞,−mtγ), [−mtγ, +mtγ], (+mtγ, +∞). 4 Experiments In this section, we explore the four questions introduced in Section 1.2 and attempt to answer them via the statistical framework provided by model confidence sets (MCS). This inference procedure allows to compare a set of competing modelsM0 based on observed loss time series {Li,w}W w=1 whereLi,w denotes the loss of model i∈M 0 at time w∈W . To apply the model confidence set procedure to the data described in Section 3, we divide the 55 weeks from January 14, 2019 to January 31, 2020 intoW = 11 five-week periods6, as represented in Figure 11. Each window of 4Note that, especially for short horizonsh, many of the returnsrt,t+h can be exactly zero, leading to ˆQh(0.33) = ˆQh(0.66) = 0 . When this happens the three classes are unbalanced. 5ϑ = $0.01 for many US listed stocks and all the stocks considered in this paper. 6Data from the week starting on January 7, 2019, is used to start the rolling window standardization required for deepLOB and deepOF architectures 16 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets dataDw is divided into a training-validation setDw,train∪Dw,val, the first four weeks, and a test setDw,test, the fifth week. The joint training-validation set is then further split into training and validation sets by randomly selecting 5 days out of the four weeks for validation. First, the training datasetDw,train is used to choose theγ threshold for defining the return labels, as detailed in Section 3.2.2 (note that the choice ofγ is specific to the choice of window, horizon, and ticker). Then, the joint training-validation datasetDw,train∪Dw,val is used to train the models. For the unpredictive benchmark model, this simply means determining the empirical distribution of returns inDw,train∪Dw,val, cf. Appendix A.4.2. For the deep neural network architectures, this amounts to finding the optimal parameters which minimize the training weighted cross-entropy loss. To do so, we use Adam optimization with validation-based early stopping as described in Appendix A.1. Once the model has been trained we compute the out-of-sample losses onDw,test, i.e. for periodw∈{ 1,..., 11} and modeli∈M 0 Li,w =−cce(ˆpi w,test, cw,test) =− 1 |Iw,test| X t∈Iw,test X ∗∈{↓,=,↑} 1{ct,w,test=∗} log ˆpi ∗,t, is the categorical cross-entropy loss corresponding to the estimated probabilities ˆpi w,test when compared with the observations cw,test. ˆpi w,test are the class probabilities produced by modeli on the testing setDw,test after being trained on the training-validation setDw,train∪Dw,val. The time series of test losses {Li,w}11 w=1 are then “fed through” the MCS procedure described in Appendix A.2 to obtain the set of MCS p-values{pMCS i }i∈M0. The intuitive interpretation of these p-values is: if modeli∈M 0 has an MCS p-value lower than a prescribed confidence level then it is deemed statistically inferior to other models inM0 at that confidence level. This naturally justifies the following definition of order book-driven predictability. Definition 4.1. Forα∈ (0, 1) we say that there is order book-driven predictability at confidence level 1−α if pMCS benchmark <α . In other words, if the unpredictive benchmark is deemed to be statistically inferior to some of the other models inM0 at least one order book-driven model does better than the unpredictive benchmark, i.e. such model is predictive. Figure 11: Data set windowing for experiments. One of the strengths of the way we apply the model confidence set procedure in this context is that it allows to fully account for parameter estimation error, while classic methods for comparing deep learning models do not. To make this statement precise let us make explicit the dependence of the test loss Li,w =−cce(pi(Xw,test; ˆθi(Dw,train∪Dw,val,ϵi,w)), cw,test), on the training-validation data Dw,train∪D w,val, the fitting procedure initialization seed ϵi,w and the testing data Dw,test ={Xw,test, cw,test}. In the related literature, deep learning models are often compared by fitting the model to the same dataDtrain∪D val starting with different seeds and reporting the out-of-sample average loss and standard error, This accounts only for the uncertainty inϵ and not in the sampled training and testing data sets (cf. Remark A.1). Our approach instead naturally considers overall parameter estimation uncertainty, comprised of both statistical and optimization errors, by comparing model losses as functions of the random processesDw,train∪Dw,val,ϵw,i andDw,test. This provides a more robust comparison of model performance, i.e. specification error. Remark 4.1. Note that not all training procedures may converge to the optimal combination of parameters. This is a characteristic of any model learned via numerical optimization methods. We further note that in our experimental setup, no hyperparameter tuning is carried out for any of the models. When using these models in a production setting, one may obtain better results by selecting parameters using cross-validation on the training-validation set. Parameters which one may investigate tuning include: • Architecture hyperparameters: – number of filters in each convolutional layer (we fix 32 channels); 17 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets – number of weighted averages and lengths of averaging windows; – number of LSTM hidden nodes (we fix 64 hidden nodes); – decoder type for multi-horizon models (we use seq2seq). • Feature hyper-parameters: – number of levels in features (we fixL = 10 levels); – queue depth in deepVOL(L3) (we fix queue depthD = 10); – look back window length (we fixT = 100); • Training/Optimization hyper-parameters: – Adam learning rate (we fixη = 0.01); – Adam parameters (we fixϵ = 1,β 1 = 0.9,β 2 = 0.999); – batch size (we fix batch size 256); – number of epochs (we fix 50 epochs); – early stopping patience (we fix 10 epochs validation patience); – training set downscale factor7 (we subset the training dataset by a factor of 10). Here we are not interested in obtaining the best fit possible for a specific model but in comparing different mod- els/benchmarks on a level playing field. We thus leave questions related to hyper-parameter tuning for future work. All code is developed in Python with the tensorflow library and the keras API, with some layers requiring custom tensorflow methods. Due to the computationally intensive nature of the experiments, specialized infrastructure was required to store the data (5TB) and train the models (GPUs). All computations were carried out on Imperial College’s High-Performance Computing cluster (Imperial College Research Computing Service, 2022), which provides access to several RTX6000 GPUs. The results discussed hereafter are specific to the experimental setup under consideration, i.e. they are specific to the selected stocks, time period, and models. Different experimental setups may lead to different results. 4.1 Do high-frequency returns display predictability? If so, how far ahead can we predict? In order to understand whether high-frequency returns display predictability we consider the following set of models: M0 =  benchmark, deepLOB(L1), deepOF(L1), deepLOB(L2), deepOF(L2), deepVOL(L2), deepVOL(L3) , where L1 models only use the first level of the order book, while L2 and L3 models use the first 10 levels. For each return horizonh∈{ 10, 20, 30, 50, 100, 200, 300, 500, 1000} and TICKER∈{ LILAK, QRTEA, XRAY, CHTR, PCAR, EXC, AAL, WBA, ATVI, AAPL} we determine the MCS p-value of each model inM0. The MCS p-value for the unpredictive benchmark model are reported in Table 4. Lighter green shading corresponds toα = 0.05 while darker green isα = 0.01. From the results reported in Table 4 we see that at high frequencies predictability is systematically present. For most of the stocks under consideration, we were able to identify predictability up to 50 order book events ahead at the 99% confidence level. Except for LILAK, which is the most illiquid stock, we observe a substantial correlation between the persistence in predictability and the average Updates to Price Changes ratio, cf. Table 1. Recalling that in our setting the horizonh is measured in order book updates, this can be interpreted as it being easier for the deep learning models to predict returns that are the result of fewer price changes. One might thus expect to obtain a more consistent maximum predictable horizon across stocks when using a price change-driven clock to measure time. 7It is worth noting that in all our experiments, we subset the training dataset by a factor of 10, i.e. subsequent feature-response observations in the dataset are obtained by sliding forward by 10 order book events. This serves multiple purposes: on one hand, it significantly reduces the computational effort required to train the models, on the other, it helps to prevent the risk of overfitting to specific patterns arising in the training dataset. Down-sampling the dataset might also have adverse effects, for example, reducing the available training data of an illiquid stock by a factor of 10 might result in insufficient information to robustly train these data-intensive models. 18 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets h = 10 h = 20 h = 30 h = 50 h = 100 h = 200 h = 300 h = 500 h = 1000 LILAK 0.00 0.00 0.42 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 QRTEA 1.00 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.08 0.77 0.54 XRAY 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.10 0.23 0.48 1.00 0.93 CHTR 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.00 0.42 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.97 PCAR 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 0.60 1.00 1.00 EXC 0.26 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.51 1.00 AAL 0.11 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.71 1.00 1.00 1.00 WBA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.27 0.13 0.01 1.00 ATVI 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.78 1.00 1.00 1.00 AAPL 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.23 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 Table 4: MCS p-values of the unpredictive benchmark model for the 10 tickers and 9 horizons under consideration. When the p-value is low at least one of the order book-driven models statistically outperforms the unpredictive benchmark, i.e. there is order book-driven predictability according to Definition 4.1. 4.2 Which order book representations perform the best? Having discussed the extent to which the class of models under consideration can identify predictability, it is now natural to ask which of these models performs best. In the MCS framework, this corresponds to determining the specifications which are consistently placed in the set of superior models. We restrict our attention to the horizons and stocks at which predictability is identified and, for each model in consideration, we count the number of times it is identified as a superior model. The results are reported in Table 5. α = 0.05 α = 0.01 benchmark 0% 0% deepLOB(L1) 7% 11% deepOF(L1) 23% 22% deepLOB(L2) 5% 11% deepOF(L2) 88% 89% deepVOL(L2) 65% 84% deepVOL(L3) 77% 86% Table 5: % of times the model is in theα-MCS when predictability is identified at the corresponding levelα. From the results in Table 5 (at the 99% confidence level) we can make the following observations on the way order book representations influence model performance. When considering deep learning models for short-term return prediction having access to L2 data provides a significant advantage over L1 data. We see that models with L1 data are rarely placed in the set of superior models when predictability is identified. When going from L2 to L3 data instead, the increased granularity does not seem to provide a clear advantage: deepVOL(L2) and deepVOL(L3) display similar performance. Our experiment, therefore, suggests that L3 data might be excessively granular when predicting high-frequency returns from order books. The choice of features used to represent the order book is also crucial when leveraging deep learning methods for return prediction. Using order flow or volume representations provides a significant improvement in performance: the basic deepLOB model ends up being included in the set of best models only 10% of the time and is outperformed even by the model with only first-level (L1) order flow. V olume- and order flow-based models (with L2/L3 data granularity) display comparable performance, being placed in the set of superior models in 85-90% of the predictable horizons. 4.3 Can we use a single model across multiple horizons? In this section, we explore whether using a seq2seq decoder to produce multi-horizon predictions is beneficial. Such models have the clear advantages of having a single set of weights (the network size is only slightly bigger than single horizon networks) and output multiple predictions in very similar run times. This significantly reduces both the memory required to store the models and the time needed to train them. But how do they perform when compared to their single-horizon counterparts? 19 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets To answer this question we run the same experiment as in Section 4.1 and Section 4.2 but enlarge the set of models with the seq2seq specifications. We focus only on prediction horizonsh∈{ 10, 20, 30, 50}. The results are reported in Table 6 and Table 7. From Table 7 we note that, for each input type, the seq2seq specifications outperform their single horizon counterparts. We suggest this behavior might be due to the increased availability of information in a multi-horizon setting. For a given input-target pair, when targets are multi-horizon, more information is available on the “order book regime” the inputs should be mapped to. Multi-horizon models can thus learn a more granular map from the input variables to the latent space of “order book regimes”, which might be beneficial for producing predictions. Remark 4.2. Note that running the model confidence set procedure again with a larger set of models leads to a counter-intuitive situation where fewer prediction horizons are identified. One would expect that adding models could only increase the number of horizons at which predictability is identified. While this is true in the limit as the number of horizons increases to infinity, it does not hold in the setting where we have access to a finite set of observations. With this observation in mind, we note that results in Table 6 are consistent with those in Table 4. h = 10 h = 20 h = 30 h = 50 LILAK 0.00 0.00 0.31 0.55 QRTEA 1.00 0.10 0.06 0.00 XRAY 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 CHTR 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 PCAR 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 EXC 0.23 0.00 0.00 0.00 AAL 0.08 0.00 0.00 0.00 WBA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 ATVI 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 AAPL 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.07 Table 6: MCS p-values of the unpredictive benchmark model for the 10 tickers and 9 horizons under consideration when seq2seq models are also considered. When the p-value is low at least one of the order book-driven models statistically outperforms the unpredictive benchmark, i.e. there is order book-driven predictability according to Definition 4.1. α = 0.05 α = 0.01 benchmark 0% 0% deepLOB(L1) 6% 10% deepOF(L1) 13% 16% deepLOB(L2) 6% 13% deepOF(L2) 63% 71% deepVOL(L2) 63% 74% deepVOL(L3) 75% 84% deepLOB(L1, seq2seq) 13% 26% deepOF(L1, seq2seq) 16% 16% deepLOB(L2, seq2seq) 16% 39% deepOF(L2, seq2seq) 91% 97% deepVOL(L2, seq2seq) 78% 84% deepVOL(L3, seq2seq) 81% 87% Table 7: % of times the model is in theα-MCS when predictability is identified at the corresponding levelα. 4.4 Can we use a single model across multiple stocks? In a similar spirit to Sirignano and Cont (2019), we investigate questions regarding the universality of order book dynamics. Intuitively, at a microstructural level, securities which are traded by market participants with similar 20 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets characteristics may be subject to the same trading patterns, independently of the underlying stock’s properties. In Sirignano and Cont (2019), the authors observe that price formation dynamics driven by past order book information, i.e. next mid-price moves, display common patterns across different stocks. In this paper, we explore whether similar results hold over longer horizons. We run the same experiment as in Section 4.1 but train the models on multiple stocks simultaneously. Specifically, we split the set of 10 stocks under consideration into two; a first “in-sample” set of stocks given by{QRTEA, CHTR, EXC, WBA, AAPL}, and a second “out-of-sample” set{LILAK, XRAY , PCAR, AAL, ATVI}. For each windoww, we use all the training-validation data for the “in-sample” stocks to train (and validate) the models. We then evaluate the trained models on the test data of both the “in-sample” and the “out-of-sample” stocks. The results are reported in Table 8. h = 10 h = 20 h = 30 h = 50 h = 100 h = 200 h = 300 h = 500 h = 1000 LILAK 0.98 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 QRTEA(∗) 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.06 0.00 0.13 0.59 0.34 1.00 XRAY 0.03 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.62 0.81 1.00 CHTR(∗) 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.94 1.00 1.00 PCAR 0.08 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 EXC(∗) 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.39 0.69 1.00 1.00 AAL 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.58 0.60 1.00 1.00 WBA(∗) 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.58 0.36 0.14 1.00 ATVI 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.60 0.74 0.88 1.00 1.00 AAPL (∗) 0.07 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.59 1.00 0.65 1.00 Table 8: MCS p-values of the unpredictive benchmark model for the 10 tickers and 9 horizons under consideration, universal models only. When the p-value is low at least one of the order book-driven models statistically outperforms the unpredictive benchmark, i.e. there is order book-driven predictability according to Definition 4.1. (∗) are “in-sample” stocks. Focusing on “in-sample” stocks, we note that using universal models leads to results that are partially inconsistent with those in Table 4. A possible interpretation for this is that universal models may be picking up different order book dynamics from those identified by stock-specific models. In this sense, relatively illiquid stocks with overall “standard” trading behavior might benefit from universal models thanks to the greater availability of data. We suggest this might be the case for QRTEA and EXC at horizonh = 10. When, instead, the ticker is mainly subject to stock-specific trading patterns, universal models have a hard time detecting predictability – we believe this might be the case for CHTR and AAPL. These results are intrinsically tied to the observations of Remark 4.3. It is rather remarkable that universal models can identify predictability for “out-of-sample” stocks. This provides evidence of the presence of common trading patterns in the order books of different tickers. For AAL and ATVI, universal models can consistently outperform the unpredictive benchmark predictions without ever learning from the stock’s past order book data. α = 0.05 α = 0.01 benchmark 0% 0% deepLOB(L1, universal) 0% 0% deepOF(L1, universal) 0% 0% deepLOB(L2, universal) 8% 24% deepOF(L2, universal) 42% 62% deepVOL(L2, universal) 71% 81% deepVOL(L3, universal) 92% 100% Table 9: % of times each model is in theα-MCS when predictability is identified at the corresponding levelα. Since we believe universal and stock-specific models may be picking up different trading patterns, a natural question to ask is whether the conclusions from Section 4.2 carry over to the universal setting. The results in Table 9 suggest the superior power of L2 over L1 data is retained for universal models. In this case, though, the increased granularity of L3 data appears to be actually beneficial. Moreover, when considering universal models, the volume representation appears to outperform both order book and order flow inputs. These results thus suggest that some predictive universal 21 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets patterns can be extracted only from the most granular data. This contrasts with stock-specific models which achieve good predictive performance simply based on order flow information (which is, by construction, also contained in volume-based features). Remark 4.3. As discussed in Section 3.2.2, the choice ofγ used to define the return classes is stock-specific. This means that up/down labels for different securities may correspond to different numbers of mid-price changes. This is in line with our choice of order book-driven clock, which is by definition also stock-specific. It is important to note that the choices ofγ and clockt might not entirely account for structural trading differences of stocks, making it harder to identify universal trading patterns. This contrasts with Sirignano and Cont (2019), where the next mid-price move has a straightforward universal structural interpretation. There are a couple more differences with Sirignano and Cont (2019) we want to point out: • First, in Sirignano and Cont (2019), the authors consider a much bigger set of stocks, comprised of 500 “in-sample” stocks used for training and 500 “out-of-sample” stocks, making their model more general and thus more universal. • Second, in that paper, the authors also investigate questions regarding the stationarity of price formation dynamics. This entails using a single long training window: the greater availability of data leads to more stable results. To employ the model confidence set procedure and allow the models to capture patterns specific to different economic regimes, we did not adopt this approach in our work. • The LSTM model considered in that paper differs from the deepLOB/deepOF/deepVOL architectures. In Sirignano and Cont (2019), the LSTM specification is an online model, i.e. inputs at timet represent the order book state at timet only and are fed through an LSTM-based architecture updating the stored hidden state and producing output predictions. In our models, instead, there is no storage of hidden units between one prediction and the next, i.e. at each time stept, we input the order book history betweent−T + 1 andt (in the form of raw order books, order flow or volumes) and, after appropriate convolutional feature extraction, apply an LSTM to the processed sequential data to produce the prediction. When studying dependence on order book historyT , Sirignano and Cont (2019) refer to the cut-off horizon used in the backpropagation through time computation of gradients during the training procedure. 5 Conclusions and Outlook In this paper, we explored empirical questions regarding the predictability of mid-price returns driven by order book data in centralized exchanges. The predictability in price formation dynamics, already considered in the sense of next mid-price change in Sirignano and Cont (2019), was found to persist up to 50-300 order book updates ahead, horizons over which multiple mid-price changes may occur. Such predictable horizons might vary from a few milliseconds to nearly half a second, depending on the stock under consideration. These results contrast with low-frequency returns, where predictability is much harder to identify but easier to trade once discovered. In fact, in the high-frequency context, predictability is not always exploitable due to technological limitations and market microstructure issues. A related and more challenging question is, therefore, to understand whether the predictability identified in this paper is actually tradable. The experiments were carried out using specific deep learning architectures. Other than identifying predictable horizons, we aimed to answer questions related to the models under consideration. In particular, we found strong empirical evidence for using L2 data over L1 data. But, from the results presented in this paper, using even more granular order book information (L3) seems to benefit only universal models. The experiments also highlight the importance of carefully choosing a data representation: models based on the basic order book level representation are considerably outperformed by those with order flow or volume inputs. Finally, we found empirical evidence for the presence of universal trading patterns in order book dynamics. Our preliminary results suggest that deep learning architectures may pick up different predictable order book patterns when trained on a pool of stocks instead of a single one. The volume representation has some considerable theoretical advantages, in particular, it is robust to small perturbations, which might explain its superior predictive ability when considering universal models. Many further theoretical questions regarding predictability which we believe to be of research interest remain unan- swered. First, it would be natural to explore whether predictability in returns can be entirely explained by order book structure or if recurring trading patterns play a relevant role. Next, one could compare the predictive performance of the deep learning architectures discussed in this paper to that of the models based on carefully engineered features considered in Aït-Sahalia et al. (2022). Finally, only Nasdaq-traded stocks were considered in this paper. This is a centralized electronic dealer market on which relatively big companies are listed. It would be interesting to explore whether similar results are obtained for securities traded on exchanges with different market structures. With appropriate 22 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets experimental setups, we believe the model confidence set procedure used in this paper provides a solid framework to tackle all these questions. On the practical side, there are some relevant issues one should consider. First, it is essential to note that in this paper we focus on mid-to-mid returns, which are not tradable in practice. When considering specific trading applications, one should thus define the return labels appropriately, for example, working with ask-to-bid returns. Second, in this paper, we use an order book-driven clock. In practice, this means the prediction horizon is intrinsically stochastic, which might be a problem in execution. Another critical aspect that would need to be accounted for in practical high-frequency trading is total execution speed. This consists of order book information latency, model prediction run time, and order submission speed. Zhang et al. (2019) and Kolm et al. (2021) argue that their models (which are also considered in this paper) are sufficiently fast to be used by traders with good connections: see Appendix A.7 for a discussion on the effects of infrastructure latency. As with any trading application, one must also account for the impact his own trade will have on the order book. Moreover, if many traders exploit the same inefficiencies, this might erode all predictive power above the lowest tradable latencies. Overall we believe that while the predictability identified in this paper might not be directly tradable through a standalone strategy, it might still help some market players, such as market makers, to gauge the direction of the market and adjust their quotes accordingly. 23 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets A Appendix A.1 Deep Learning A.1.1 Deep Neural Network Architectures When approximating a function 8 f from a set of models{fθ}θ∈Θ, such as in the return prediction task introduced in Section 2.2, a quite common approach is to consider a parametric family of deep neural networks. Theoretically motivated by the universality of such models, this approach does not rely on the functional form off being correctly specified. The main idea behind deep neural networks is to lift the input into a higher dimensional space to extract relevant latent features before projecting onto output space. Mathematically a neural network consists of a composition of functions, known as layers,fl : Rdl−1→ Rdl forl = 1,...,L whered0 is the dimensionality of input space anddL is the dimensionality of the output space, for exampledL = 3 in our three-class classification task. A neural network is considered deep if the number of layersL is large. In the simplest case the layersfl’s are “activated” affine transformations, i.e. for inputzl−1∈ Rdl−1 fl(zl−1) =σl(Wlzl−1 +bl), whereWl∈ Rdl×dl−1 andbl∈ Rdl are learnable parameters, also known as weights, andσl is a non-linear activation function applied element-wise. Neural networks of the formf =fL◦···◦ f1 such that eachfl is of this form have been shown to be universal for the class of continuous functions (Cybenko, 1989; Hornik et al., 1990), i.e. any continuous function (on a bounded domain) can be approximated arbitrarily well by a large enough network in the supremum norm9. Related works have shown the representational benefits of depth: there are functions that deep networks can construct with polynomially many parameters, which instead require exponentially many parameters when considering shallow networks (Telgarsky, 2015). More complex and domain-specific forms of layersfl exist; we briefly introduce convolutional and recurrent/LSTM layers. Convolutional layers Convolutional layers are a natural choice when the input is an image, i.e. zl−1∈ Rdl−1 = Rhl−1×wl−1×cl−1, wherehl−1 is the height in pixels,wl−1 is the width in pixels andcl−1 is the number of channels, for examplecl−1 = 3 if the image is in RGB. A convolutional layer is a specific case of a generic dense layer with parameter restrictions to account for adjacencies in the input’s structure. It consists of kl weight kernels, also known as filters, which are convoluted with the input image to produce the output. Mathematically a 2-dimensional convolution withkl (nl×ml) filters and stride (sl×tl) is described by [fl(zl−1)]i,j,k = nlX n=1 mlX m=1 cl−1X c=1 n [W (k) l ]n,m,c[zl−1]sl(i−1)+n,tl(j−1)+m,c +b(k) l o , whereW (k) l ∈ Rnl×ml×cl−1, for k = 1,...,k l, are the kl filters, b(k) l ∈ R are bias terms and [·]i,j,k denotes the i,j,k -th entry of a three dimensional tensor. The output then lives in Rhl×wl×kl, wherehl = (hl−1−nl)/sl + 1 and wl = (wl−1−ml)/tl + 1, assuming that sl|(hl−1−nl) andtl|(wl−1−ml). While this equation might look a bit daunting, convolutional layers are often easily understood via a graphical depiction, as in Figure 12. Many empirical studies (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016) have investigated the ability of convolutional layers to extract relevant features from input with grid-like topologies. In Section 2.3, we discuss how this ability might be leveraged to extract relevant features from order books. Recurrent/LSTM layers When the input has a built-in temporal structure, this can be quite naturally accounted for by recurrent layers. This type of layer retains information over time, discovering temporal dependencies in the data. Recurrent layers may be used with streaming data to obtain online predictions or applied to a whole time series yielding a single output. We focus on the latter case, i.e. assuming the inputzl−1∈ Rdl−1 has a temporal structure of the form zl−1 =  z(1) l−1,...,z (Tl−1) l−1 T ∈ RTl−1×nl−1, 8This notation covers both regressionf (·) = g(·) and classificationf (·) = (p↓(·),p =(·),p↑(·)) tasks. 9It follows directly that the class of neural networks is dense inLp(X ) space, for boundedX⊆ Rd. 24 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets Figure 12: Convolutional layer, inputzl−1∈ R8×8×3, filter size (nl×ml) = (4× 4), stride (sl×tl) = (2× 2) and number of filterskl = 32. the recurrent layerzl =fl(zl−1) is given by h(0) l−1∈ Rml−1, h (t) l−1 =ϕl  h(t−1) l−1 ,z (t) l−1  fort = 1,...,T l−1, z l =h(Tl−1) l−1 , whereϕl : Rml−1× Rnl−1→ Rml−1 is a parameterized recurrent function and theh(t) l−1’s are known as hidden states. The most widely used type of recurrent layer is Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997). While other types of recurrent layers may suffer from vanishing or exploding gradients when training, the specific structure of LSTMs largely prevents such problems (Hochreiter et al., 2001). In an LSTM layer each hidden stateh is augmented with a memory states, and hence the recurrence becomes  h(t) l−1,s (t) l−1  =ϕl  h(t−1) l−1 ,s (t−1) l−1 ,z (t) l−1  . The equations governing the LSTM recurrence are given by h(t) l−1 =o(t) l−1⊙ tanh(s(t) l−1), s(t) l−1 =g(t) l−1⊙σ  bl +Ulz(t) l−1 +Wlh(t−1) l−1  +f(t) l−1⊙s(t−1) l−1 , where the input, forget and output gates depend on the context, i.e. onh(t−1) l−1 ,z (t) l−1, via: g(t) l−1 =σ  bg l +Ug lz(t) l−1 +Wg l h(t−1) l−1  , f(t) l−1 =σ  bf l +Uf l z(t) l−1 +Wf l h(t−1) l−1  , o(t) l−1 =σ  bo l +Uo lz(t) l−1 +Wo l h(t−1) l−1  , for sigmoid activation functionσ, element-wise product⊙ and parametersbl,bg l,bf l,bo l∈ Rml−1,Ul,U g l,U f l ,U o l ∈ Rml−1×nl−1 andWl,W g l ,W f l ,W o l ∈ Rml−1×ml−1. The network diagram of an LSTM layer is given in Figure 13. LSTMs summarize relevant context information in the memory cells(t) l−1, performing exceptionally well on tasks with a strong temporal dependency (Melis et al., 2017). A.1.2 Training Deep Neural Networks As discussed in Section 2.2, once we have specified a parametric model for approximating the prediction functionf≈fθ we wish to learn the best approximation tof from a training set of observed input-output dataDtrain ={(xi,yi)}i∈Itrain. To do so, we aim to find the parameter combinationθ which yields predictions closest to the observations: ˆθ = argmin θ∈Θ L(θ|Dtrain) = argmin θ∈Θ n 1 |Itrain| X i∈Itrain L   fθ(xi),yi o , whereL(·,·) is a loss function quantifying the distance between the prediction and the observed value, andθ contains all network parameters (weights matrices, bias terms, CNN filters...). The form ofL may be chosen using probabilistic arguments or according to some other task-specific criteria. 25 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets Figure 13: LSTM layer network diagram. When the modelfθ is a deep neural network the loss landscapeL(θ) =L(θ|Dtrain) may be very complex and finding a “good” minimizer is often a difficult task. The most widely used approach is to use (some variant of) gradient descent in which the model parameters are iteratively updated by θ(n+1) =θ(n)−η∇θL   θ(n) , until a convergence criterion is met. Hereη >0 is a fixed learning rate, and the weightsθ(0) are chosen according to an appropriate initialization rule. When considering deep neural network architectures, the number of parameters is often very large, and therefore second-order methods are often intractable or computationally infeasible. Many variants of the first order gradient descent algorithm exist though. For example, the stochastic gradient descent algorithm updates parameter values based on estimates of the gradient∇θL(θ(n)) computed from a random subset (known as a batch) of the training data set. More advanced first-order optimizers consider momentum and/or use adaptive learning rates. In our experiments, we use the Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2015) which updates the parameters based on adaptive estimates of first and second-order moments: m(n+1) = 1 1−βn 1 n β1m(n) + (1−β1)∇θL   θ(n)o , v(n+1) = 1 1−βn 2 n β2v(n) + (1−β2)  ∇θL   θ(n)2o , θ(n+1) =θ(n)−η m(n+1) √ v(n+1) +ϵ , for parametersη,β 1,β 2,ϵ> 0. Remark A.1. Note that, contrary to other model specifications, such as linear models, the fitting procedure of deep neural networks is not closed form. This adds a further layer of uncertainty. Any model is subject to the following two sources of uncertainty: one due to model specification (i.e.f≈fθ) and one due to parameter estimation uncertainty (i.e. statistical error arising from estimatingθ from a finite sample). Models that do not have closed forms for ˆθ from observed data are further subject to numerical optimization error in the parameter estimation phase. Sometimes, the optimization procedure may not even converge to a (global) minimum. With deep neural networks, we thus trade off smaller model uncertainty (at least theoretically due to the universality property) for larger parameter estimation error. When the task is a classification problemfθ is usually chosen so that it maps to{p∈ [0, 1]C :∥p∥1 = 1}, whereC is the number of classes in the setC. This allows to give a probabilistic interpretation of the deep neural network outputs, i.e. fθ(x) ={pc,θ(x)}c∈C, where pc,θ(x) = P(y =c|x,θ ). In this case, a natural choice of loss function to use during training is the cross-entropy loss, which can be understood by maximum likelihood arguments: assuming the responses are independent given the features and the distribution of the features is independent of the parametersθ the negative log-likelihood is L(θ|Dtrain) =− log P(Dtrain|θ)∝− 1 |Itrain| X i∈Itrain X c∈C 1{yi=c} logpc,θ(xi). 26 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets When training samples for the classes are unbalanced, say class ¯c∈C has many more samples than all other classes, the optimization algorithm tends to get stuck in the trivial minimum given by the Dirac measure at ¯c∈C . One way to mitigate this effect is to re-weight the categorical cross entropy loss such that the network is less incentivized to move towards the trivial minimum. With appropriate weighting, ¯c∈C observations influence the direction of the gradient less, thus reducing the strength of the attraction towards the trivial minimum. Mathematically one uses the following weighted categorical cross-entropy loss L(θ|Dtrain) =− 1 |Itrain| X i∈Itrain X c∈C wc1{yi=c} logpc,θ(xi), where the weightswc are chosen to be inversely proportional to the class’s training set density. For example, in our experiments, we set: wc =wc(Dtrain) = |Itrain| #{ci∈D train :ci =c}. A.2 Model Confidence Sets The model confidence set procedure introduced by Hansen et al. (2011) provides a formalized statistical inference framework in which to compare competing models. It does not assume that any of the models is the true data generating process but simply aims to identify a set of models that will contain the best model with a given level of confidence, known as model confidence set, MCS. A model confidence set is, therefore, analogous to a confidence interval for a parameter. To identify the best models, one must compare the model outputs (either as estimated class probabilities or as forecasts) by selecting an appropriate loss/score function. Let us denote byM0 the set of models under consideration and by{Li,w}W w=1 fori∈M 0 the time series of losses. In the MCS framework for modelsi,j ∈M 0 and windoww∈{ 1,...,W } we define: dij,w =Li,w−Lj,w. Under a stationarity assumption on the (dij,w)w≥1, we define the set of best models among those inM0 as M∗ ={i∈M 0 : E[dij]≤ 0∀j∈M 0}. This is the set we want to identify by using the MCS procedure. The MCS algorithm is then defined as follows. Definition A.1. LetδM andeM be an equivalence test and an elimination rule. Step 0. Initially setM =M0. Step 1. Test H0,M : E[dij] = 0,∀i,j ∈M usingδM at levelα. Step 2. IfH0,M is accepted, set ˆM∗ 1−α =M; otherwise, useeM to eliminate an object fromM and repeat the procedure from Step 1. Under appropriate assumptions on the equivalence test and elimination rule10, the model confidence set ˆM∗ 1−α has the following asymptotic properties: (i) lim inf W→∞ P(M∗⊂ ˆM∗ 1−α)≥ 1−α, (ii) lim W→∞ P(i∈ ˆM∗ 1−α) = 0 fori /∈M∗, whereW→∞ denotes the number of sample periods. If furthermore, the equivalence test and elimination rule satisfy a coherency condition11, we have the following finite sample property: (iii) P(M∗⊂ ˆM∗ 1−α)≥ 1−α. 10We require the equivalence testδM to have asymptotic levelα and asymptotic power 1, while the elimination ruleeM needs to satisfy limW→0 P(eM∈M∗|H1,M) = 0 . 11The required coherency condition is P(δM = 1,e M∈M∗)≤α. 27 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets In Hansen et al. (2011), the authors give multiple practical examples of equivalence tests and elimination rules. We focus on implementing the MCS procedure with tests constructed from t-statistics and bootstrap estimators. This choice of equivalence test and elimination rule has two practical advantages: it does not require estimating a variance-covariance matrix for the time series {(dij,w)i,j∈M0,w ≥ 1} which might be difficult when |M0|≈ W and it satisfies the coherency condition required for the finite sample property (iii) of the MCS procedure. Let us assume the following holds: Assumption A.1. For somer> 2 andγ >0, it holds that that{(dij,w)i,j∈M0,w≥ 1} is strictly stationary,α-mixing of order−r/(r− 2) and Var(dij,w)> 0, E|dij,w|r+γ <∞ for alli,j ∈M 0. For a set of modelsM⊂M 0 with time series of relative performances{(dij,w)i,j∈M,w≥ 1} define the following quantities∀i,j ∈M : ¯dij = 1 W WX w=1 dij,w, ¯di· = 1 |M| X j∈M ¯dij, respectively measuring the sample relative performance of the modelsi andj and the sample relative performance of modeli and all other models inM. We can then introduce the following t-statistics∀i∈M : ti· = ¯di·q cVar( ¯di·) , where cVar( ¯di·) are appropriate estimators of the variances of the ¯di·’s. The associated test statistic is Tmax,M = maxi∈Mti·. The equivalence test and elimination rule are given by: (δM) RejectH0,M ifTmax,M >F −1 ϱ (1−α) whereTmax∼Fϱ. (eM) Eliminate argmaxi∈Mti·. The asymptotic distribution of the test statisticTmax,M is nonstandard because it depends on the (usually unknown) nuisance parameterϱ under the null. The value of ϱ is not strictly necessary since we can consistently estimate the distribution ofTmax,M by using a bootstrapping procedure. In this case, the equivalence test compares the observed valueTmax,M with the bootstrap empirical quantile. The resulting procedure preserves the asymptotic12 properties (i) and (ii) and the finite sample property (iii) under Assumption A.1. For details of the bootstrapping procedure see the Appendix of Hansen et al. (2011). Remark A.2. The test based on the t-statistic discussed above relies on the fact that the null hypothesisH0,M can be equivalently rewritten as H0,M : E[di·] = 0,∀i∈M, where di· = 1 |M| X j∈M dij. In this paper, we present results using MCS p-values, which are defined as follows. Definition A.2. Let (δM,eM) be the equivalence test and elimination rule associated with a MCS procedure as defined in Definition A.1. The elimination rule defines a decreasing sequence of random setsM0⊃M 1⊃... ⊃M|M0| by successively eliminating modelseM0,...,e |M0|. Let pH0,M denote the p-value associated with the null hypothesis H0,M under the equivalence testδM with the convention thatpH0,M|M0| ≡ 1. Then for model i =eMk∈M 0 the MCS p-value is defined as pMCS i = max k′≤k pH0,Mk′. Note that the definition of MCS p-value is such that fori∈M 0pMCS i ≥α ⇐⇒ i∈ ˆM∗ 1−α. Remark A.3. The MCS procedure is quite flexible. It allows to compare models between each other and to compare them to an unpredictive benchmark model (by including the unpredictive benchmark inM0). When only two models are considered, i.e.|M0| = 2, the MCS procedure reduces to testing the null hypothesisH0 : E[di1i2] = 0. The model confidence set procedure relies on the assumption that the loss differences time series{(dij,w)i,j∈M0, w≥ 1} is stationary andα-mixing. This means that even when the loss process{(Li,w)i∈M0, w≥ 1} is non-stationary, e.g. model performance is tied to regime changes, the model confidence set procedure might still be applicable. In Section 12As both the sample sizeW and the number of bootstrap samplesB increase. 28 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets 4, we assume the time series{(dij,w)i,j∈M0, w≥ 1} to be stationary based on intuitive arguments, but we discuss some statistical checks which might be carried out to provide further evidence in this context. First of all, it is worth noting that general tests for stationarity are not available: most tests require assuming a parametric form on the time series. The simplest example would be to impose a linear structure on the time series, i.e. assume the difference time series{dw, w≥ 1} ={(dij,w)i,j∈M0, w≥ 1} follows a Vector Auto-Regressive process of order 1: dw = Γdw−1 +ηw, whereηw∼N(0, Ση) are serially uncorrelated. In this setting, one can consider various tests to determine whether the process is stationary. For example, one may apply multivariate homogeneous Dickey-Fuller tests (Harvey and Bates, 2003) to test the null of a unit root against the alternative of stationarity or a multivariate KPSS test to test (short-memory) stationarity as the null and the presence of a unit root as the alternative (Nyblom and Harvey, 2000). A.3 Data Processing From LOBSTER (Huang and Polak, 2011) we obtain the order book and message files introduced in Section 3.1. These files are jointly processed to obtain the desired order book features, i.e. raw order books, order flow and volumes, and responses as described in Section 3.2. Before extracting the feature-response pairs the data is treated in the following way: 1. order book states with crossed quotes are removed; 2. states occurring at the same time stamp (at nanosecond precision) are collapsed onto the last state, e.g. an aggressive order executing against multiple resting limit orders; 3. the first and last 10 minutes of market activity are dropped; 4. the smoothed returns at the requested horizons – as defined in Section 3.2.2 – are computed and matched to the corresponding features. The data provided by LOBSTER is easily accessible and does not exhibit significant anomalies. The only data inconsis- tencies we found were on 2019-11-05 for the WBA ticker after the trading halt occurring between 13:32:50.233001415 and 13:37:50.2335639. A.3.1 Volume data processing LOBSTER provides level-based data in a form that can be easily manipulated to derive order book and order flow features (we access the firstL = 10 levels). Deriving the volume features from LOBSTER data instead is a non-trivial task. If we set a windowW >L for the volume representation, some levels pastL = 10 might have prices that fall in the volume window, i.e.p(L+1) x,t ∈{π(1) x,t,...,π (W) x,t }, and we won’t have the required information. To avoid this issue in all our experiments we setW =L = 10. Reconstruction of L3 queue data has a further complication: every time a quoting price leaves the 10-level range, all orders submitted/canceled at this price are not recorded. Therefore there is no way of reconstructing what happens at such a price level while it is outside of the 10-level range. To minimize the effect of this shortcoming, we adopt the following systematic approach: each time a quoting price (re-)enters the 10-level range, we initialize the corresponding queue with a single order of size given by the total liquidity available at that price level (even if it may be made up of multiple independent orders). These issues could be mitigated by accessing data deeper in the order book from LOBSTER, sayL = 50 or 100, while keeping a relatively small windowW <<L. A.4 Data set descriptive statistics: ATVI deep dive In this section, we report some descriptive statistics of the processed data used for the experiments. We focus on one representative stock, Activision Blizzard Inc. (ATVI). First, we explore the distribution of the order book, order flow, and volume features. For each level/price tick, we report the aggregated distributional boxplot. Moreover, in order to understand the temporal behavior of the data, we fix one specific level/ price tick and look at how the distribution varies day by day. Finally, we analyze the distribution of the target categorical returns. To do so we fix the first window in the experiment procedure, i.e.w = 1 in Section 4, and plot the unconditional train, validation, and test distributions at each prediction horizonh∈{ 10, 20, 30, 50, 100, 200, 300, 500, 1000}. A.4.1 Features In Figures 14–18 we plot the aggregate and temporal distributions of the features xt described in Section 3.2.1. We note the following: 29 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets • As expected, order book prices display significant non-stationarity, cf. Figure 14. • The difference between order book volumesv(l) t,x, Figure 15, and volumess(w) t,x , Figure 17, is that in the former we measure the distance from the mid in levels, i.e. the volume is strictly positive, while in the latter we use all, i.e. also possibly empty, price ticks. • In Figure 16 we note that order flow is zero most of the time. By definition, we have non-zero flow only when an event affects exactly that level or the whole order book shifts. • To provide some insight on the distribution of L3 volume features, we plot queue depth statistics in Figure 18. We note that most queue depths are less than 9 orders long, this justifies the queue depth cutoff of length 10 chosen in our experiments. • Finally, looking at Figure 15, Figure 17 and Figure 18, one can clearly note the difference between first level/price tick dynamics and those of the rest of the order book: active price discovery leads to lower volumes and shorter queues. BID10 BID9 BID8 BID7 BID6 BID5 BID4 BID3 BID2 BID1 ASK1 ASK2 ASK3 ASK4 ASK5 ASK6 ASK7 ASK8 ASK9 ASK10 level 40 45 50 55 60 price ($) Aggregated distributions 2019-01-02 2019-03-06 2019-05-06 2019-07-05 2019-09-04 2019-11-01 2020-01-03 40 45 50 55 60 price ($) ASK1 daily distributions min-max Q1- Q3 median A TVI orderbook price Figure 14: ATVI order book prices during the period from January 2nd, 2019 to Januray 31st, 2020. A.4.2 Responses In Figure 19 we plot the unconditional empirical distributions of the target responses defined in Section 3.2.2 for the first windoww = 1. Note that the threshold ˆγh is based on the training data set only. As detailed in Section 4, the train and validation sets are randomly partitioned from a four week period, i.e.Dw,train∪Dw,val, and thus are likely to display similar volatility regimes. On the other hand, the test setDw,test corresponds to the following week, cf. Figure 11, and thus may exhibit a different volatility profile. By joining the train and validation distribution we obtain the unpredictive benchmark described in Remark 2.1 and used to define predictability in the experiments in Section 4. In Figure 20 we explore the dependence structure of the return labels by plotting13 the previoush-step returnct−h,t against the next h-step return ct,t+h. We note that for all horizons h∈{ 10, 20, 30, 50, 100, 200, 300, 500, 1000} the null hypothesis of independence is rejected by a contingency chi-square test. The fact that return labels display 13To be more precise, we plotct−h−k,t againstct,t+h in order to avoid any kind of overlap between the labels, cf. Section 3.2.2. We drop thek for clarity of exposition and notational convenience. 30 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets BID10 BID9 BID8 BID7 BID6 BID5 BID4 BID3 BID2 BID1 ASK1 ASK2 ASK3 ASK4 ASK5 ASK6 ASK7 ASK8 ASK9 ASK10 level 0 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5 10 6 volume (shares) Aggregated distributions 2019-01-02 2019-03-06 2019-05-06 2019-07-05 2019-09-04 2019-11-01 2020-01-03 0 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5 10 6 volume (shares) ASK1 daily distributions min-max Q1- Q3 median A TVI orderbook volume Figure 15: ATVI order book volumes during the period from January 2nd, 2019 to Januray 31st, 2020. some form of persistency has a two-fold interpretation. On one hand, it provides evidence towards the existence of predictability in the data, i.e. against the i.i.d. Efficient Market Hypothesis on which the unpredictive benchmark is based, cf. Remark 2.1. On the other, it suggests that a simple one-step ahead Markovian model of returns may display predictive power, i.e. a model which predicts the next price movect,t+h conditional on the last returnct−h,t only. In this respect, we note the return labelct−h,t can be computed from the features (xt−T+1,..., xt) forT sufficiently large. In view of the universal approximation property of neural networks, any such simple model can thus be considered as ‘nested’ in the deep learning models treated in this paper. In Appendix A.5 we explore how well a specific model based onct−h,t only performs when compared to the more complex deep learning models considered in this paper. A.5 Simpler predictive models: an empirical auto-regressive specification In this section, we explore how a simple model performs when compared to the deep learning architectures considered in this paper. We base the model on the simple empirical observation that the target return labels display time-dependence, cf. Appendix A.4.2 and Figure 20. We consider a one-step ahead14 auto-regressive (AR) model, i.e. we aim to estimate p∗(⋆) = P(ct,t+h =∗|ct−h,t = ⋆) for∗,⋆ ∈{↓ , =,↑}. We use a non-parametric approach, setting ˆp∗(⋆) in period w ∈ {1,..., 11} to be the empirical distribution of ct,t+h =∗ ∈ {↓, =,↑} given the previous return label was ct−h,t =⋆∈{↓, =,↑} in the training and validation setDw,train∪Dw,val, i.e. the row normalised matrices displayed in Figure 20. Formally, this is the maximum likelihood estimator of the conditional probabilities P(ct,t+h =∗|ct−h,t =⋆) given the data setDw,train∪Dw,val. We repeat the experiments of Sections 4.1 and 4.2 with this empirical AR model in the setM0. The updated results are reported in Table 10 and Table 11 (we only report results at the 99% confidence level, i.e.α = 0.01). 14To avoid any look-ahead bias we actually condition onct−h−k,t wherek is the smoothing factor introduced in Section 3.2.2. We writect−h,t for clarity of exposition. 31 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets BID10 BID9 BID8 BID7 BID6 BID5 BID4 BID3 BID2 BID1 ASK1 ASK2 ASK3 ASK4 ASK5 ASK6 ASK7 ASK8 ASK9 ASK10 level −200000 −150000 −100000 −50000 0 50000 100000 150000 200000 volume (shares) Aggregated distributions 2019-01-02 2019-03-06 2019-05-06 2019-07-05 2019-09-04 2019-11-01 2020-01-03 −40000 −20000 0 20000 40000 volume (shares) ASK1 daily distributions min-max Q1- Q3 median A TVI orderflow Figure 16: ATVI order flow during the period from January 2nd, 2019 to Januray 31st, 2020. h = 10 h = 20 h = 30 h = 50 h = 100 h = 200 h = 300 h = 500 h = 1000 LILAK 0.00 0.00 0.38 0.40 0.04 0.08 0.00 0.01 1.00 QRTEA 0.00 0.01 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.06 0.85 0.26 XRAY 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.09 0.35 0.35 0.73 0.85 CHTR 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.06 0.14 0.56 PCAR 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.86 0.42 0.31 0.17 1.00 EXC 0.12 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.46 0.38 AAL 0.04 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.65 0.70 0.10 0.38 WBA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.23 0.04 0.00 0.18 ATVI 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.61 0.34 0.12 0.03 AAPL 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.16 0.08 0.03 0.05 0.06 0.09 Table 10: MCS p-values of the unpredictive benchmark model for the 10 tickers and 9 horizons under consideration. When the p-value is low at least one of the order book-driven models statistically outperforms the unpredictive benchmark, i.e. there is order book-driven predictability according to Definition 4.1. The results reported in Table 10 are consistent with those in Table 4. The main differences are due to some additional predictable horizons identified by including the empirical auto-regressive model. This mostly occurs for stocks with low liquidity (LILAK, QRTEA, and CHTR) where the low data regime makes it more challenging for deep learning models to train effectively. In Table 11 we note the greater expressivity of deep learning models provides a significant advantage compared to the simple empirical auto-regressive model. While the simple AR model does display predictive power, it is often outperformed by the order book-driven deep learning models deepOF(L2) and deepVOL(L2/L3). In Table 12 we dive deeper into this analysis by reporting for each ticker-horizon combination whether the simple AR model or deepVOL(L3) is in the MCS of best models. 32 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets BID10 BID9 BID8 BID7 BID6 BID5 BID4 BID3 BID2 BID1 ASK1 ASK2 ASK3 ASK4 ASK5 ASK6 ASK7 ASK8 ASK9 ASK10 ticks from mid 0 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5 10 6 volume (shares) Aggregated distributions 2019-01-02 2019-03-06 2019-05-06 2019-07-05 2019-09-04 2019-11-01 2020-01-03 0 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5 10 6 volume (shares) ASK1 daily distributions min-max Q1- Q3 median A TVI volume Figure 17: ATVI volumes during the period from January 2nd, 2019 to Januray 31st, 2020. α = 0.01 benchmark 0% empirical AR model 28% deepOF(L1) 12% deepOF(L1) 26% deepLOB(L2) 12% deepOF(L2) 81% deepVOL(L2) 77% deepVOL(L3) 79% Table 11: % of times the model is in theα-MCS when predictability is identified at the levelα = 0.01. While our results suggest deepOF and deepVOL architectures significantly outperform the simple AR model, a more in-depth study comparing these specifications to the models in Aït-Sahalia et al. (2022) is required to shed some light on the question of whether the expressivity of deep learning techniques is the key to producing good predictive models or if careful feature engineering can be as effective. This analysis is of particular relevance in applications where prediction speed plays a fundamental role, see Appendix A.7. 33 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets BID10 BID9 BID8 BID7 BID6 BID5 BID4 BID3 BID2 BID1 ASK1 ASK2 ASK3 ASK4 ASK5 ASK6 ASK7 ASK8 ASK9 ASK10 ticks from mid 0 2 4 6 8 10 # of orders in the queue Aggregated distributions 02/01/2019 06/03/2019 06/05/2019 05/07/2019 04/09/2019 01/11/2019 03/01/2020 0 2 4 6 8 10 # of orders in queue ASK1 daily distributions min-max Q1- Q3 median A TVI queue depth Figure 18: ATVI queue depths during the period from January 2nd, 2019 to Januray 31st, 2020. h = 10 h = 20 h = 30 h = 50 h = 100 h = 200 h = 300 h = 500 h = 1000 LILAK QRTEA XRAY CHTR PCAR EXC AAL WBA ATVI AAPL Table 12: Comparison between emprical AR model and deepVOL(L3) MCS results,α = 0.01. Shading indicates whether the empirical AR model and/or deepVOL(L3) is in the set of best models. White: neither, light blue: empirical AR model only, blue: deepVOL(L3), dark blue: both. Grey shading indicates the ticker-horizon combination was not deemed predictable at the 99% confidence level. A.6 Return definition The way returns are defined is often an overlooked topic which inevitably has a significant effect on model evaluation. Here we state two alternative definitions to that given in Section 3.2.2 taken from the literature and discuss their properties. In all cases, the mid-price is treated as the “true” price and returns are defined relative to it. Recall this is not a tradable price. 34 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 train h = 10 ̂ γ h = 0.0×10 4 h = 20 ̂ γ h = 0.0×10 4 h = 30 ̂ γ h = 0.0×10 4 h = 50 ̂ γ h = 0.05×10 4 h = 100 ̂ γ h = 0.97×10 4 h = 200 ̂ γ h = 1. 23×10 4 h = 300 ̂ γ h = 1.92×10 4 h = 500 ̂ γ h = 2.13×10 4 h = 1000 ̂ γ h = 2.45×10 4 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 al down stationary up 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 test down stationary up down stationary up down stationary up down stationary up down stationary up down stationary up down stationary up down stationary up A TVI, w = 1 Figure 19: ATVI return labels during the first window of the experiment, i.e. from January 14th, 2019 to February 15th, 2019. • In Ntakaris et al. (2018) the authors define the return at horizon h as rt,t+h = mt,t+h−mt mt , mt,t+h = 1 h hX i=1 mt+i, wheremt denotes the mid-price at timet. This definition of return compares the smoothed mid-price over the nexth time steps to the current mid-price. In this case, the return can be equivalently understood as the average mid-to-mid return over the nexth time steps. As the horizonh becomes longer, so does the window over which we smooth the returns. This has a couple of practical disadvantages in terms of the predictability questions we wish to explore. First, predictability over h = 100 time steps might be due to changes of the mid-price over the first, say,h = 50 time steps, and thus it becomes difficult to discuss questions of persistency in predictability. Second, the definition produces correlation between returns at different horizons,rt+h1 and rt+h2, inducing a hidden bias in multi-horizon models. • In Zhang et al. (2019) and Zhang and Zohren (2021) the authors define the return at horizon h by rt,t+h = mt,t+h−mt−h,t mt−h,t , mt,t+h = 1 h hX i=1 mt+i, mt−h,t = 1 h h−1X i=0 mt−i, wheremt denotes the mid-price at time t. This definition has similar drawbacks to the previous one. But, additionally, we believe it may suffer from look-ahead bias: for example, if the mid-price has been going up in the pasth steps (an information which is included in our covariates), then it is more likely the returnrt,t+h will be positive. The definition of returns used in this paper, cf. Section 3.2.2, does not suffer from the issues identified for these two return specifications. Remark A.4. The definition of returns intrinsically depends on the clock used to measure time. Note that in Kolm et al. (2021) the authors use a physical time clock with stock-specific horizonh. In their setting, the authors use simple un-smoothed mid-price returns, rt,t+h = mt+h−mt mt . 35 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets down stationary up c t , t + h downstationaryup c t − h , t 465524 827206 320486 792670 3655781 835439 354928 801040 479019 h = 10, p χ 2 = 0.00 down stationary p c t , t + h downstationary p c t − h , t 698989 880988 537214 817912 2560125 888339 600132 825490 722714 h = 20, p χ 2 = 0.00 down stationary p c t , t + h downstationary p c t − h , t 848500 880088 715450 801100 1930262 881927 794272 803280 876834 h = 30, p χ 2 = 0.00 down stationary p c t , t + h downstationary p c t − h , t 1068955 817866 964513 745709 1240086 814149 1036334 742576 1101145 h = 50, p χ 2 = 0.00 down stationary p c t , t + h downstationary p c t − h , t 1058251 901429 952851 874352 996223 868104 979360 841883 1057930 h = 100, p χ 2 = 0.00 down stationary p c t , t + h downstationary p c t − h , t 1016910 902114 906735 907904 1093696 902711 900774 909588 988051 h = 200, p χ 2 = 0.00 down stationary p c t , t + h downstationary p c t − h , t 1062102 872462 967552 892340 990958 868761 947657 889794 1034957 h = 300, p χ 2 = 0.00 down stationary p c t , t + h downstationary p c t − h , t 1039185 844456 979685 869816 1118419 834811 953558 862917 1019936 h = 500, p χ 2 = 0.00 down stationary p c t , t + h downstationary p c t − h , t 975145 892553 966634 904152 1152358 845149 952242 863836 961214 h = 1000, p χ 2 = 0.00 A TVI, w = 1, trainval dataset Figure 20: ATVI return labels dependence in the joint training and validation data set during the first window of the experiment, i.e. from January 14th, 2019 to February 15th, 2019. With our choice of order book-driven clock, even assuming mid-mid trading, there is no way of placing a trade exactly h order book events ahead, i.e. the prediction horizon is random. Smoothing the exit price can thus be understood as averaging out the uncertainty in the execution time. Moreover, in our work, we aim to investigate questions regarding structural market predictability. In our setting, smoothing mid-prices leads to better estimates of the true (latent) prices by weakening idiosyncratic noise effects. As pointed out in the conclusions in Section 5 though, in practical trading applications it may be more appropriate to consider a physical time clock and un-smoothed returns. A.7 Infrastructure latency In this paper, we explored the predictive value of order book data by assuming instantaneous access to such information. In practice, due to technological constraints, market participants experience varying degrees of delay when engaging 36 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets with the order book. Let us writeλn,view andλn,act for the latencies that market participantn experiences when viewing and acting on the order book respectively. Forx∈{ view, act} we can decompose λn,x =λx 0 +λn,x + , whereλact 0 is the time it takes the financial entity running the market, e.g. the Nasdaq, to execute an action on the order book once received andλview 0 is the time it takes the market entity to send out the information regarding an order book update. Market participants make large efforts to reduce their idiosyncratic latenciesλn,x + forx∈{ view, act} by optimizing software and hardware, one prototypical example being co-location. Note thatλn,act + also includes the time needed to take a trading decision which, in our setting, requires a forward pass through a pre-trained predictive model, e.g. deepLOB/deepOF/deepVOL. Figure 21 represents how market-wide and idiosyncratic latencies affect market participants. Action executed on order book ↓ λview 0 ↑ Action broadcasted to market participants λn,view + Action viewed by market participant n ↓ Action initiated by market participant n ↓ λn,act + ↑ Action received by market entity λact 0 Action executed on order book ↓ Figure 21: Market-wide and idiosyncratic latencies. When considering practical trading applications one should thus take into account the effect these latencies may have on the definition of returns, cf. Section 3.2.2 and Appendix A.6. For example, denoting by t = 1, 2,... the order book-driven clock considered in this paper, one may want to predict the return between physical timesτt +λn,tot and τt+h +λn,tot where λn,tot =λn,view +λn,act =λtot 0 +λn,tot + , is the total round trip latency time to view and act once the order book clock ticks andτ : N→ [0,∞) is the increasing random function mapping the order book clock to physical time. An interesting analysis in this setting would be to analyze how predictability varies as a function ofλn,tot + =λn,view + +λn,act + . In order to quantify the magnitude of these time lags and better understand their impact we briefly summarize some infrastructure tests published by market participants. • As of 2023, the Nasdaq reports the door-to-door speed of its matching engine, i.e.λtot 0 =λact 0 +λview 0 , to be ‘sub-40µs, with the fastest production implementation at 14µs’ (Nasdaq, 2023). Studies from 2015 report the door-to-door latencies of Brazilian and European futures exchanges in the order of a few hundred microseconds (Kirilenko and Lamacie, 2015; Menkveld and Zoican, 2017). • Leading industry producers of co-located network adapters and feed handlers report the total speed for processing an order book message and sending a trade action, i.e. tick-to-trade latencyλn,tot + =λn,view + +λn,act + , to be of the order of a couple of microseconds (µs) (Enyx, 2020; CSPi, 2023). This is achieved via the use of specific hardware known as FPGA cards. These figures assume relatively simple trading decision applications, when working with more sophisticated predictive models, such as the ones considered in this paper, one should account for a couple of hundred microseconds in tick-to-trade latency, see Table III in Zhang et al. (2019) for unoptimized forward-pass run times. The total latency λk,tot is thus less than a fraction of a millisecond (ms) while the average time elapsed between consecutive price changes in our data ranges from 0.18 to 8.38 seconds depending on the liquidity of the stock, cf. Table 1. The effect of infrastructural latencies on the definition of returns, cf. Section 3.2.2, is thus negligible. A.8 Stock selection Ideally, we would like to work with the same set of stocks as in Kolm et al. (2021). Due to computational limitations, we were able to conduct experiments only on a subset of 10 tickers from the total 115 NASDAQ stocks considered in the original paper. We selected 10 stocks with diverse liquidity characteristics, hopefully providing a sufficiently representative sub-sample of the whole set. 37 The Short-Term Predictability of Returns in Order Book Markets To choose the sub-sample, we use the stock characteristics provided in Kolm et al. (2021), Table 6. For each of the liquidity characteristics – Updates, Trades, Price Changes, Spread – we compute a sub-score based on the characteristic’s rank. For example, the stock with the most updates is assigned an updates score of 1, while the stock with the least number of updates is assigned an updates score of 0. The characteristic-specific scores are then averaged to obtain a general “liquidity score” for each stock. The 10 chosen stocks correspond to the 10 evenly spaced quantiles of the “liquidity score”. The liquidity characteristics of the 10 chosen stocks are reported in Table 1. A.9 Model details In the experiments we use the model architectures reported in Table 13 and Table 14. To speed up the training procedure, we use batch normalization (Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015) (with momentum = 0.6) after every convolutional layer and inception block. To prevent overfitting, we use a dropout layer (Srivastava et al., 2014) (with noise = 0.2) positioned after the inception module. All the models are implemented with float32 precision policy: at every layer float32 is used as computation and variable data type. Loss and gradient computations are also carried out with float32 precision. 38 Model Architectures Model DeepLOB DeepOF Architecture Description Output Size Architecture Description Output Size Input Layer Raw order book states,n (p(l) a,t−τ , v(l) a,t−τ , p(l) b,t−τ , v(l) b,t−τ ) o τ =0,...,T−1 l=1,...,L (T , 4L, 1) Multi-level order flow,n (aOF (l) t−τ , bOF (l) t−τ ) o τ =0,...,T−1 l=1,...,L (T , 2L, 1) First Convolutional layer Spatial convolution 32 (1×2) filters, (1×2) stride Convolve price and volume information (T , 2L, 32) Temporal convolution 32 (4×1) filters, padding Convolve through four time-steps (T , 2L, 32) Temporal convolution 32 (4×1) filters, padding Convolve through four time-steps (T , 2L, 32) Second Convolutional layer Spatial convolution 32 (1×2) filters, (1×2) stride Convolve bid and ask price-volume information (T , L, 32) 32 (1×2) filters, (1×2) stride Convolve order flow information (T , L, 32) Temporal convolution 32 (4×1) filters, padding Convolve through four time-steps (T , L, 32) 32 (4×1) filters, padding Convolve through four time-steps (T , L, 32) Temporal convolution 32 (4×1) filters, padding Convolve through four time-steps (T , L, 32) 32 (4×1) filters, padding Convolve through four time-steps (T , L, 32) Third Convolutional layer Spatial convolution 32 (1×L) filters, (1×1) stride Convolve information through the whole order book (T , 1, 32) 32 (1×L) filters, (1×1) stride Convolve information through the whole order book (T , 1, 32) Temporal convolution 32 (4×1) filters, padding Convolve through four time-steps (T , 1, 32) 32 (4×1) filters, padding Convolve through four time-steps (T , 1, 32) Temporal convolution 32 (4×1) filters, padding Convolve through four time-steps (T , 1, 32) 32 (4×1) filters, padding Convolve through four time-steps (T , 1, 32) Inception module (parallel blocks) Temporal convolution 64 (1×1) filters Increase dimensionality (Network-in-Network) (T , 1, 64) 64 (1×1) filters Increase dimensionality (Network-in-Network) (T , 1, 64) Temporal convolution 64 (3×1) filters, padding Convolve through three time-steps, "MA(3)" (T , 1, 64) 64 (3×1) filters, padding Convolve through three time-steps, "MA(3)" (T , 1, 64) Temporal convolution 64 (1×1) filters Increase dimensionality (Network-in-Network) (T , 1, 64) 64 (1×1) filters Increase dimensionality (Network-in-Network) (T , 1, 64) Temporal convolution 64 (5×1) filters, padding Convolve through five time-steps, "MA(5)" (T , 1, 64) 64 (5×1) filters, padding Convolve through five time-steps, "MA(5)" (T , 1, 64) Temporal maxpooling (3×1) pool size, (1×1) stride & padding Rolling maximum, three time-steps (T , 1, 32) (3×1) pool size, (1×1) stride & padding Rolling maximum, three time-steps (T , 1, 32) Temporal convolution 64 (1×1) filters Increase dimensionality (Network-in-Network) (T , 1, 64) 64 (4×1) filters Increase dimensionality (Network-in-Network) (T , 1, 64) Concatenate and reshape Concatenate and reshape the outputs of the inception module to obtain an R192-valued time series of length T (T , 192) Concatenate and reshape the outputs of the inception module to obtain an R192-valued time series of length T (T , 192) LSTM module LSTM 64 hidden units Capture longer term dependencies (64) 64 hidden units Capture longer term dependencies (64) (a) Output layer Dense layer Softmax activation Produce classification output (3) Softmax activation Produce classification output (3) (b) Decoder module LSTM decoder (seq2seq/attention) 64 hidden units, softmax activation Produce sequential classification output (5, 3) 64 hidden units, softmax activation Produce sequential classification output (5, 3) Table 13: DeepLOB and DeepOF network description. (a) Single horizon, (b) Multi-horizon. Model Architectures Model DeepVOL DeepVOL L3 Architecture Description Output Size Architecture Description Output Size Input Layer V olume representation,n s(j) x,t−τ o τ =0,...,T−1,j =1,...,W x∈{a,b} (T , W,2, 1) L3 volume representation,n (q(j,k) x,t−τ o τ =0,...,T−1,j =1,...,W x∈{a,b},k=1,...,D (T , W,2, D, 1) First Convolutional layer Spatial convolution 32 (1×1×D) filters, (1×1×1) stride At each price, convolve the queue volumes (T , W,2, 32) Second Convolutional layer Spatial convolution 32 (1×2×2) filters, (1×1×1) stride Convolve volumes on opposite sides of the mid (T , W− 1, 32) 32 (1×2×2) filters, (1×1×1) stride Convolve volumes on opposite sides of the mid (T , W− 1, 32) Temporal convolution 32 (4×1) filters, padding Convolve through four time-steps (T , W− 1, 32) 32 (4×1) filters, padding Convolve through four time-steps (T , W− 1, 32) Temporal convolution 32 (4×1) filters, padding Convolve through four time-steps (T , W− 1, 32) 32 (4×1) filters, padding Convolve through four time-steps (T , W− 1, 32) Third Convolutional layer Spatial convolution 32 (1×W-1) filters, (1×1) stride Convolve information through the whole order book (T , 1, 32) 32 (1×W-1) filters, (1×1) stride Convolve information through the whole order book (T , 1, 32) Temporal convolution 32 (4×1) filters, padding Convolve through four time-steps (T , 1, 32) 32 (4×1) filters, padding Convolve through four time-steps (T , 1, 32) Temporal convolution 32 (4×1) filters, padding Convolve through four time-steps (T , 1, 32) 32 (4×1) filters, padding Convolve through four time-steps (T , 1, 32) Inception module (parallel blocks) Temporal convolution 64 (1×1) filters Increase dimensionality (Network-in-Network) (T , 1, 64) 64 (1×1) filters Increase dimensionality (Network-in-Network) (T , 1, 64) Temporal convolution 64 (3×1) filters, padding Convolve through three time-steps, "MA(3)" (T , 1, 64) 64 (3×1) filters, padding Convolve through three time-steps, "MA(3)" (T , 1, 64) Temporal convolution 64 (1×1) filters Increase dimensionality (Network-in-Network) (T , 1, 64) 64 (1×1) filters Increase dimensionality (Network-in-Network) (T , 1, 64) Temporal convolution 64 (5×1) filters, padding Convolve through five time-steps, "MA(5)" (T , 1, 64) 64 (5×1) filters, padding Convolve through five time-steps, "MA(5)" (T , 1, 64) Temporal maxpooling (3×1) pool size, (1×1) stride & padding Rolling maximum, three time-steps (T , 1, 32) (3×1) pool size, (1×1) stride & padding Rolling maximum, three time-steps (T , 1, 32) Temporal convolution 64 (1×1) filters Increase dimensionality (Network-in-Network) (T , 1, 64) 64 (4×1) filters Increase dimensionality (Network-in-Network) (T , 1, 64) Concatenate and reshape Concatenate and reshape the outputs of the inception module to obtain an R192-valued time series of length T (T , 192) Concatenate and reshape the outputs of the inception module to obtain an R192-valued time series of length T (T , 192) LSTM module LSTM 64 hidden units Capture longer term dependencies (64) 64 hidden units Capture longer term dependencies (64) (a) Output layer Dense layer Softmax activation Produce classification output (3) Softmax activation Produce classification output (3) (b) Decoder module LSTM decoder (seq2seq/attention) 64 hidden units, softmax activation Produce sequential classification output (5, 3) 64 hidden units, softmax activation Produce sequential classification output (5, 3) Table 14: DeepVOL and DeepVOL L3 network description. (a) Single horizon, (b) Multi-horizon. References Abergel, F., Lehalle, C.-A., and Rosenbaum, M. (2014). Understanding the Stakes of High-Frequency Trading. The Journal of Trading, 9(4):49–73. Aït-Sahalia, Y ., Fan, J., Xue, L., and Zhou, Y . (2022). How and When are High-Frequency Stock Returns Predictable? NBER Working Papers 30366, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc. Bacry, E. and Muzy, J.-F. (2014). Hawkes model for price and trades high-frequency dynamics. Quantitative Finance, 14(7):1147–1166. Bengio, Y ., Courville, A. C., and Vincent, P. (2013). Representation Learning: A Review and New Perspectives.IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI), 35(8):1798–1828. Byrd, D., Hybinette, M., and Balch, T. H. (2020). ABIDES: Towards High-Fidelity Multi-Agent Market Simulation. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGSIM Conference on Principles of Advanced Discrete Simulation , pages 11–22, Miami FL Spain. ACM. Cho, K., van Merriënboer, B., Gulcehre, C., Bahdanau, D., Bougares, F., Schwenk, H., and Bengio, Y . (2014). Learning Phrase Representations using RNN Encoder–Decoder for Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 1724–1734. Association for Computational Linguistics. Coletta, A., Moulin, A., Vyetrenko, S., and Balch, T. (2022). Learning to simulate realistic limit order book markets from data as a World Agent. In Proceedings of the Third ACM International Conference on AI in Finance , pages 428–436, New York NY USA. ACM. Cont, R., Kukanov, A., and Stoikov, S. (2013). The Price Impact of Order Book Events. Journal of Financial Econometrics, 12(1):47–88. CSPi (2023). Tick-to-Trade Latency, Accessed: 2023-08-30. Cybenko, G. V . (1989). Approximation by Superpositions of a Sigmoidal Function.Mathematics of Control, Signals and Systems, 2:303–314. Enyx (2020). NASDAQ Totalview Latency Tests, Accessed: 2023-08-30. European Parliament and Council (2004). Directive 2004/39/EC on markets in financial instruments amending Council Directives 85/611/EEC and 93/6/EEC and Directive 2000/12/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directive 93/22/EEC. Fama, E. F. (1970). Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work. The Journal of Finance , 25(2):383–417. Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y ., and Courville, A. (2016).Deep Learning. MIT Press. http://www.deeplearningbook. org. Hansen, P. R., Lunde, A., and Nason, J. M. (2011). The Model Confidence Set. Econometrica, 79(2):453–497. Harvey, A. and Bates, D. (2003). Multivariate Unit Root Tests and Testing for Convergence. Cambridge Working Papers in Economics 0301, Faculty of Economics, University of Cambridge. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. (2016). Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 770–778, Los Alamitos, CA, USA. IEEE Computer Society. Hochreiter, S., Bengio, Y ., Frasconi, P., and Schmidhuber, J. (2001). Gradient Flow in Recurrent Nets: the Difficulty of Learning Long-Term Dependencies. Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Long Short-Term Memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):1735–1780. Hornik, K., Stinchcombe, M., and White, H. (1990). Universal Approximation of an Unknown Mapping and its Derivatives using Multilayer Feedforward Networks. Neural Networks, 3(5):551–560. Huang, R. and Polak, T. (2011). LOBSTER: Limit Order Book Reconstruction System. Information Systems & Economics eJournal. Imperial College Research Computing Service (2022). High-Performance Computing Cluster. Ioffe, S. and Szegedy, C. (2015). Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Network Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 37 ofProceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 448–456, Lille, France. PMLR. Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. (2015). Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. CoRR, abs/1412.6980. 41 Kirilenko, A. A. and Lamacie, G. (2015). Latency and Asset Prices. Kolm, P. N., Turiel, J. D., and Westray, N. (2021). Deep Order Flow Imbalance: Extracting Alpha at Multiple Horizons from the Limit Order Book. Econometric Modeling: Capital Markets - Portfolio Theory eJournal . Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G. E. (2012). ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. In Pereira, F., Burges, C., Bottou, L., and Weinberger, K., editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 25. Curran Associates, Inc. Large, J. (2007). Measuring the resiliency of an electronic limit order book. Journal of Financial Markets, 10(1):1–25. Luong, T., Pham, H., and Manning, C. D. (2015). Effective Approaches to Attention-based Neural Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1412–1421, Lisbon, Portugal. Association for Computational Linguistics. Melis, G., Dyer, C., and Blunsom, P. (2017). On the State of the Art of Evaluation in Neural Language Models. CoRR, abs/1707.05589. Menkveld, A. J. and Zoican, M. A. (2017). Need for Speed? Exchange Latency and Liquidity. The Review of Financial Studies, 30(4):1188–1228. Nasdaq (2023). Exchange Trading Technology, Accessed: 2023-08-30. Ntakaris, A., Magris, M., Kanniainen, J., Gabbouj, M., and Iosifidis, A. (2018). Benchmark dataset for mid-price forecasting of limit order book data with machine learning methods. Journal of F orecasting, 37(8):852–866. Nyblom, J. and Harvey, A. (2000). Tests of Common Stochastic Trends. Econometric Theory, 16(2):176–199. Sirignano, J. and Cont, R. (2019). Universal Features of Price Formation in Financial Markets: Perspectives from Deep Learning. Quantitative Finance, 19(9):1449–1459. Srivastava, N., Hinton, G., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Salakhutdinov, R. (2014). Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural Networks from Overfitting. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(56):1929–1958. Telgarsky, M. (2015). Representation Benefits of Deep Feedforward Networks. arXiv e-prints, page arXiv:1509.08101. Tran, D. T., Iosifidis, A., Kanniainen, J., and Gabbouj, M. (2019). Temporal Attention-Augmented Bilinear Network for Financial Time-Series Data Analysis. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , 30(5):1407– 1418. US Securities and Exchange Commission (2005). Regulation NMS - Proposed rules and amendments to joint industry plans. Wu, Y ., Mahfouz, M., Magazzeni, D., and Veloso, M. (2021). Towards Robust Representation of Limit Orders Books for Deep Learning Models. Papers 2110.05479, arXiv.org. Xu, K., Gould, M. D., and Howison, S. D. (2019). Multi-level Order-flow Imbalance in a Limit Order Book. Market Microstructure and Liquidity, 4. Zhang, Z. and Zohren, S. (2021). Multi-Horizon Forecasting for Limit Order Books: Novel Deep Learning Approaches and Hardware Acceleration using Intelligent Processing Units. Papers 2105.10430, arXiv.org. Zhang, Z., Zohren, S., and Roberts, S. (2019). DeepLOB: Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for Limit Order Books. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 67(11):3001–3012. 42