Efficient Sampling for Realized V ariance Estimation in Time-Changed Diffusion Models TimoDimitriadis 1, RoxanaHalbleib 2, JeanninePolivka 3, JasperRennspies 4, SinaStreicher 5 and Axel FriedrichWolter 6 October 23, 2025 Abstract This paper analyzes the benefits of sampling intraday returns in intrinsic time for the realized variance (RV) estimator. We theoretically show in finite samples that depending on the permitted sampling information, the RV estimator is most efficient under either hitting time sampling that samples whenever the price changes by a pre-determined threshold, or under the new concept of realized business time that samples according to a combination of observed trades and estimated tick variance. The analysis builds on the assumption that as- set prices follow a diffusion that is time-changed with a jump process that separately models the transaction times. This provides a flexible model that allows for leverage specifications and Hawkes-type jump processes and separately captures the empirically varying trading intensity and tick variance processes, which are particularly relevant for disentangling the driving forces of the sampling schemes. Extensive simulations confirm our theoretical results and show that for low levels of noise, hitting time sampling remains superior while for in- creasing noise levels, realized business time becomes the empirically most efficient sampling scheme. An application to stock data provides empirical evidence for the benefits of using these intrinsic sampling schemes to construct more efficient RV estimators as well as for an improved forecast performance. Keywords: Business time, Efficient estimation, High-frequency data, Hitting time, Pure jump process, Realized variance, Time-changed diffusion model JEL classification: C22, C32, C51, C58, C83 1Corresponding author. Faculty of Economics and Business, Goethe University Frankfurt, 60629 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, dimitriadis@econ.uni-frankfurt.de. 2Institute of Economics, University of Freiburg, Germany; email: roxana.halbleib@vwl.uni-freiburg.de 3University of St. Gallen, Switzerland 4Institute of Economics, University of Freiburg, Germany; email: jasper.rennspies@vwl.uni-freiburg.de 5KOF Swiss Economic Institute, ETH Z¨ urich, Switzerland; email: streicher.sina@gmail.com 6Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Konstanz, Germany; email: axel- friedrich.wolter@uni-konstanz.de 1 arXiv:2212.11833v4 [econ.EM] 22 Oct 2025 1 Introduction The estimation and forecasting of the variance of daily stock returns plays a major role in risk management, portfolio optimization and asset pricing. Accurate estimates of the daily variation of asset prices are commonly obtained by using intraday information as in the realized variance (RV) estimator introduced by Andersen and Bollerslev (1998) and Andersen et al. (2001a,b). Together with Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2002) and Meddahi (2002), they show that under the assumption that the logarithmic price process follows a standard continuous-time diffusion model, RV is an unbiased and consistent estimator of the quadratic variation, which coincides with the integrated variance (IV) in the absence of jumps (Barndorff-Nielsen et al., 2008, 2011; Andersen et al., 2012). Despite the theoretically appealing approaches of subsampling (Zhang et al., 2005), realised kernels (Barndorff-Nielsen et al., 2008) and pre-averaging (Podolskij and Vetter, 2009) for robus- tifying the RV estimator to market mircrostructure noise (MMN), the standard RV estimator at low frequencies such as sampling every five minutes is still regularly employed in empirical work, see e.g. Liu et al. (2015); Bollerslev et al. (2018, 2020, 2022); Bates (2019); Bucci (2020); Reisenhofer et al. (2022); Alfelt et al. (2023); Patton and Zhang (2023) among many others. 1 Reasons for the standard RV’s ongoing popularity include its simple and intuitive implementa- tion, the fact that low(er) frequencies can be used at which MMN is not a major concern, that its convergence rate is substantially faster compared to the previously mentioned approaches, and that it still performs comparably well in empirical studies (Liu et al., 2015). While most of the literature focuses on sampling returnsequidistantly in calendar timesuch as every five minutes, financial markets do not tick in calendar time. Instead, their intraday trading activity and tick variance (price variance of adjacent transactions or quotes) is time- varying, which might provide important information about the market’s pulse and especially its riskiness. In this paper, we study the theoretical and empirical benefits of using intraday returns sampled in intrinsic time scales to efficiently estimate the daily IV through the RV estimator. These time scales accelerate the clock time when the trading or price variations are intense, and they slow the time down when the markets are calm. In particular, we differentiate between the time scale driven by the trading activity (Transaction Time Sampling - TTS), the intraday price volatility (Business Time Sampling - BTS), and observed absolute price changes (Hitting Time Sampling - HTS). For TTS and BTS, we distinguish their implementation intointensity andrealized/jump-basedversions, where the latter use the observed amount of trades on a given day whereas the former rely on estimated intensities. In contrast to e.g., Bandi and Russell (2008, Section 4) who derive an optimal sampling frequency given equidistant sampling points, we focus on the “inverse” question of how to optimally allocate the sampling points under a given frequency. Byoptimalorefficient, we mean a sampling scheme that, among a class of unbiased schemes, attains the smallest mean squared error (MSE), which in this case equals its estimation variance. Summarizing our main contributions, we show that using HTS, which samples such that the absolute returns are (approximately) equal, provides a theoretical lower bound for the efficiency 1More fundamentally, the bibliographic review of Hussain et al. (2023) analyses 2920 papers and summarizes that “5-minute interval data appear to be the most favored choices in terms of high-frequency data usage.” 2 of the RV estimator in finite samples in terms of its MSE. Furthermore, the newly introduced realized BTS (rBTS) scheme, which samples according to a combination of the observed ticks and the (estimated) variance at these ticks, arises as most efficient when restricting attention to sampling schemes that do not use the observed high-frequency prices for the construction of the sampling points. This restriction is motivated by the empirical presence of MMN, which has a particularly severe impact on HTS as its sampling times are obtained directly from the noise-contaminated price observations. In our simulations and the empirical application, both HTS and rBTS exhibit an excellent and overall comparable performance, and clearly dominate the classically used sampling in calendar or tick time. While HTS dominates for very low frequencies where MMN is (almost) absent, rBTS arises as most efficient when the sampling frequency exceeds the 5 minute level. Our theory builds on the assumption of a price process that follows a stochastic diffusion that is time-changed with a jump (e.g., doubly stochastic Poisson or Hawkes) process. We call this thetick-time stochastic volatility (TTSV) model. It is a joint stochastic model for the asset prices together with their transaction (or quote) arrival times. The prices in this model follow a pure jump process that accommodates the time-varyingtrading intensityandtick variance processes within its diffusive component. The spot variance becomes the product of these two time-varying components that behave empirically different for stock markets as portrayed in Figures 2 and 3 below. The TTSV model is a simple and transparent framework to study statistical (finite sample) properties of the RV estimator with respect to various choices of sampling schemes. This is achieved by having the trading intensity and tick variance as two separately evolving processes that jointly govern the price variability. The separate modeling of trading intensity and tick vari- ance particularly allows for a comparative theoretical analysis of sampling according to calendar time, tick time in the sense of observed ticks or trading intensity, business time as measured by (realized) intraday volatility and hitting time by homogenizing absolute price changes. A theoretical alternative is to work underdiscretizeddiffusion models as e.g. employed in Jacod et al. (2017, 2019); Jacod (2018); Da and Xiu (2021); Li and Linton (2022), where a continuous diffusion process is augmented with a process separately modeling the arrivals of the transactions. Similar to the TTSV model, the resulting price process is a pure jump process with price changes at the explicitly modeled arrivals of the transactions. We illustrate in Appendix B that these discretized diffusions are closely related to the TTSV model. While similar (finite sample or asymptotic) efficiency results might be derived by relying on discretized diffusions, the TTSV model is attractive due to its simplicity and transparency in distinguishing between trading intensity and tick variance. Some of our results (in particular, Theorem 8 (b) and (c)), however, require strong independence conditions on the underlying TTSV processes, which could possibly be weakened when working with discretized diffusions. The TTSV model, however, also allows for the analysis of the price-dependent HTS scheme (opposed to e.g., Li and Linton (2022, Assumption O (2c)), Jacod et al. (2017, Assumption O (ii)) and A¨ ıt-Sahalia and Jacod (2014, Assumption A on page 302)) and it yields the novel realized BTS scheme due to the explicit modeling of the trading times, hence refining the (asymptotic) efficiency results of Barndorff- Nielsen et al. (2011). 3 Although the idea of intrinsic time sampling is not new to the literature, especially with regard to its empirical benefits (Clark, 1973; Oomen, 2005, 2006; Hansen and Lunde, 2006; Andersen et al., 2007, 2010; A¨ ıt-Sahalia et al., 2011), its theoretical advantages over the classical calendar time sampling (CTS) scheme are still largely unexplored, especially in finite samples. Exceptions are Oomen (2005, 2006), who study the statistical properties of RV under intrinsic time sampling schemes, however, based on a compound Poisson price assumption (Press, 1967), whose volatility pattern is solely driven by the trading intensity (see also Griffin and Oomen (2008)). Hence, this model misses a substantial source of daily return variation, i.e., the one due to the tick variance, as illustrated in Figures 2 and 3 below. Furthermore, Barndorff-Nielsen et al. (2011, Corollary 2) show that (intensity) BTS arises as an asymptotically efficientdeterministic sampling scheme for (subsampled) realized kernel estimators. Our results however also apply to finite sampling frequencies and allow for sampling based on observed ticks and prices (instead of being deterministic) and can hence accommodate the HTS and realized BTS schemes. Fukasawa (2010) analyses the asymptotic MSE of the RV estimator under endogenous sampling schemes, assuming a continuous semi-martingale for the price process that is observed whenever the price changes by a fixed quantity. Fukasawa (2010) shows that, asymptotically, HTS is most efficient. In this light, Theorem 8 (a) can be interpreted as a finite-sample analogue of his result, albeit established in a different setting. Fukasawa and Rosenbaum (2012), Robert and Rosenbaum (2012) and Vetter and Zwingmann (2017) provide further asymptotic results under endogenous sampling times. Pure jump processes, as the TTSV model, have already proven to be valuable alternatives to continuous diffusion models to describe financial prices, as they not only capture empirically observed random trading times and price discontinuities, but also offer a flexible framework to address MMN contamination or to price derivatives; see e.g., Press (1967), Carr and Wu (2004), Engle and Russell (2005), Oomen (2005, 2006), Liesenfeld et al. (2006) and Shephard and Yang (2017). These processes can be further framed and generalised within stochastic time-changed structures, which are mathematically and empirically very effective, but have received so far only moderate attention in the financial econometrics literature (Clark, 1973; Carr and Wu, 2004). The decomposition of spot variance in trading intensity and tick variance has already been addressed by Jones et al. (1994), An´ e and Geman (2000), Plerou et al. (2001), Gabaix et al. (2003), Dahlhaus and Neddermeyer (2014), Dahlhaus and Tunyavetchakit (2016), among oth- ers, when studying the intraday trading behaviour in relation to the intraday clock volatility pattern in order to measure spot variance or to test for normality of intraday returns sampled in transaction time scales. They find that, while the intraday trading is highly correlated with the intraday spot variance, the tick variance affects the spot variance as well, although it has a flatter intraday shape. Our empirical observation on stock markets complements these findings and reveals that the intraday tick variance and the trading intensity follow mirrored “J” patterns (also see Admati and Pfleiderer (1988), Oomen (2006) or Dong and Tse (2017)), which jointly result in the well known “U” shape of the intraday spot variance, as documented by Harris (1986), Wood et al. (1985), Andersen and Bollerslev (1997) and Bauwens and Giot (2001). We validate our theoretical results in extensive simulations, where we also examine the impact of a leverage effect through an asymmetric Hawkes-type process and different specifications of 4 MMN on the bias and the MSE of the RV estimator. Our empirical results show that, as predicted by our theory, the HTS scheme provides the most efficient RV estimates in the absence of noise. However, the HTS scheme is most sensitive to noise as its sampling times directly rely on absolute changes of the noisy price process. In contrast, the rBTS scheme is more robust to noise and is superior for the typical sampling frequencies between 1 and 5 minutes under noisy price processes. The rBTS scheme also clearly dominates a classical implementation of (intensity) BTS, different implementations of TTS and the baseline case of CTS. The empirical application considers 27 liquid stocks traded at the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). It provides clear empirical evidence for the benefits of using HTS and realized BTS for increasing the statistical quality of the RV estimator in terms of MSE and QLIKE loss in both an in-sample estimation and out-of-sample forecast environment based on the Heterogeneous Au- toRegressive (HAR) model of Corsi (2009). For the in-sample evaluation, we follow the method of Patton (2011a) that facilitates the empirical comparison of competing RV estimators, in our case computed from the different sampling schemes. The empirical results particularly stress the practical relevance of the HTS and the realized BTS scheme by showing their superiority in a model-free environment. The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the TTSV model and derive theoretical efficiency results for finite sampling frequencies for the RV estima- tor. Section 3 presents a comprehensive simulation study that analyses the performance of RV under different sampling schemes and Section 4 provides an empirical application to real data. We conclude in Section 5. Appendix A provides proofs for our main results. The supplemental material contains a comparison to discretized diffusions in Appendix B, additional finite sample theory in a setting where sampling can use information from the end of the trading day in Appendix C, and a specific comparison to the results of Oomen (2006) in Appendix D. All proofs—other than those in Appendix A—are collected in Appendix E. Appendix F discusses generalizations of some theoretical results to mildly dependent processes and Appendix G contains additional empirical results. 2 Theory This section introduces some preliminaries in Section 2.1 and presents the TTSV model in Sec- tion 2.2. Sections 2.3 and 2.4 establish finite sample efficiency results for the RV estimator, which is complemented by additional theory in Appendix C that allows for employing information from the entire trading day. 2.1 Preliminaries Throughout the paper, all random objects are defined on a filtered probability space (Ω,F,F,P) with filtrationF={F t}t≥0 that we specify in Assumption (1) below. If not stated otherwise, all (in)equalities of random variables are understood to hold almost surely. Let{P(t)} t≥0 denote the stochastic process representing the logarithmic price process of an asset, which we assume to be a continuous-time stochastic process that is right-continuous with left limits. We sometimes abuse notation and simply writeP(t), which we also do for other stochastic processes. We 5 denote the quadratic variation of the processP(t) over [0,T] by [P] T . For 0≤s≤t, we define the logarithmic return over the interval [s,t] by r(s,t) :=P(t)−P(s). Then, the (model free)spot (or instantaneous) varianceof the logarithmic pricePat timetis 2 σ2(t) := lim δ↓0 1 δ E  r2(t,t+δ) Ft  .(1) In this paper, we are interested in estimating the price variability within a given time pe- riod [0,T], where we focus on the case ofTbeing one trading day, i.e., the daily return is given byr daily :=r(0,T) =P(T)−P(0). Here, this price variability is measured by theinte- grated variance(IV) associated with the logarithmic price processP(t) over the interval [0,T] (Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard, 2002; Andersen et al., 2009). Formally, the IV is defined as IV (0,T) := Z T 0 σ2(r)dr.(2) Proposition 3 below provides a more formal justification for the IV as our object of interest given that in expectation, it equals the variance of the daily asset return. We primarily focus on the specific choice of asampling schemefor sparsely sampled intraday returns for estimating IV. Given a filtrationG={G t}t≥0 withG t⊂F t, aG-adapted stopping time sampling schemeτis a sequence of increasingG-adapted stopping times on [0,T], τ={τ 0,τ 1,...}⊆[0,T],(3) such thatτj−1≤τ j for allj∈N. We requireτ 0 = 0 and that for almost allω∈Ω there exists an n(ω)∈Nsuch thatτ n(ω)(ω) =Tand thatτ j−1 <τ j for allj≤n(ω). We give specific examples howτcan be chosen in Section 2.4. Given the sampling timesτ, the corresponding intraday returns are rj :=r(τ j−1,τj) =P(τ j)−P(τ j−1), j= 1,...,M,(4) where we associate to a sampling schemeτthe (random) number of intraday returnsM= M(τ) = inf{n:τ n =T}. Based on theM∈Nintraday returnsr j from the gridτ, we follow Andersen and Bollerslev (1998), among many others, and define therealized variance(RV) estimator as RV(τ) := MX j=1 r2 j,(5) where we stress the dependence on the employed sampling scheme with the argumentτ. 2We consider spot variance incalendar time(instead of some intrinsic time) as this conveniently allows to link it to the trading intensity and tick variance as later formalized in Proposition 2. 6 2.2 The Tick-Time Stochastic Volatility Model We model the ticks and log-prices based on a diffusionBwith stochastic tick varianceς, whereB is time-changed by a jump processN(e.g., Poisson- or Hawkes-type) that models the individual ticks. We refer to this as the Tick-Time Stochastic Volatility (TTSV) model, P(t) =P(0) + Z t 0 ς(r)dU(r),(6) fort∈[0,T], whereU(r) =B(N(r)). Formally, we build the model on the following assumption: Assumption (1).We assume that there exists a filtered probability space (Ω,F,F,P), where the filtration3 F={F t}t∈[0,T] satisfies the usual assumptions (completeness and right-continuity), and there exist: (a) a counting process{N(t)} t∈[0,T] , which is anF-adapted jump process with a scalar, positive andF-predictable intensity process{λ(t)} t∈[0,T] that is left-continuous with right-hand limits and Rt 0λ(r)dr<∞a.s. for allt∈[0,T]; (b) a tick volatility process{ς(t)} t∈[0,T] that is a positive,F-predictable and left-continuous process with right-hand limits; (c) and a (not necessarilyF-adapted) Brownian motion{B(s)} s≥0 such that{B(N(t))} t∈[0,T] isF-adapted and such that for any jump pointt i = inf{t≥0,N(t) =i},i∈N, the increment of the Brownian motionU i :=B(N(t i))−B(N(t i−1)) is independent ofF ti−, i.e.,U i|Fti−∼N(0,1). (d) Moreover, the momentsE RT 0 ς2(r)dN(r) 2 andE  [P] 2 T  are finite, where the quadratic variation of a pure jump process is the sum of the squared increments, [P]t :=P 0≤ti≤t(∆Pti)2. The TTSV model provides a joint model for the tick arrivalsN(t) together with the log- price processP(t) that can capture both, time-varying, stochastic trading intensity and tick variance patterns. At the same time,P(t) is a semi-martingale as a time-changed diffusion model (Monroe, 1978; Liptser and Shiryayev, 2012). In fact, Proposition 1 shows thatPis an actual martingale, complying with the regularly imposed assumption of efficient markets (Delbaen and Schachermayer, 1994). Proposition 1.Under Assumption (1), the TTSV price processP, as defined in (6), is an F-martingale. In the TTSV model, we assume to observe the jump timesN(t) together with the logarithmic prices at these times. We treat the jump timesN(t) as transaction times, whereas they could also be other measures of interest such as quote arrivals, volume-related quantities or aggregates of these measures. The “intensity” processesλ(t) andς(t) are latent, and can for example 3The minimal filtration that satisfies Assumption (1) is the completed right-continuous version ofF ∗ = σ(N(s),λ(s),ς(s),B(N(s)),0≤s≤t) t∈[0,T] . 7 P(t) N(t) t1 t2 t3 t4 t5 t6 t7 t8 t9 t10τ0 τ1 τ2 τ3 t1 t2 t3 t4 t5 t6 t7 t8 t9 t10τ0 τ1 τ2 τ3 0 2 4 6 8 10 5.1550 5.1555 5.1560 5.1565 5.1570 Time Value Figure 1: Illustration of the arrival and sampling times in the TTSV model: The upper panel shows the evolution of the jump processN(t) generating the ticks (arrival times)t i. The lower panel shows the log-price processP(t), which exhibits price jumps at the tickst i ofN(t) and is constant in between. The vertical red lines represent the sampling times of an exemplary sampling schemeτ(that does not have to be equidistant in calendar time), and the red squares show the resampled prices based on the previous tick method. be modeled as standard Itˆ o diffusions, or Hawkes process type intensities; see Dahlhaus and Tunyavetchakit (2016, Example 2.3) for a range of possible specifications. 4 In the general form of Assumption (1), the transaction timesN(t) can follow a general jump process with intensityλ(t), which implies thatE  N(t)−N(s)|F s  =E Rt s λ(r)dr|F s  holds a.s. for all 0≤s≤t≤T, i.e., the expected number of arrivals in the period [s,t] is char- acterized by the accumulated intensity Rt s λ(r)dr; see Bauwens and Hautsch (2009) for details. Besides doubly stochastic (and non-homogeneous) Poisson processes that are characterized by independent arrivals, Assumption (1) also allows more general intensity-based models such as autoregressive intensity processes (Hamilton and Jorda, 2002) or self-exciting Hawkes processes (Hawkes, 1971), which can additionally capture the observed dependence and memory of the trade arrivals on financial markets. Assumption (1) also allows for capturing “leverage effects” as the jump intensityλand the tick-volatilityςcan depend on (the sign of) past price changes. Part (c) of Assumption (1) governs the price changes at the observed jumps. It essentially rules out anticipative dependence of the calendar-time processesλorςonB, in the sense that the path of the intensities following a jump point is independent of the next increment of the Brownian motion. Assumption (1) further contains moment conditions, which ensure that the IV and the integrated quarticity (IQ) in Theorem 5 below are finite. 4The price process in (6) could further be augmented with a finite-variation predictable mean component (Andersen et al., 2003). However, we follow Oomen (2006) (see also Hansen and Lunde (2006), A¨ ıt-Sahalia et al. (2011), among others) and set it to zero for simplicity. 8 Morning Afternoon 09:45 09:46 09:47 09:48 15:57 15:58 15:59 16:00 5.1545 5.1550 5.1555 5.1560 5.1565 5.1545 5.1550 5.1555 5.1560 5.1565 Time Log−price Figure 2: IBM transaction log-prices on May 1, 2015 for three minutes in the morning between 9:45am and 9:48am and in the afternoon between 15:57pm and 16:00pm. We observe a clear pattern of much more ticks in the afternoon and a much higher “tick-by-tick” variance in the morning that is typical for stocks traded at the NYSE. In the following, we provide a detailed empirical motivation of the TTSV model: The jump processN(t) models the ticks (i.e., the transaction or quote times) through itsarrival times ti,i≥0, that satisfyt i∈[0,∞) andt i < ti+1 for alli= 1,...,N(T). As illustrated by the blue points and black lines in the upper panel of Figure 1, the sample path ofN(t) is a right- continuous step function with jumps of magnitude one at the arrival timest i such thatN(t) =i fort∈[t i,ti+1). The stochastic intensity processλ(t) ofN(t) is motivated by the empirical observation that the amount of trading varies drastically throughout the day. E.g., at the NYSE, there is a much higher trading activity just before market closure than throughout the rest of the day. Figure 2 shows the log-prices of the IBM stock traded on the NYSE on May 1, 2015 between 9:45am and 9:48am and between 15:57pm and 16:00pm. We see that there are drastically more trades in the afternoon than in the morning, which is caused by many traders closing their position due to various reasons, including settlement rules of exchange markets (Admati and Pfleiderer, 1988). Figure 3 shows a non-parametric estimate of the trading intensityλ(t) for the IBM stock (details are provided in the figure caption), which confirms this finding. AsN(t) is piecewise constant between its arrival timest i, it holds for all 0≤s<t≤Tthat P(t) =P(s) + X s<ti≤t ς(ti)Ui,whereU i =B(N(t i))−B(N(t i−1)),(7) where the indexiinU i corresponds to thei’th observed tickt i. As graphically illustrated with the blue dots and black lines in the lower panel of Figure 1, this implies that the log-priceP(t) exhibits jumps of magnitudeς(t i)Ui at the arrivals ofN(t), and it is constant in between. The stochastic tick volatilityς(t) is essential for the model as one observes empirically varying tick volatility patterns throughout the day on financial markets. E.g., Figure 2 shows that at the NYSE, the tick variance of the log-price changes is much higher in the morning than in the afternoon, which is illustrated more formally by the nonparametric estimate of the tick variance ς2(t) in Figure 3. This finding is mainly caused by traders who trade overnight information in the beginning of the day, which triggers large oscillations in the transaction prices and thus, a 9 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 10:00 11:00 12:00 13:00 14:00 15:00 16:00 Time Relative value Measure Tick intensity λ(t) Tick variance ς2(t) Spot variance σ2(t) Figure 3: Estimates of the trading intensityλ(t), tick varianceς 2(t) and spot varianceσ 2(t), averaged over all trading days in the year 2018. We use the nonparametric kernel estimators forλ(t) andς 2(t) of Dahlhaus and Tunyavetchakit (2016), that we augment with a “mirror image” bias correction of Diggle and Marron (1988), similar to Oomen (2006, equation (17)). Following Proposition 2, the estimate of the spot varianceσ 2(t) is obtained as the product of the estimatedλ(t) andς 2(t). high tick volatility that calms down until lunch time (Dahlhaus and Neddermeyer, 2014). Conditionally on an arrivalt i, the price changeς(t i)Ui is normally distributed with mean zero and varianceς 2(ti), hence justifying the termtick variance. Generalizing the conditional Gaussianity ofς(t i)Ui in (7) might be an interesting avenue for future research. Nevertheless, due to the stochastic nature of the processesN(t),λ(t) andς(t), the unconditional distribution of the log-prices in the TTSV model is much more general than Gaussian. Proposition 2.Let Assumption (1) hold and assume that for eacht∈[0,T] there exists an ϵ >0 such thatς 2(r)λ(r) is bounded for allr∈[t,t+ϵ] by a random variableZ(t) with E[Z(t)]<∞. Then, the spot variance as given in (1) satisfies the following decomposition, σ2(t) =ς 2(t+)λ(t+),(8) where, for any processX, we denote the right-limit asX(t+) := lim δ↓0X(t+δ). Proposition 2, which is similarly stated in Dahlhaus and Tunyavetchakit (2016), shows that in the TTSV model, the spot variance at timetconveniently decomposes into the (right-hand limits of the) trading intensityλ(t) and the tick variance of the price jumpsς 2(t), hence combining the two different sources of intraday variation as illustrated, for example, in Figure 3. Together with the general definition of IV in (2), Proposition 2 shows that the IV of the log-price following the TTSV model is given by IV(0,T) = Z T 0 σ2(r)dr= Z T 0 ς2(r+)λ(r+)dr= Z T 0 ς2(r)λ(r)dr.(9) The use of IV as the measure of (daily) return variability in the TTSV model is further motivated by the following result. 10 Proposition 3.Under Assumption 1, it holds that E  r2 daily−IV (0,T)  = 0. Hence, under the TTSV model, the variance of the daily return equals the expected IV, which shows that (estimates of) the IV can be interpreted as a measure of daily return variation, similar to classical diffusion processes (Andersen et al., 2003, Corollary 1 and Theorem 2). For our purposes of analyzing the efficiency of alternative sampling schemes, the TTSV model is particularly useful as it disentangles the time-varying trading activity via thetrading intensityλ(t), and the time-varyingtick variancethroughς 2(t). As their intraday dynamics differ markedly in empirical data as shown in Figures 2 and 3, the separate model components forλ(t) andς(t) are crucial for some of the results of this paper. The TTSV model is closely related to many classical models. For deterministic arrival timest 1,...,t N and a constant tick volatilityς(t), it nests a simple Gaussian random walk in transaction time. Furthermore, the compound Poisson process used by Oomen (2005, 2006) arises whenN(t) follows a doubly stochastic Poisson process and whenς(t) is constant. While this setup allows for modeling tick arrivals as a separate component, it models all time variation in volatility through fluctuations in the arrival intensity. This restriction to a constant tick volatility is a clear limitation. Lastly, a standard modelling choice is the continuous-time diffusion (Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard, 2002) (without drift and jump terms) dP(t) =σ diff(t)dB(t), t∈[0,T],(10) which is, compared to the TTSV model, not based on a time-change. In order to explicitly model the stochastic tick arrivals within these diffusion models, Fukasawa (2010); Jacod (2018); Jacod et al. (2017, 2019) apply discretization schemes, where the tick arrivals (or alternatively, the sampling points) are modeled as random times at which one observes (a possibly generalized version of) the diffusion in (10). Similar to the TTSV model, the observed prices are then mod- eled as a pure jump process with random arrival times, however, with the conceptual difference that the former applies atime-changewith a jump process while the latter usesdiscretization. We provide a detailed comparison of the TTSV model to these discretization schemes in Appendix B. While both modeling approaches have their individual merits and limitations, we use the TTSV model in this paper for the following reasons: First, the TTSV model offers an inherent and transparent decomposition of the spot variance into the empirically relevant components of sampling intensity and tick variance, which directly enables the derivation of particularly insightful results for classically used sampling schemes. Second, the simplicity of the TTSV model facilitates the derivation of finite sample MSE results—albeit partly under strong independence assumptions. While such results may also be attainable with discretized diffusion models, we conjecture that doing so would be considerably more involved. Third, as illustrated in Appendix B, the novel realized BTS scheme does not arise as naturally within the discretized diffusion framework. 11 2.3 Efficient Sampling In this section, we derive the bias and MSE of the RV estimator based on general sampling schemesτwith a fixed (expected) amount of intraday returns. Our main target is to find an optimal sampling scheme that is efficient in the sense of attaining the smallest MSE among a class of unbiased sampling schemes. Theorem 4.Under Assumption (1) and for anyF-adapted sampling schemeτ, the RV estimator in (5) is an unbiased estimator for the IV: E  RV(τ)  =E  IV(0,T)  .(11) As the RV estimator is unbiased foranyF-adapted sampling scheme, there is no theoretical distinction between different sampling schemesτin terms of a bias. We, however, continue by showing that the choice ofτentails a difference in the estimation efficiency. To this end, we derive a closed-form expression for the finite-sample MSE of the RV estimator depending on the sampling gridτ. Theorem 5.Under Assumption (1) and for anyF-adapted sampling schemeτ, the MSE of the RV estimator is given by E h  RV(τ)−IV(0,T) 2i = 2 3 E   MX j=1 r4(τj−1,τj)   +E[IQ(0,T)],(12) where IQ(0,T) = RT 0 ς4(r)λ(r)dris the integrated quarticity (IQ) of the TTSV model. 5 Theorem 5 provides a finite sample result for the MSE of anyF-adapted sampling schemeτ under general dependence assumptions that for example, allow for Hawkes-type processes includ- ing a leverage effect; see the discussion after Assumption (1). In (12), the MSE is bounded from below byE[IQ(0,T)], which merely depends on the underlying process but is invariant to the employed sampling scheme. Most important for our purposes is the term 2 3 E hPM j=1r4(τj−1,τj) i , which depends on the fourth power of the returns, sampled according toτ. By applying the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, this term is minimized by a sampling scheme that aims at homog- enizing the absolute values of the intraday returns—as e.g., HTS. As the MSE expression (12) in Theorem 5 is only shown to hold for anyF-adapted sampling schemeτ, it is unclear how a feasible andF-adapted scheme could be set up in practice that minimizes (12)exactly, especially as the TTSV price process is discontinuous.6 We will later consider feasible andF-adapted sam- pling schemes that aim at making intraday returns as homogeneous as possible—either in terms of their magnitude or in quantities related to their second moment—depending on the setting. 5We call IQ(s,t) = Rt s ς 4(r)λ(r)drthe integrated quarticity of the TTSV model as its definition is specific for the TTSV model. If, instead, the integrated quarticity would be defined based on the spot variance as Rt s σ4(r)dr, this would result in a slightly different notion of Rt s ς 4(r)λ2(r)drby using Proposition 2. 6A trivial—but clearly notF-adapted—approach to minimizing (12) for a givenMwould be to allocateτ among all observed tick times so as to minimize the sum of the fourth power of the resulting returns. However, such a sampling scheme would presumably not yield an unbiased RV estimator, rendering the MSE expression (12) inapplicable. Moreover, it would be computationally very demanding, particularly on days with many ticks and for large values ofM. 12 Theorem 5 applies to a very general class of sampling schemes that can access the history of all the processes driving the prices in the TTSV model. In the following, we also consider subclasses of sampling schemes that use less information about the price process and, in particular, are notallowed to depend directly on the observed prices. The intuitive reason is that the actual price observations are affected by MMN, which distorts the MSE result in Theorem 5. As we will see in our simulations, this distortion is particularly severe for sampling schemes as HTS that directly rely on the observed high-frequency prices. Therefore, we define the following two restricted filtrations that determine the precise infor- mation that (alternative) sampling schemes can use: Fλ,ς,N :={F λ,ς,N t }t∈[0,T],andF λ,ς :={F λ,ς t }t∈[0,T], whereF λ,ς,N t =σ   λ(s),ς(s),N(s); 0≤s≤t  andF λ,ς t =σ   λ(s),ς(s); 0≤s≤t  . By considering sampling schemes adapted to the filtrationsFλ,ς,N orFλ,ς, we ensure that the possibly noisy price observations do not directly determine the sampling times. In theF λ,ς,N -adapted case, we allow for a dependence of the sampling times on the realized tick pattern of the particular day. We refer to the case ofF λ,ς,N -adapted sampling as “realized” or “jump-based” sampling and to the case ofF λ,ς-adapted as “intensity-based” sampling. We continue to investigate the MSE for the specific classes of sampling schemes introduced above. For this, we first state the two following corollaries, which express the MSE for sampling schemesτthat are adapted to the reduced filtrationsF λ,ς,N andF λ,ς. The first corollary states that the MSE depends on the realized IV (rIV), which we define as rIV(s,t) := Z t s ς2(r)dN(r) = X s≤ti≤t ς2(ti),(13) and interpret as a jump-process based and hence “realized” version of the classical IV given in (2) and (9). Corollary 6.Under Assumption (1), and given thatU 2 i is independent of the paths ofλ,ς, andN, the MSE of the RV estimator for anyF λ,ς,N -adapted sampling schemeτis E  (RV(τ)−IV(0,T)) 2 = 2E   MX j=1 rIV(τj−1,τj)2   +E[IQ(0,T)] +E[R(τ)],(14) where R(τ) := 4 MX j=1   (Pτj−Pτj−1)2−([P] τj−[P] τj−1)  rIV(τj−1,τj).(15) The MSE formula from Corollary 6 provides intuition on the relative efficiency ofF λ,ς,N - adapted sampling schemes: InvokingE[R(τ)] = 0, a condition that holds under independence assumptions that are formalized in Theorem 8 below, the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality directly implies that the MSE can be minimized by specifyingτsuch that rIV(τ j−1,τj) is as homogeneous as possible (in expectation). Notice that the additional requirement in Corollaries 6 and 7 that theU 2 i are independent of the entire paths ofλ,ςandNstill allows for leverage effects, as 13 the jump process and the tick variance can depend on the past sign ofU i. In Appendix F, we provide informal theoretical arguments that, under process dependencies that decay fast enough over time (as in Hawkes processes), the remainder termE[R(τ)] is approximately equal for all sampling schemes, given that sparse sampling is employed. We note here already that our simulations confirm this finding. Corollary 7.Under Assumption (1), and given thatU 2 i is independent of the paths ofλ,ς, andN, the MSE of the RV estimator for anyF λ,ς-adapted sampling schemeτis E  (RV(τ)−IV(0,T)) 2 = 2E   MX j=1 IV(τj−1,τj)2   + 3E[IQ(0,T)] +E[R(τ)] +E eR(τ)  ,(16) whereR(τ) is as in (15) and for eN:= n N(t)− Rt 0λ(r)dr o t∈[0,T] , we define eR(τ) := 4 MX j=1 IV(τj−1,τj)E "Z τj τj−1 ς2(r)deN(r) Fλ,ς τj # .(17) Corollary 7 shows that restricting attention toF λ,ς-adapted sampling schemesτleads to a similar formula as in Corollary 6. However, efficiency is now characterized by homogeneity of IV(τj−1,τj) (opposed to therealizedIV in Corollary 6), and the result is subject to the further remainder term eR(τ). The following theorem summarizes these results by imposing conditions under which the remainder termsR(τ) and eR(τ) vanish in expectation. Theorem 8.For a given constant M=E[M(τ)]∈N, we consider sampling schemesτwith respect to different filtrations. Under Assumption (1), the MSE of the RV estimator is minimized (a) among allF-adapted sampling schemes, by a sampling scheme such that|r(τ j−1,τj)|=q E[IV(0,T)]  M; (b) among allF λ,ς,N -adapted sampling schemes, by a sampling scheme such that rIV(τj−1,τj) = E[IV(0,T)]  Munder the additional assumption thatBis independent fromλ,ςandN; (c) among allF λ,ς-adapted sampling schemes, by a sampling scheme such that IV(τ j−1,τj) = E[IV(0,T)]  Munder the additional assumptions thatBis independent fromλ,ςandN and thatNis a doubly stochastic Poisson process with intensityλ. Roughly speaking, all three parts of Theorem 8 suggesthomogenizingthe sampled returns. These parts mainly differ by the quantity that is homogenized, which will naturally be contained in the filtration the sampling schemes are adapted to. It is important to note that in all three parts of Theorem 8, adaptiveness to a certain filtration is required. This makes it unclear how the condition of homogenizing returns can be satisfiedexactlyin practice, rendering these lower bounds infeasible in implementation. In Section 2.4, we therefore consider feasible sampling schemes that satisfy the homogeneity conditions approximately. Theorem 8 (a) establishes that the most general finite sample efficiency is achieved when sampling times are chosen such that the absolute return values coincide throughout a trading 14 day, hence pertaining to the HTS scheme. Parts (b) and (c) examine settings where the price information is not used for the construction of the sampling times. These restricted settings are practically relevant, as the observed high-frequency returns are regularly contaminated by MMN, which can make their use in constructing the sampling times problematic as will be illustrated in our simulations. On a technical level, the additional independence assumptions in parts (b) and (c) ensure that the remainder termsR(τ) and eR(τ) from Corollaries 6 and 7 vanish in expectation. As exemplified in Appendix F, we conjecture that these remainder terms have a minor dependence on the employed sampling schemes, suggesting that the efficiency results of parts (b) and (c) also continue to hold for processes with mild dependencies, as reflected in our simulations. While Theorem 8 describes idealized conditions for efficient sampling, the following Sec- tion 2.4 discusses their practical implementation. 2.4 Sampling Schemes Most practically relevant sampling schemesτthat aim to homogenize a certain quantity, as formalized through Theorem 8, can be specified based on a (weakly) increasing and possibly stochasticaccumulated sampling intensityprocess{Φ(t)} t∈[0,T] . For example, for the classical CTS scheme, Φ(t) =tequals the identity. In contrast, different variants of transaction- and business-time sampling are based on combinations of the accumulated trading intensity, tick variance and the observed tick arrivals. If Φ is differentiable on (0,T), its derivative is denoted byϕand has the interpretation of a sampling intensity. Given an accumulated sampling intensity process Φ, the sampling timesτ j,j= 0,...,Mare chosen as the generalized inverse of Φ, τj = inf  t∈[0,T] : Φ(t)≥j·δ ,(18) for some possibly stochastic thresholdδ >0. This ensures that we sampleequidistantly in the accumulated sampling intensitywithτ 0 = 0 andτ M =T. 7 We then obtain the prices at sampling timesτ j with the “previous tick method” that is consistent with the TTSV modeling assumption, as illustrated with the red squares in the lower panel of Figure 1. In this paper, we focus on the following common sampling schemes that arise by choosing different measures for the sampling intensity: 1.Calendar Time Sampling (CTS), for which Φ CTS(t) =t, such that we have a constant sampling intensityϕ CTS(t) = 1. CTS returns homogenize calendar time between sampling pointsτ CTS j =jT/Mforj= 0,...,M, and its simple implementation makes it the most widespread sampling scheme in finance. It, however, neglects any information on intraday trading and volatility patterns. 2.Intensity Transaction Time Sampling (iTTS), for which the data is sampled equidis- tantly in thetrading intensityϕ iTTS(t) =λ(t) of the TTSV model, i.e., Φ iTTS(t) = Λ(0,t), 7If Φ(t) is continuous, (18) implies that Φ(τ j)−Φ(τ j−1) =jδ−(j−1)δ=δis constant for allj= 1,...,M. For the discontinuous versions of Φ(t) (such as sampling everyK∈Ntransactions), this only holds approximately. 15 where Λ(s,t) := Rt s λ(r)dr. Sampling according to iTTS homogenizes the returns according to the trading intensity. 3.Realized Transaction Time Sampling (rTTS), for which the data is sampled equidis- tantly in theobserved number of transactions, such that ΦrTTS(t) =N(t). This implies that we sample everyN(τ rTTS j )−N(τ rTTS j−1 ) =δobserved ticks (given thatδis integer-valued) such that rTTS homogenizes returns with respect to the observed transactions. 4.Intensity Business Time Sampling (iBTS), for which the data is sampled equidis- tantly in integratedspot varianceϕ iBTS(t) =σ 2(t) =ς 2(t)λ(t), i.e., we choose Φ iBTS(t) = IV(0,t). Hence, iBTS homogenizes the returns according to the spot variance. 5.Realized Business Time Sampling (rBTS), where the data is sampled equidistantly in thetick variance-weighted observed number of transactions. In particular, we choose ΦrBTS(t) = P ti≤tς2(ti) = Rt 0ς2(r)dN(r), such that the returns are (approximately) ho- mogenized with respect torealizedIV. While CTS is deterministic, iTTS and iBTS areFλ,ς-adapted, and rTTS and rBTS areFλ,ς,N - adapted, at least given that a deterministic thresholdδis used. For a practical implementation of iTTS, iBTS, and rBTS, we have to estimate the intensity processesλand/orς, which we do by averaging over past trading days. The above sampling schemesτresult inM=M(τ) = Φ(T)/δsampled returns per day, which is in general a stochastic quantity. In practice, it is, however, often desirable to fixM for the following reasons: First, fixingMallows for a convenient comparison across sampling schemes. We will do this later on in simulations and the empirical application. Second, as argued in Zhang et al. (2005), among many others, the value ofMis the main driver of the bias of the RV estimator in the presence of MMN. By fixingM, we particularly “stabilize” the effect of noise on the RV estimator, as this prevents the RV from being more affected by noise on higher volatility days than on lower volatility days. In empirical work, one often deviates from the stopping time assumption and fixesMby choosingδ= Φ(T)/M. In practice, when estimating RV at the end of a trading day, the information Φ(T) is observable or can be estimated. Formally, the sampling schemes are no longer adapted to the filtrationsF λ,ς orF λ,ς,N , but rather to their enlargements byσ(Φ(T)), where Φ(T) corresponds to the given sampling scheme. While the theoretical results of Section 2.3 do not formally apply to that setting, we show in simulations (see Figure G.5) that the effect is negligible. Moreover, Appendix C derives finite sample theory with results analogous to cases (b) and (c) of Theorem 8, where the sampling times are allowed to depend on information up to timeT. We finally describe the HTS scheme that is already analyzed in Fukasawa (2010); Vetter and Zwingmann (2017); Fukasawa and Rosenbaum (2012), and which isnotbased on an accumulated intensity process: 6.Hitting Time Sampling (HTS), where the data is sampled whenever the observed price change exceeds a fixed thresholdδ∈R +, i.e,τ 0 = 0 and, given someτj−1∈[0,T] forj≥1, 16 we set τj = inf  t∈[0,T] :|P(t)−P(τ j−1)|≥δ .(19) This results in a random numberM=M δ of samples per day, and we setτ M =T. HTS homogenizes the absolute return values, at least approximately for the TTSV model, as the discontinuity of the price process does in general not allow to find times where |P(τj)−P(τ j−1)|=δholds exactly; see Figure G.1. HTS is model-free and does not require estimation of any underlying intensity processes. Reconsidering our main result, Theorem 8, we see that HTS is tailored to the most general case (a), where the absolute return values should coincide. Similarly, rBTS aims at homoge- nizing rIV, which is the most efficient among theF λ,ς,N -adapted sampling schemes, and iBTS homogenizes IV, which is the most efficient among theF λ,ς-adapted sampling schemes. It is important to note that Theorem 8 suggestsidealizedsampling schemes, which are, how- ever, not necessarily feasible due to the discontinuity of the underlying processes in the TTSV model as well as in practice. For HTS, this leads to a common “overshooting” effect, where the absolute returns are only guaranteed to be larger thanδ. This overshooting effect is particu- larly pronounced for small values ofδand for days with little trading activity; see Figure G.1. Although otherF-adapted schemes—such as sampling whenever the price process crosses an equidistant grid, ignoring repeated crossings of the same grid level—could also homogenize ab- solute returns, we find their performance similar to HTS and therefore do not pursue them further. For HTS, it is unfortunately not possible to fix the number of samplesM, which is often desirable, as argued above. 8 Through Theorem 8, it is only feasible to fix the expected number of samples Mby choosingδ 2 =E[IV(0,T)]  M, at least in the absence of MMN, by ignoring the overshooting effect, and by estimatingE[IV(0,T)], e.g., by a standard RV estimator based on CTS returns. Figure 4 shows the price path of IBM on May 1, 2015, with estimates of the sampling times τwithM= 26 under the four sampling schemes CTS, rTTS, rBTS and HTS, presented in the four panels. The figure reveals a substantial variation of the sampling times across the sampling schemes: While the sampling points are equidistant in time for CTS, we sample more often in the afternoon with rTTS, but more often in the morning with rBTS and HTS. In particular, the empirically observed difference between rTTS and rBTS highlights the importance and necessity of a refined price model, such as the TTSV model, that can separately accommodate the different intraday patterns of the trading intensity and tick variance. Remark 9.The efficiency results of Theorem 8 (b) and (c) extend the theoretical findings of Oomen (2006, Proposition 1), who considers sampling based on observed and expected trans- actions in a restricted version of the TTSV price process based on a doubly stochastic Poisson process with a constant tick variance. Disregarding whether sampling schemes are allowed to use the information Φ(T) (also see Appendix C), the sampling schemes of Oomen (2006) are 8Even with a large number of values forδand trial and error, it might be impossible to obtain certain values ofMgiven an observed price path. 17 HTS rBTS rTTS CTS 10:00 11:00 12:00 13:00 14:00 15:00 16:00 172.5 173.0 173.5 174.0 172.5 173.0 173.5 174.0 172.5 173.0 173.5 174.0 172.5 173.0 173.5 174.0 Time Price Sampling Scheme CTS rTTS rBTS HTS Figure 4: IBM log-price on May 1, 2015 together with the CTS, rTTS, rBTS and HTS sampling schemes for M= 26, i.e., corresponding to intrinsic time 15 minute returns. For the rBTS scheme, we estimate the tick variance ς 2(·) as the average of the estimates over the past 50 days using the estimator of Dahlhaus and Tunyavetchakit (2016). For HTS, we choose the thresholdδ= 0.00158 that happens to result in exactly 26 sampled observations on the given day. closely related to ourF λ,ς,N -adapted sampling. In summary, Oomen (2006) finds that in his model, sampling with respect to the observed transactions (i.e., rTTSb= rBTS) is more efficient than sampling with respect to the sampling intensity that represents the expected number of transactions (i.e., iTTSb= iBTS). This finding is consistent with the results of our Theorem 8 (b) and furthermore, with Theorem C.2 and Corollary C.3 in Appendix C, where we thoroughly illustrate the comparison for the setting where information on Φ(T) is used for sampling. 9 9The past literature on sampling schemes often uses inconsistent terminologies, which requires special care when comparing the results among different papers. E.g., Oomen (2006) refers to BTS as sampling with respect to the “expected number of transactions” and to TTS as sampling with respect to the “realized number of transactions”, which matches our definitions of iTTS and rTTS, respectively. Furthermore, Griffin and Oomen (2008) differentiate between the tick and transaction time sampling, where the former samples with respect to transactions with non-zero price changes. 18 3 Simulation Study We now compare the statistical properties of the RV estimator in (5) based on different sampling schemes in simulations under general (leverage-type) process and noise specifications. In addition to validating our theoretical derivations, the aim of the simulation study is to analyze the impact of MMN on the sampling schemes and to quantify the efficiency gains ofintrinsic timesampling. We simulateD= 5000 days withT= 23400 (seconds) from the TTSV price process dP(t) =ς(t)dB(N(t)), t∈[0,T],(20) where we distinguish the following two settings. In the first specification, which we denote as the “independent TTSV process”,N(t) is a doubly stochastic Poisson process independent ofB. For the underlying intensities, we use the diffusive specifications, λ(t) =λ det(t)cλ exp   0.01λ∗(t)− ¯λ∗ ,wheredλ ∗ (t) =−0.0002λ∗(t)dt+dB 1(t),(21) ς(t) =ς det(t)c−1/2 λ exp   0.005ς∗(t)−¯ς∗ ,wheredς ∗ (t) =−0.0002ς∗(t)dt+dB 2(t),(22) fort∈[0,T], whereB 1 andB 2 (andB) are independent Brownian motions. The processes λ(t) andς(t) in (21)–(22) consist of deterministic componentsλ det(t) andς det(t) that are the same for every simulated day and give the processes a common characteristic shape, and the multiplicative stochastic diffusionsλ ∗(t) andς ∗(t) that add some day-by-day randomness. We obtain the deterministic componentsλ det(t) andς det(t) as averages of their estimates using the estimators of Dahlhaus and Tunyavetchakit (2016), computed over all trading days of the IBM stock in the year 2018. The factorcλ∈{2000,8000,32000}/ RT 0 λdet(t)dtin (21) allows to control the amount of expected ticks per day to equal{2000,8000,32000}, while its inclusion in (22) preserves the expected IV, making it invariant to the choice ofc λ. The componentsλ ∗(t) andς ∗(t) are Ornstein-Uhlenbeck processes driven by independent Brownian motionsB i(t),i= 1,2. Their exponential transformations ensure the positivity of λ(t) andς(t), and the coefficients ¯λ∗ and ¯ς∗ are the daily averages (over allt∈[0,T]) of exp(0.01λ∗(t)) and exp(0.005ς∗(t)), respectively, such that the exponential functions have unit mean and serve as multiplicative noise. We use Euler discretizations with 23400 steps to simulate the diffusions in (20)–(22). For the second specification, which we denote as the “Hawkes-type TTSV process”,N(t) is a Hawkes process with intensityλ(t), which, along with the tick variance, is defined as follows λ(t) =λ det(t)ecλ exp   0.005λ∗(t)− ¯λ∗ + X tk<t νλ(t−t k),(23) ς(t) =ς det(t)ecςec−1/2 λ exp   0.0025ς∗(t)−¯ς∗ + X tk<t νς(t−t k).(24) These intensities extend the specifications in (21)–(22) by incorporating dependent Brownian motionsB 1 andB 2 with a correlation of 0.3 and, more importantly, by including summands corresponding to self-exciting Hawkes-type intensities with an additional leverage specification 19 Simulated price P(t) Simulated spot variance σ2(t) Simulated trading intensity λ(t) Simulated tick variance ς2(t) Independent TTSV processHawkes−type TTSV process 10:00 12:00 14:00 16:00 10:00 12:00 14:00 16:00 10:00 12:00 14:00 16:00 10:00 12:00 14:00 16:00 10:00 12:00 14:00 16:00 10:00 12:00 14:00 16:00 10:00 12:00 14:00 16:00 10:00 12:00 14:00 16:00 0e+00 3e−08 6e−08 9e−08 2e−08 4e−08 6e−08 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0e+00 1e−08 2e−08 3e−08 0e+00 2e−08 4e−08 6e−08 0.995 1.000 1.005 0.98 0.99 1.00 1.01 Time value Figure 5: Simulated paths of the asset price as described in Section 3, the spot varianceσ 2(t), the trading intensity λ(t), and the tick varianceς 2(t) for three exemplary days in green, orange and pink. The black lines show the (appropriately rescaled according to the expected behavior of the Hawkes processes) deterministic components λdet(t),ς 2 det(t) and the resultingσ 2 det(t) =λ det(t)ς 2 det(t) of our simulation setup that are obtained as the estimates from the IBM stock averaged over all tradings days in the year 2018. (Hawkes, 2018; Laub et al., 2021). For the sequence of jump timet 1,t 2,...of the processN, and ∆P(tk) =P(t k)−P(t k−1), we set νλ(t−t k) =    0.05¯λdet exp(−0.25¯λdet(t−t k)) if ∆P(t k)>0, 0.1¯λdet exp(−0.25¯λdet(t−t k)) if ∆P(t k)≤0, νς(t−t k) =    0 if ∆P(t k)>0, 0.1¯ςdet exp(−0.5(t−t k)) if ∆P(t k)≤0, where ¯λdet and ¯ςdet are the daily averages (over allt∈[0,T]) ofλ det(t) andς det(t), respectively. Here, past price changes have a self-exciting effect on the intensities that declines exponentially with the time elapsed since that observation,t−t k. Consistent with the classical leverage effect, positive price changes ∆P(tk)>0 at the previous tickst k have a different (weaker) impact than negative price changes ∆P(t k)≤0. As above, the constantecλ∈{2000,8000,32000}·(1−η)/ RT 0 λdet(t)dt, withη= 0.5(0.05 ¯λdet+ 0.1¯λdet)/(0.25¯λdet), controls the expected number of ticks per day; see Laub et al. (2021, Eq. (3.6)) for details. As we are not aware of a closed-form formula for the expectedς(t) to account for the self-exciting effect stemming from the latter sum in (24), we chooseec ς ≈ 0.855,0.837,0.741 for the settings of 2000,8000, and 32000 expected ticks, respectively. These choices ensure that all simulation processes have approximately the same expected IV while maintaining control over the expected number of ticks. For the Hawkes-type intensities in (23)– (24), we employ the simulation method described in Dassios and Zhao (2013, Algorithm 3.1). The parameters of the two simulation processes above are chosen to mimic real financial data, while also providing sufficient daily variation (across different days) in the simulated intensities 20 λ(t) andς(t), as can be seen from the three exemplary sample paths ofλ(t),ς 2(t),σ 2(t) and P(t) for both processes shown in Figure 5. For both simulation processes, we contaminate the log-price process with either i.i.d. or ARMA(1,1) noise with and without a diurnal heteroskedasticity component. Given the randomly simulated trading timest 1,...,t N(T) , we set eP(ti) =P(t i) +vi,(25) wherev i is independent of all other processes. For the i.i.d. noise, we letv i i.i.d.∼ N(0,σ 2 v) for i= 1,...,N(T), whereσ v =c N·1.2·10 −4. Here, the factor 1.2·10 −4 corresponds to the magnitude of the average tick standard deviation (for the standard setting of 8000 expected ticks per day), and the pre-factorc N∈{0,0.25,0.5,1}governs the relative noise level ranging from no noisec N = 0 to a high noise settingc N = 1, where the noise variance equals the average tick variance. In the results below, we refer to the factorc N by writing “100·c N% noise”. We emphasize that our “100% noise” setting is consistent with the findings and simulation setups of Jacod et al. (2017) and Li and Linton (2022). 10 For the ARMA noise process, we letv i =ε i + 0.5vi−1 + 0.5εi−1, whereε i∼N(0,σ 2 ε,i), and σ2 ε,i is either constant or follows a diurnal V-shaped piecewise linear function. The latter assigns double the variance at market opening and closing compared to the middle of the trading day, following Kalnina and Linton (2008) and Jacod et al. (2017). For each of the five choices inc N, we specifyσ 2 ε,i such that the average standard deviation ofv i over the day equalsc N·1.2·10 −4 to make it comparable in magnitude to the i.i.d. noise setting. For all sampling schemes except HTS, we fix the value ofMby using information on the respective accumulated intensity Φ(T) at the end of each trading day in (18). While this formally violates the stopping-time condition (3) in Theorems 5 and 8, we illustrate in Figure G.5 that the results are invariant to this violation. As fixingMis not possible for the HTS scheme, we fixδ, for which we choose a sequence of 17 values ranging from approximately 0.00022 to 0.0054. These values yield reasonable sampling frequencies allowing for a comparison with the other sampling schemes. Note that for HTS and a fixedδ, the number of samples per days is random and can vary substantially across trading days. While the CTS and rTTS schemes can be implemented straightforwardly, the iTTS, iBTS and rBTS schemes require the intensitiesλ(t),ς 2(t)λ(t), andς 2(t), respectively. For this, we use rolling averages over the past 50 trading days of the nonparametric estimators bλ(t), bλ(t) ˆς2(t) and ˆς2(t), respectively, which are proposed in Dahlhaus and Tunyavetchakit (2016), who also show consistency of these estimators under i.i.d. noise. Figure 6 shows the relative bias, i.e., the bias standardized by the respective daily value of IV, of the RV estimator for the considered sampling schemes, a range ofMvalues, and for the two process specifications 11 described above. Results are shown for four magnitudes of i.i.d. 10In more detail, our 100% i.i.d. noise setting employs a noise standard deviation ofσ v = 1.2·10 −4 for values of √ IV≈1.1·10 −2. In contrast, Jacod et al. (2017, Section 4.1) use the much higher estimated noise standard deviation from their Figure 9 of approximately 5.6·10 −4 for Citigroup data in the year 2011 in relation to values of √ IV of around 10 −2. Moreover, Li and Linton (2022, Figure 5) obtain noise standard deviation estimates of approximately{0.7,1.1}·10 −4 (obtained as the square root of the autocovariance function at lag 0) for the Coca-Cola stock in the year 2018, where the pre-factors{0.7,1.1}refer to two different noise estimators. 11For the Hawkes-type TTSV-process, we compare the estimated RV values against therealizedIV, which can 21 0% Noise 25% Noise 50% Noise 100% Noise Independent TTSV processHawkes−type TTSV process 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 0% 50% 100% 150% 0% 50% 100% 150% 0% 10% 20% 30% 0% 10% 20% 30% 0% 2% 4% 6% 0% 2% 4% 6% −0.9% −0.6% −0.3% 0.0% −0.4% 0.0% 0.4% 0.8% Amount of samples: M Relative Bias Sampling scheme CTS rTTS rBTS HTS Figure 6: Relative bias (in percent) of the RV estimator using different sampling schemes in color plotted against the (for HTS average) sampling frequenciesMon the horizontal axis. The plot columns refer to the noise magnitude described below (25) and the plot rows refer to the two process specifications described after (20). noise and values ofc λ andecλ that yield 8000 expected ticks per day. For the specification without noise, we can confirm the unbiasedness of the RV estimator of Theorem 4 for all sampling schemes and both process specifications. For an increasing amount of noise, the RV estimator exhibits the usual positive bias that grows with the sampling frequency. Notably, the HTS sampling scheme reacts more strongly to increasing noise levels, even for the lowest considered sampling frequencies, where the other sampling schemes are (almost) unbiased. Importantly, the results hold equivalently for both the independent and the Hawkes-type TTSV processes, thereby illustrating the broad applicability of Theorem 4. We continue to shed light on the increased bias under noise of the HTS scheme: Using the notationr(s,t) =P(t)−P(s) ander(s,t) = eP(t)− eP(s), heuristic arguments for the RV estimator under noise, fRV(τ), yield fRV(τ) = MX j=1 er(τj−1,τj)2 = MX j=1 r(τj−1,τj)2 + MX j=1 (vN(τj)−vN(τj−1))2 + 2 MX j=1 r(τj−1,τj)(vN(τj)−vN(τj−1)) = IV(0,T) +O P   M−1/2 + MX j=1 (vN(τj)−vN(τj−1))2 + 2 MX j=1 r(τj−1,τj)(vN(τj)−vN(τj−1)).(26) easily be computed as rIV(0,T) = RT 0 ς 2(r)dN(r) = P 0≤ti≤Tς 2(ti). In contrast, IV(0,T) = RT 0 ς 2(r)λ(r)dris much more difficult to approximate in our simulations due to the combination of a continuous time diffusion with the Hawkes-type jumps with exponential decays defined in (23)–(24). Note thatE[rIV(0,T)] =E[IV(0,T)]. 22 CTS rTTS rBTS HTS 25% Noise100% Noise 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 0e+00 3e−06 6e−06 9e−06 0.00000 0.00005 0.00010 0.00015 0.00020 Amount of samples: M Absolute Bias Bias approximation Covariance Term Variance Term Figure 7: Bias of the RV estimator in the independent TTSV process using different sampling schemes in the plot columns (and in color) plotted against the (for HTS average) sampling frequenciesMon the horizontal axis. The gray areas depict the “variance” and “covariance” terms from the bias approximation in (26), estimated from corresponding simulations. The plot rows refer to two different noise magnitudes described below (25). In the following, we ignore the asymptotically vanishingO P   M−1/2 term arising from a stan- dard central limit theorem for the (noise-free) RV estimator. Then, (26) indicates that the bias is driven by two terms: thevarianceof the noise differences at the sampling points and the covariancebetween the sampled (noise-free, efficient) returns and the noise differences. Figure 7 displays the bias for the four sampling schemes under the independent TTSV process with 8000 expected ticks per day and 25% or 100% i.i.d. noise. The colored lines represent the empirical bias obtained from the simulations, i.e., these lines match the respective lines from the second and fourth plot in the upper panel of Figure 6. The shaded gray areas correspond to the two approximation terms from (26), which help explain the sampling-scheme-dependent differences in bias. We estimate these terms from the simulated data according to the formulas in (26). While the variance term is of a similar magnitude for all sampling schemes, the HTS scheme stands out as the only scheme with a notably large positive covariance term—the main cause of HTS’s elevated bias, as we explain in the following. For CTS, rTTS, and rBTS, the efficient returnsr(τj−1,τj) are independent of the noise terms as the sampling points do not depend on the noise on the given day. In contrast, HTS determines the next sampling timeτ j as the first time pointt≥τ j−1, where the absolute noisy price change, er(τj−1,t) = r(τj−1,t) + (vN(t)−vN(τj−1)) exceedsδ. 12 Hence, given a fixed previous sampling pointτ j−1, HTS is particularly likely to sample at time pointsτ j for which the two quantities r(τj−1,τj) and (vN(τj)−vN(τj−1)) share the same sign, and hence accumulate in the noisy return er(τj−1,τj). This behavior results in a positive covariance term in (26) and in our simulations, 12As our price process in (6) (such as real prices at financial markets) generates discrete price paths that are only observed at the realizations ofN, the absolute values of the HTS returns slightly overshoots the thresholdδ as can be seen in Figure G.1. As shown in Theorem 4 that applies to arbitraryF-adapted sampling schemes, this should not be the underlying reason for the increased bias of HTS. 23 0% Noise 25% Noise 50% Noise 100% Noise Independent TTSV processHawkes−type TTSV process 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 0.0625 0.2500 1.0000 0.0625 0.2500 1.0000 Amount of samples: M Relative RMSE Sampling scheme CTS rTTS rBTS HTS Figure 8: Relative RMSE of the RV estimator using different sampling schemes in color plotted against the (for HTS average) sampling frequenciesMon the horizontal axis. The plot columns refer to the noise magnitude described below (25) and the plot rows refer to the two process specifications described after (20). we observe associated correlations ranging between 0.15 and 0.5 for HTS. Figure 8 presents the relative RMSE of the RV estimator13 for the different sampling schemes. As in Figure 6, we show results for both simulation processes and four noise levels in the subplots. In the absence of noise, HTS clearly yields the lowest RMSE across all sampling frequencies and both process specifications, as implied by Theorem 8. Furthermore, rBTS and rTTS also improve upon the classically used CTS scheme, in line with part (b) of Theorems 8. As the noise level increases, the RMSE rises across all sampling schemes and frequencies, reflecting the growing bias illustrated in Figures 6–7. The pronounced bias for the HTS scheme leads to the finding that, as the sampling frequency increases, rBTS yields RV estimates with lower RMSE than HTS. The crossing point at which rBTS becomes more efficient than HTS primarily depends on the noise magnitude and ranges fromM≈780 toM≈39, corresponding to sampling frequencies between 30 seconds and 10 minutes. Similar to the bias, the MSE results are very similar for the independent and the Hawkes-type TTSV processes, hence illustrating the broad applicability of Theorem 8. This observation also supports the insight from Appendix F that the remainder terms in Corollaries 6 and 7 are approximately equal across sampling schemes, even under mild dependence. Appendix G contains additional simulation results summarized as follows: First, Figure G.2 13The relative RMSE over the trading daysd= 1,...,Dis formally given as qPD d=1   RVd(τ)−IV d(0,T) 2 PD d=1 IVd(0,T) , ensuring that the square root and the normalization are taken “outside” of the MSE. This way, the plots indeed analyze the MSE while presenting results in a conveniently interpretable scale. 24 analyzes the effects of a varying expected number of{2000,8000,32000}trades per day while keeping the expected IV unchanged. Under noise, HTS performs worse as the number of ticks increases, which is mainly explained by an increased relationship of the noise relative toς(t): More ticks are generated through a higher level ofλ(t), which results in a lowerς(t) as the expected IV is held constant. Second, Figure G.3 illustrates that our results are robust to the standard and diurnal ARMA noise specifications. Third, Figure G.4 confirms parts (b) and (c) of Theorem 8, i.e., that therealizedTTS and BTS sampling variants outperform the intensityvariants, and that using the true (oracle) intensities yields slightly better RV estimation performance than using their estimated counterparts. Fourth, Figure G.5 shows that employing stopping-times for rTTS and rBTS, as opposed to fixingM(see Section 2.4), produces essentially the same RMSE results. 4 Empirical Applications We start to illustrate the gains in estimation accuracy that HTS and rBTS entail for the RV estimator in Section 4.1, and continue to analyze different sampling schemes in a forecasting environment in Section 4.2. 4.1 Comparing Estimation Accuracy In this application, we assess the estimation accuracy of the RV estimator for the different sampling schemes using data on 27 liquid stocks from the NYSE TAQ database. 14 We filter the raw prices according to Barndorff-Nielsen et al. (2009, Section 3). Based on the filtered prices, we compute the five sampling schemes CTS, rTTS, iBTS, rBTS, and HTS as described in Section 2.4. We use all trading days from January 1, 2012, to March 31, 2019, for evaluating the estimation accuracy and up to 50 trading days before January 1, 2012, to estimate the intensities required for the iBTS and rBTS methods. We estimate the underlying trading intensity and tick variance with the non-parametric and noise-robust estimators of Dahlhaus and Tunyavetchakit (2016) and average the estimated intensities over the past 50 trading days in a rolling fashion. For the above sampling schemes, we choose a fixed number ofM∈{13,26,39,78,130,260,390} log-returns per day, which correspond to intrinsic time sampling frequencies of 390/Mminutes. As in the simulations, fixingMis done using the information on Φ(T) available at the end of each trading day. For HTS, however, fixing the thresholdδleads to a random number of sam- plesM δ per day, which can vary considerably. To address this variability, we proceed as follows: For eachM, asset, and trading day, we select the HTS result corresponding to the threshold δfor which the realizedM δ is closest to the givenM. Forδ, we use 29 equally spaced values for log 10(δ) between−3.7 and−2.3. Table G.3 shows that averagingM δ over time and assets before matching toMdoes not meaningfully change the results for HTS. 15 We evaluate the competing RV estimators with the data-based ranking method of Patton 14We use the 27 stocks with the ticker symbols AA, AXP, BA, BAC, CAT, DIS, GE, GS, HD, HON, HPQ, IBM, IP, JNJ, JPM, KO, MCD, MMM, MO, MRK, NKE, PFE, PG, UTX, VZ, WMT, and XOM. 15Table G.3 also shows results when we (i) matchmonthly averagesby averagingM δ over all days within each month before matching to theM-grid; (ii) useall-time averagingover all trading days in the sample; and (iii) applyall-time and asset-wise averagingacross all days and assets. 25 Sampling vs. CTS Sampling vs. rBTS MSE QLIKE MSE QLIKE Sampling pos neg pos neg Sampling pos neg pos neg CTS 0 56 2 90 rTTS 46 0 64 8 rTTS 3 42 0 89 iBTS 43 1 95 0 iBTS 4 29 14 27 rBTS 56 0 90 2 HTS 56 3 86 4 HTS 33 19 73 10 Table 1: Percentage values of significantly positive (“pos”) and negative (“neg”) MSE and QLIKE loss differences between the sampling schemes mentioned in the column “Sampling” against the one in the title using the method of Patton (2011a). The percentage values are computed over the 27 assets and the seven employed values ofM for the respective estimators. (2011a), which addresses the challenge that the estimation target, IV, is not observable, even ex post. Specifically, we use the subsequent trading day’s IV estimate as a proxy, assuming it is unbiased but noisy. By using a future RV estimator as the proxy, the method of Patton (2011a) “breaks” the correlation between the estimation errors of the RV estimators under consideration and the proxy. In practice, one should use an unbiased proxy that is unlikely to be affected by MMN. While choosing a potentially inefficient estimator still gives an asymptotically valid test, its power might be lower (Liu et al., 2015; Hoga and Dimitriadis, 2023). To balance these points, we set the proxy to the next day‘s RV computed from 5 minute CTS returns throughout our analysis. Using different reasonable choices for the proxy such as sampling frequencies of 1, 10, or 15 minutes, or daily squared returns (see Figures G.6 and G.7), does not meaningfully change our results. We test for significance of the pairwise loss differences with respect to a benchmark estimator to be specified below (which is in general different from the proxy) by using the Diebold and Mariano (1995) test, with inference drawn by using the stationary bootstrap of Politis and Romano (1994) that is shown to be valid in this setting by Patton (2011a, Proposition 2). Table 1 summarizes the results by reporting the percentage of significantly positive and negative loss differences (at the 5% level) compared to the baseline sampling schemes, aggregated across the 27 assets and the seven considered sampling frequencies. We use CTS and rBTS as the baseline schemes for comparison in the two panels: CTS as the most commonly employed sampling method in the literature, and rBTS to enable a direct comparison to HTS, as motivated by our simulation results. We deliberately compare estimators with the same sampling frequency acrosssampling schemes as a direct comparison of sampling schemes is the main focus of the paper. The table shows results based on both the MSE and QLIKE loss functions. Detailed results for each asset and sampling frequency are given in Figures 9 and 10, com- paring to CTS and rBTS as the baseline schemes, respectively. The upper panels show RMSE and the lower panels QLIKE results. Black (red) points indicate that the considered estimator is significantly better (worse) than the benchmark at the 5% level; absence of a point denotes an insignificant difference. The color intensity indicates the magnitude of the relative improvements in RMSE (capped at±20%) or in QLIKE (capped at±50%). When comparing the more elaborate (rTTS, iBTS, rBTS, HTS) sampling schemes against the baseline CTS scheme in Figure 9 and the left panel of Table 1, we observe far more significantly 26 Realized TTS vs. CTS Intensity BTS vs. CTS Realized BTS vs. CTS HTS vs. CTS 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 XOM WMT VZ UTX PG PFE NKE MRK MO MMM MCD KO JPM JNJ IP IBM HPQ HON HD GS GE DIS CAT BAC BA AXP AA M Asset Relative RMSE Improvement −10% 0% 10% Realized TTS vs. CTS Intensity BTS vs. CTS Realized BTS vs. CTS HTS vs. CTS 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 XOM WMT VZ UTX PG PFE NKE MRK MO MMM MCD KO JPM JNJ IP IBM HPQ HON HD GS GE DIS CAT BAC BA AXP AA M Asset Relative QLIKE Improvement 0% 25% 50% Figure 9: RMSE (top) and QLIKE (bottom) loss differences for the RV estimator based on different sampling schemes and a range of sampling frequenciesMfor the 27 considered assets. Each point corresponds to a (at the 5% level) significant loss difference of the corresponding RV estimator to abenchmark CTS R V estimatorwith the same sampling frequency. Insignificant loss differences are omitted. The color scale of the points shows the relative improvement in terms of RMSE/QLIKE, where black (red) colors refer to an improvement (decline). 27 CTS vs. Realized BTS Realized TTS vs. Realized BTS Intensity BTS vs. Realized BTS HTS vs. Realized BTS 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 XOM WMT VZ UTX PG PFE NKE MRK MO MMM MCD KO JPM JNJ IP IBM HPQ HON HD GS GE DIS CAT BAC BA AXP AA M Asset Relative RMSE Improvement −20% −10% 0% 10% 20% CTS vs. Realized BTS Realized TTS vs. Realized BTS Intensity BTS vs. Realized BTS HTS vs. Realized BTS 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 XOM WMT VZ UTX PG PFE NKE MRK MO MMM MCD KO JPM JNJ IP IBM HPQ HON HD GS GE DIS CAT BAC BA AXP AA M Asset Relative QLIKE Improvement −50% −25% 0% 25% 50% Figure 10: RMSE (top) and QLIKE (bottom) loss differences for the RV estimator based on different sampling schemes and a range of sampling frequenciesMfor the 27 considered assets. Each point corresponds to a (at the 5% level) significant loss difference of the corresponding RV estimator to abenchmark rBTS R V estimatorwith the same sampling frequency. Insignificant loss differences are omitted. The color scale of the points shows the relative improvement in terms of RMSE/QLIKE, where black (red) colors refer to an improvement (decline). 28 positive than negative loss differences. This pattern is even more pronounced for the QLIKE loss function, relating to the known fact that evaluation results are often more stable for QLIKE than for MSE loss (Patton, 2011b). Figure 9 further shows that the increases are particularly pronounced at lower sampling frequencies, which are still regularly used in empirical work such as in Liu et al. (2015); Bollerslev et al. (2018, 2020, 2022); Bates (2019); Bucci (2020); Reisenhofer et al. (2022); Alfelt et al. (2023); Patton and Zhang (2023). Consistent with our simulation findings, the most frequent and substantial improvements can be observed for the HTS (at lower frequencies) and the rBTS schemes. Figure 10 and the right panel of Table 1 show that rBTS consistently outperforms CTS, rTTS, and iBTS, with efficiency gains again being more pronounced under the QLIKE loss. The direct comparison between rBTS and HTS reveals that, in line with our simulation results, HTS dominates rBTS at lower sampling frequencies below 5 minutes (M≤78), where noise has a negligible effect. In contrast, rBTS outperforms HTS at frequencies above 5 minutes (M >78) for most of the considered stocks. To assess how our sparsely sampled RV estimators perform compared to a state-of-the-art noise-robust benchmark, Figure 11 compares them to the pre-averaging RV of Jacod et al. (2009), computed from all tick-level data with non-zero price changes and with a bandwidth of 0.5√mticks, wherem ticks is the daily number of ticks. Because the pre-averaging RV is independent of the sampling frequencyM, all sampling-based RV estimators (for differentM) are compared to a single pre-averaging estimator in Figure 11. The resulting presentation therefore differs slightly from Figures 9 and 10. For the evaluation proxy, we use daily squared returns, since other choices—either a sparsely sampled CTS RV in Figure G.8 or the pre-averaging RV in Figure G.9—can bias the results. As noted above, using daily squared returns reduces the test’s power but avoids this undesired sensitivity. Figure 11 shows that our sparsely sampled RV estimators slightly outperform the pre- averaging estimator, particularly the rTTS and rBTS variants at sampling frequencies between M= 78 andM= 390. Although the HTS estimator exhibits some advantages at very low frequencies (M <78) over the other sampling schemes in Figures 9 and 10, RV at these frequen- cies does not outperform the pre-averaging benchmark in Figure 11. Our overall findings with respect to the pre-averaging RV estimator are consistent with the empirical study of Liu et al. (2015), who find that the classical RV estimator is difficult to outperform in practice. In summary, our empirical analysis confirms our theoretical and simulation-based findings. First, the more elaborate sampling schemes (rTTS, iBTS, rBTS, HTS) that take into account intraday variation clearly outperform CTS. Second, rBTS and HTS perform best within this class, and can also outperform the noise robust pre-averaging estimator using all tick level data. Third, their relative effectiveness depends on the sampling frequency: HTS excels at (very) low frequencies, while rBTS proves to be more robust at higher ones. The empirical superiority of the HTS and especially the rBTS schemes further underscores the practical value of the TTSV modeling framework, which enables the convenient derivation of the rBTS scheme. 29 CTS vs. PreAvg RV Realized TTS vs. PreAvg RV Realized BTS vs. PreAvg RV HTS vs. PreAvg RV 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 XOM WMT VZ UTX PG PFE NKE MRK MO MMM MCD KO JPM JNJ IP IBM HPQ HON HD GS GE DIS CAT BAC BA AXP AA M Asset Relative RMSE Improvement −20% −10% 0% 10% 20% Figure 11: RMSE loss differences for the RV estimator based on different sampling schemes and a range of sampling frequenciesMfor the 27 considered assets. Here, we use the (leaded) daily squared return as the proxy in the evaluation framework of Patton (2011a). Each point corresponds to a (at the 5% level) significant loss difference of the corresponding RV estimator to abenchmark pre-averaging R V estimatorusing all tick-level returns. Insignificant loss differences are omitted. The color scale of the points shows the relative improvement in terms of RMSE, where black (red) colors refer to an improvement (decline). 4.2 Comparing Forecast Performance We next assess how the gains in estimation accuracy of HTS and rBTS translate into improved forecast performance following the empirical analysis of Liu et al. (2015, Section 5.6). To this end, we use the Heterogeneous AutoRegressive (HAR) model of Corsi (2009), RVd(τ) =β 0 +βD RVd−1(τ) +β W 1 5 5X j=1 RVd−j(τ) +β M 1 22 22X j=1 RVd−j(τ) +ε d,(27) that models RV on daydas a linear function of the past daily, weekly and monthly averages of RV with error termε d and parameters (β0,βD,βW,βM) that are estimated by ordinary least squares. For each combination of asset, sampling scheme, and sampling frequency, and for the tick- level pre-averaging RV estimator, we use the HAR model in (27) to generate one-step-ahead forecasts by estimating the parameters in (27) with a rolling window consisting of 803 trading days for model estimation starting on January 1, 2012. This results in an evaluation period of 1000 trading days ranging from March 28, 2015 to March 29, 2019. We evaluate the resulting forecasts with the MSE and QLIKE loss functions. As the associated estimation target, we use daily squared returns as in Liu et al. (2015), to have a fair evaluation target for all estimators. Figure 12 reports results aggregated over time and across assets for each sampling scheme and frequency individually. For both the MSE and QLIKE loss function, we report the average ranks of the respective sampling schemes, the proportion of comparisons where each sampling 30 QLIKE Mean Rank QLIKE Winning Rates QLIKE MCS Inclusion Rates MSE Mean Rank MSE Winning Rates MSE MCS Inclusion Rates 13 78 390 13 78 390 13 78 390 13 78 390 13 78 390 13 78 390 0.92 0.96 1.00 0.7 0.8 0.9 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.1 0.2 0.3 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 M value Sampling scheme CTS rTTS iBTS rBTS HTS PreAvg Figure 12: Average Ranks, winning rates, and MCS inclusion rates (at the 10% level) of the MSE and QLIKE comparisons in the forecasting exercise plotted against the sampling frequency, individually for each considered sampling frequency (in color), and for the pre-averaging RV estimator. For the forecast evaluation, the daily squared return is used. scheme is considered best, and the inclusion rates of the model confidence set (MCS) of Hansen et al. (2011) using the implementation of Bernardi and Catania (2018). We find that HTS performs best at very low sampling frequencies (belowM= 78), achieving the lowest average ranks and highest winning rates. The MCS inclusion rates are high across all sampling schemes and frequencies, which is unsurprising given the procedure’s low power, making the differences difficult to interpret. For the higher frequencies betweenM= 78 and M= 390, no sampling scheme consistently outperforms the others, which can be explained by the substantial “empirical noise” that is added in such a forecasting exercise, compared to the estimation results from Section 4.1. 5 Conclusions In this paper we provide finite-sample theory as well as empirical results for the statistical quality of the classical RV estimator when the intraday returns are sampled in intrinsic time. This approach accounts for intraday trading (transaction time sampling – TTS), volatility patterns (business time sampling – BTS), or absolute price changes (hitting time sampling – HTS). For BTS, we propose the novelrealizedBTS variant that samples according to a combination of the observed transactions and the estimated tick variance. The intrinsic time scales leverage 31 the rich information content of high-frequency data by adopting a perspective that differs from traditional equidistant clock-time sampling, reflecting the irregular evolution of market activity and risk. We find that, in the absence of market microstructure noise, the HTS scheme theoretically provides the most efficient RV estimates in finite samples. However, the rBTS scheme emerges as most efficient in a restricted setting where sampling must occur independent of the observed intraday prices. This restricted setting and consequently the rBTS scheme is motivated through the increased sensitivity of the HTS scheme to market microstructure noise, which we find empirically causes its performance to deteriorate rapidly when (intrinsic) sampling frequencies exceed five minutes. In contrast, the rBTS scheme is an attractive and robust alternative at all sampling frequencies. The theoretical framework for our analysis builds on a joint model for the ticks (transaction or quote times) and prices, which we call thetick-time stochastic volatility(TTSV) model: The prices follow a continuous-time diffusion that is time-changed by a jump process that explicitly models the ticks. As a result, prices form a pure jump process with time-varying and stochastic jump intensity capturing the empirical fact that price observations arrive randomly and at irregular intervals throughout the day. Furthermore, the model includes a stochastic tick variance process—representing the variance of price jumps between adjacent ticks—that also varies over time and displays a mirrored intraday pattern relative to the trading intensity. The TTSV model is particularly useful for theoretically disentangling the effects of intrinsic time sampling for several reasons. First, it captures the natural spot variance decomposition into trading intensity and tick variance that is especially informative when comparing business and tick time sampling variants. Second, it enables the derivation of theoretical finite-sample results in contrast to, for example, Barndorff-Nielsen et al. (2011) who provide asymptotic arguments in favor of the intensity version of BTS. Third, by explicitly modeling the observed ticks through a jump process, the TTSV model naturally encompasses the novel realized BTS scheme, which performs well in our empirical application, demonstrating that its effectiveness reflects genuine practical improvements beyond the TTSV framework. An interesting theoretical alternative is to accommodate the tick arrivals throughdiscretiza- tioninstead of atime-change, as recently proposed by Jacod et al. (2017, 2019); Da and Xiu (2021); Li and Linton (2022) among others. While the TTSV framework enables convenient finite-sample derivations, we conjecture that the corresponding asymptotic analysis tends to be more complex and demands stronger assumptions compared to the discretization approaches in Jacod et al. (2017, 2019); Da and Xiu (2021); Li and Linton (2022). Furthermore, advancing the theoretical analysis of noise-robust estimators such as subsampling, realized kernel, or pre- averaging RV, particularly in combination with rBTS and HTS sampling, offers promising paths for future research. Replication Material Replication material is available under https://github.com/TimoDimi/replication RVTTSV. While the simulations can be fully replicated, we have to exclude the data files for the empirical application as these cannot be made publicly available. 32 Acknowledgements We would like to thank the editor, the associated editor and the two referees for very valuable and constructive comments that have substantially improved the results of the paper. We are further thankful to Dobrislav Dobrev, Christian Gouri´ eroux, Andrew Patton, Davide Pirino, Winfried Pohlmeier, Angelo Ranaldo, Roberto Ren` o, Richard Olsen, Philipp Sibbertsen, George Tauchen and the participants at the SoFiE Conference 2019, QFFE Conferences 2019 and 2022, and the Conference on Intrinsic Time in Finance 2022 for helpful comments. All remaining errors are ours. We thank Sebastian Bayer and Christian M¨ ucher for help in preparing the TAQ data. T. Dimitriadis gratefully acknowledges financial support from the German Research Foundation (DFG) through grant number 502572912. R. Halbleib gratefully acknowledges financial support from the DFG through the grant number 8672/1. References Admati, A. R. and Pfleiderer, P. (1988). A theory of intraday patterns: Volume and price variability.The Review of Financial Studies, 1(1):3–40. A¨ ıt-Sahalia, Y. and Jacod, J. (2014).High-Frequency Financial Econometrics. Princeton Uni- versity Press. A¨ ıt-Sahalia, Y., Mykland, P., and Zhang, L. (2011). Ultra high frequency volatility estimation with dependent microstructure noise.Journal of Econometrics, 160(1):160–175. Alfelt, G., Bodnar, T., Javed, F., and Tyrcha, J. (2023). Singular conditional autoregressive wishart model for realized covariance matrices.Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 41(3):833–845. Andersen, T. G. and Bollerslev, T. (1997). Intraday periodicity and volatility persistence in financial markets.Journal of Empirical Finance, 4(2-3):115–158. Andersen, T. G. and Bollerslev, T. (1998). Answering the skeptics: Yes, standard volatility models do provide accurate forecasts.International Economic Review, 39(4):885–905. Andersen, T. G., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F. X., and Ebens, H. (2001a). The distribution of realized stock return volatility.Journal of Financial Economics, 61(1):43–76. Andersen, T. G., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F. X., and Labys, P. (2001b). The distribution of realized exchange rate volatility.Journal of the American Statistical Association, 96(453):42– 55. Andersen, T. G., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F. X., and Labys, P. (2003). Modeling and forecasting realized volatility.Econometrica, 71(2):579–625. Andersen, T. G., Bollerslev, T., and Dobrev, D. (2007). No-arbitrage semi-martingale restric- tions for continuous-time volatility models subject to leverage effects, jumps and i.i.d. noise: Theory and testable distributional implications.Journal of Econometrics, 138(1):125–180. Andersen, T. G., Bollerslev, T., Frederiksen, P., and Nielsen, M. Ø. (2010). Continuous time models, realized volatilities, and testable distributional implications for daily stock returns. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 25(2):233–261. Andersen, T. G., Davis, R. A., Kreiß, J.-P., and Mikosch, T. V. (2009).Handbook of Financial Time Series. Springer Science & Business Media. Andersen, T. G., Dobrev, D., and Schaumburg, E. (2012). Jump-robust volatility estimation using nearest neighbor truncation.Journal of Econometrics, 169(1):75–93. 33 An´ e, T. and Geman, H. (2000). Order flow, transaction clock, and normality of asset returns. Journal of Finance, 55(5):2259–2284. Bandi, F. M. and Russell, J. R. (2008). Microstructure noise, realized variance, and optimal sampling.Review of Economic Studies, 75(2):339–369. Barndorff-Nielsen, O. E., Hansen, P. R., Lunde, A., and Shephard, N. (2008). Designing realized kernels to measure the ex post variation of equity prices in the presence of noise.Econometrica, 76(6):1481–1536. Barndorff-Nielsen, O. E., Hansen, P. R., Lunde, A., and Shephard, N. (2009). Realized kernels in practice: Trades and quotes.The Econometrics Journal, 12(3):C1–C32. Barndorff-Nielsen, O. E., Hansen, P. R., Lunde, A., and Shephard, N. (2011). Subsampling realised kernels.Journal of Econometrics, 160(1):204–219. Barndorff-Nielsen, O. E. and Shephard, N. (2002). Econometric analysis of realized volatility and its use in estimating stochastic volatility models.Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 64(2):253–280. Bates, D. S. (2019). How crashes develop: intradaily volatility and crash evolution.The Journal of Finance, 74(1):193–238. Bauwens, L. and Giot, P. (2001).Econometric Modelling of Stock Market Intraday Activity,, volume 38 ofAdvanced Studies in Theoretical and Applied Econometrics. Kluwer. Bauwens, L. and Hautsch, N. (2009). Modelling financial high frequency data using point processes. InHandbook of financial time series, pages 953–979. Springer. Bernardi, M. and Catania, L. (2018). The model confidence set package for R.International Journal of Computational Economics and Econometrics, 8(2):144–158. Bollerslev, T., Hood, B., Huss, J., and Pedersen, L. H. (2018). Risk everywhere: Modeling and managing volatility.The Review of Financial Studies, 31(7):2729–2773. Bollerslev, T., Li, S. Z., and Zhao, B. (2020). Good volatility, bad volatility, and the cross section of stock returns.Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 55(3):751–781. Bollerslev, T., Medeiros, M. C., Patton, A. J., and Quaedvlieg, R. (2022). From zero to hero: Realized partial (co) variances.Journal of Econometrics, 231(2):348–360. Br´ emaud, P. (1981).Point Processes and Queues: Martingale Dynamics. Springer Series in Statistics. Bucci, A. (2020). Realized volatility forecasting with neural networks.Journal of Financial Econometrics, 18(3):502–531. Carr, P. and Wu, L. (2004). Time-changed levy processes and option pricing.Journal of Financial Economics, 71(1):113–114. Clark, P. K. (1973). A subordinated stochastic process model with finite variance for speculative prices.Econometrica, pages 135–155. Corsi, F. (2009). A simple approximate long-memory model of Realized Volatility.Journal of Financial Econometrics, 7(2):174–196. Da, R. and Xiu, D. (2021). When moving-average models meet high-frequency data: Uniform inference on volatility.Econometrica, 89(6):2787–2825. Dahlhaus, R. and Neddermeyer, J. (2014). Online spot volatility-estimation and decomposi- tion with nonlinear market microstructure noise models.Journal of Financial Econometrics, 12(1):174–212. Dahlhaus, R. and Tunyavetchakit, S. (2016). Volatility decomposition and estimation in time- 34 changed price models.Preprint. https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.02205. Dassios, A. and Zhao, H. (2013). Exact simulation of Hawkes process with exponentially decaying intensity.Electronic Communications in Probability, 18(62):1–13. Delbaen, F. and Schachermayer, W. (1994). A general version of the fundamental theorem of asset pricing.Mathematische Annalen, 300(3):463–520. Diebold, F. X. and Mariano, R. S. (1995). Comparing predictive accuracy.Journal of Business & Economic Statististics, 13(3):253–263. Diggle, P. and Marron, J. S. (1988). Equivalence of smoothing parameter selectors in density and intensity estimation.Journal of the American Statistical Association, 83(403):793–800. Dong, Y. and Tse, Y.-K. (2017). Business time sampling scheme with applications to testing semi-martingale hypothesis and estimating integrated volatility.Econometrics, 5(51):1–19. Engle, R. F. and Russell, J. R. (2005). A discrete-state continuous-time model of financial transaction prices and times.Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 23(2):166–180. Fukasawa, M. (2010). Realized volatility with stochastic sampling.Stochastic Processes and their Applications, 120(6):829–852. Fukasawa, M. and Rosenbaum, M. (2012). Central limit theorems for realized volatility under hitting times of an irregular grid.Stochastic Processes and their Applications, 122(12):3901– 3920. Gabaix, X., Gopikrishnan, P., Plerou, V., and Stanley, H. E. (2003). A theory of power-law distributions in financial market fluctuations.Nature, 423(6937):267–270. Griffin, J. E. and Oomen, R. C. A. (2008). Sampling returns for realized variance calculations: Tick time or transaction time?Econometric Reviews, 27(1-3):230–253. Hamilton, J. D. and Jorda, O. (2002). A model of the federal funds rate target.Journal of Political Economy, 110(5):1135–1167. Hansen, P. R. and Lunde, A. (2006). Realized variance and market microstructure noise.Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 24(2):127–161. Hansen, P. R., Lunde, A., and Nason, J. M. (2011). The model confidence set.Econometrica, 79(2):453–497. Harris, L. (1986). A transaction data study of weekly and intradaily patterns in stock returns. Journal of Financial Economics, 16(1):99–117. Hawkes, A. G. (1971). Spectra of some self-exciting and mutually exciting point processes. Biometrika, 58(1):83–90. Hawkes, A. G. (2018). Hawkes processes and their applications to finance: a review.Quantitative Finance, 18(2):193–198. Hoga, Y. and Dimitriadis, T. (2023). On testing equal conditional predictive ability under measurement error.Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 41(2):364–376. Hussain, S. M., Ahmad, N., and Ahmed, S. (2023). Applications of high-frequency data in finance: a bibliometric literature review.International Review of Financial Analysis, 102790. Jacod, J. (2018). Limit of random measures associated with the increments of a brownian semimartingale.Journal of Financial Econometrics, 16(4):526–569. Jacod, J., Li, Y., Mykland, P. A., Podolskij, M., and Vetter, M. (2009). Microstructure noise in the continuous case: the pre-averaging approach.Stochastic Processes and their Applications, 119(7):2249–2276. Jacod, J., Li, Y., and Zheng, X. (2017). Statistical properties of microstructure noise.Econo- 35 metrica, 85(4):1133–1174. Jacod, J., Li, Y., and Zheng, X. (2019). Estimating the integrated volatility with tick observa- tions.Journal of Econometrics, 208(1):80–100. Jacod, J. and Shiryaev, A. (2003).Limit theorems for stochastic processes, volume 288. Springer Science & Business Media. Jones, C. M., Kaul, G., and Lipson, M. L. (1994). Transactions, volume, and volatility.Review of Financial Studies, 7(4):631–651. Kalnina, I. and Linton, O. (2008). Estimating quadratic variation consistently in the presence of endogenous and diurnal measurement error.Journal of Econometrics, 147(1):47–59. Laub, P. J., Lee, Y., and Taimre, T. (2021).The elements of Hawkes processes. Springer. Li, Z. M. and Linton, O. (2022). A remedi for microstructure noise.Econometrica, 90(1):367– 389. Liesenfeld, R., Nolte, I., and Pohlmeier, W. (2006). Modelling financial transaction price move- ments: A dynamic integer count model.Empirical Economics, 30(4):795–825. Liptser, R. and Shiryayev, A. N. (2012).Theory of Martingales, volume 49 ofMathematics and its Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. Liu, L. Y., Patton, A. J., and Sheppard, K. (2015). Does anything beat 5-minute RV? A compar- ison of realized measures across multiple asset classes.Journal of Econometrics, 187(1):293– 311. Meddahi, N. (2002). A theoretical comparison between integrated and realized volatilities. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 17(5):479–508. Monroe, I. (1978). Processes that can be embedded in brownian motion.Annals of Probability, 6(1):42–56. Oomen, R. C. A. (2005). Properties of bias-corrected realized variance under alternative sampling schemes.Journal of Financial Econometrics, 3(4):555–577. Oomen, R. C. A. (2006). Properties of realized variance under alternative sampling schemes. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 24(2):219–237. Patton, A. J. (2011a). Data-based ranking of realised volatility estimators.Journal of Econo- metrics, 161(2):284–303. Patton, A. J. (2011b). Volatility forecast comparison using imperfect volatility proxies.Journal of Econometrics, 160(1):246–256. Patton, A. J. and Zhang, H. (2023). Bespoke realized volatility: Tailored measures of risk for volatility prediction.Preprint. https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4315106. Plerou, V., Gopikrishnan, P., Gabaix, X., Nunes Amaral, L., and Stanley, H. E. (2001). Price fluctuations, market activity and trading volume.Quantitative Finance, 1(2):262–269. Podolskij, M. and Vetter, M. (2009). Estimation of volatility functionals in the simultaneous presence of microstructure noise and jumps.Bernoulli, 15(3):634–658. Politis, D. N. and Romano, J. P. (1994). The stationary bootstrap.Journal of the American Statistical Association, 89(428):1303–1313. Press, S. J. (1967). A compound events model for security prices.Journal of Business, 40(2):317– 335. Reisenhofer, R., Bayer, X., and Hautsch, N. (2022). HARNet: A convolutional neural network for realized volatility forecasting.Preprint. https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.07719. 36 Robert, C. Y. and Rosenbaum, M. (2012). Volatility and covariation estimation when microstruc- ture noise and trading times are endogenous.Mathematical Finance: An International Journal of Mathematics, Statistics and Financial Economics, 22(1):133–164. Shephard, N. and Yang, J. J. (2017). Continuous time analysis of fleeting discrete price moves. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 112(519):1090–1106. Vetter, M. and Zwingmann, T. (2017). A note on central limit theorems for quadratic variation in case of endogenous observation times.Electronic Journal of Statistics, 11(1):963 – 980. Wood, R. A., McInish, T. H., and Ord, J. K. (1985). An investigation of transactions data for NYSE stocks.The Journal of Finance, 40(3):723–739. Zhang, L., Mykland, P. A., and A¨ ıt-Sahalia, Y. (2005). A tale of two time scales: Determin- ing integrated volatility with noisy high-frequency data.Journal of the American Statistical Association, 100(472):1394–1411. Appendix A Main Proofs This appendix contains the proofs of the main results from Sections 2.2 and 2.3. The support- ing lemmas, along with their proofs and the remaining proofs for the paper, are provided in Appendix E of the Supplementary Material. Proof of Theorem 4.By Proposition 1, the price processPis martingale. In the proof of Proposition 1 we show thatPis square-integrable, which implies that the processQ=P 2−[P] is a martingale as well. For any pair of stopping times from the sampling schemeτ j−1 andτ j we can apply the Optional Stopping Theorem because the stopping times are surely bounded byTand we have that E[r2(τj−1,τj)|Fτj−1] =E[P 2 τj−P 2 τj−1|Fτj−1] =E[[P] τj−[P] τj−1|Fτj−1].(28) We then obtain that the realized variance estimator is unbiased forE[[P] T ] as E[RV(τ)] =E   MX j=1 r2(τj−1,τj)   =E   MX j=1 E[r2(τj−1,τj)|Fτj−1]   (29) =E   MX j=1 E[[P]τj−[P] τj−1|Fτj−1]   =E[[P] T ],(30) where we use thatMis a.s. finite together with Lemma E.4 applied to the nonnegative squared returns and increments of the quadratic variation. To show that the realized variance estimator is unbiased for expected realized IV, we use the assumption about the conditional distribution of the price increments in Assumption 1. Denote the (stochastic) jump times in the interval byt 1,t 2,...with 0≤t 1 < t2 <···≤T. By Lemma 37 E.4 and the non-negativity of the squared-price increments we have that E[[P]T ] =E   X 0≤ti≤T (∆Pti)2   =E   X 0≤ti≤T E  ς2(ti)U 2 i Fti−   (31) =E   X 0≤ti≤T ς2(ti)   =E[rIV(0,T)].(32) It remains only to showE[rIV(0,T)] =E[IV(0,T)]. This equality follows from the non-negativity andF-predictability ofςand the characterization of the compensator (see Jacod and Shiryaev (2003)[Theorem 3.17])). Proof of Theorem 5.We begin by writing the difference between the estimator and the esti- mation target at any timet∈[0,T] as the sum of three martingales at timet: RV(τ,t)−IV(0,t) =A(t) +B(t) +C(t),(33) whereRV(τ,t) = PM j=1r2(τj−1∧t,τ j∧t),A:=RV(τ,·)−[P],B:= [P]−rIV(0,·) and C= rIV(0,·)−IV(0,·). ThatAis a martingale follows almost directly from the result that P 2−[P] is a martingale, which we show in the proof of Theorem 4. Showing thatBis a martingale follows by similar arguments as in the proof of Proposition 1, showing thatPis a martingale. For a reference thatCis a martingale, see the proof of Theorem 4. We can write the first martingaleAin a more convenient form by noting that for any pair of stopping times 0≤σ≤τ≤Twe have (Pτ−Pσ)2−([P] τ−[P] σ) = 2 X σ<ti≤τ (Pti−−Pσ)∆Pti,(34) where thet i denote the (stochastic) jump times in the stochastic interval (σ,τ] andP t− := lims↑tPs. Hence we have that A(t) = MX j=1 X τj−1∧t<ti≤τj∧t Ai(τj−1),(35) whereA i(τj−1) = 2(Pti−−Pτj−1)ς(ti)Ui. Here we use the notation from Assumption 1 such that ∆Pti =ς(t i)Ui whereU i is a random variable with a standard normal distribution conditional on theσ-algebraF ti−. Similarly we have forBandCthat B(t) = X 0≤ti≤t Bi (36) C(t) = X 0≤ti≤t Ci,(37) 38 whereB i =ς 2(ti)U 2 i −ς 2(ti) andC i =ς 2(ti)− Rti ti−1 ς2(r)λ(r)dr. We have that E h (RV(τ)−IV(0,T)) 2 i =E[[RV(τ,·)−IV(0,·)] T ] =E[[A+B+C] T ] (38) as long asA+B+Cis square integrable, which holds ifE[[A] T ],E[[B] T ] andE[[C] T ] are finite. To compute the expected quadratic variation in (38) and show the appropriate bounds, we note the following properties of the increments of the processesA,BandC, which follow immediately from Assumption 1 for any jump timet i such thatτ j−1 <t i≤τ j: •E[A i(τj−1)|Fti−] = 0; •E[B i|Fti−] = 0; •C i isF ti−-measurable and we haveE[C i|Fti−1] = 0, sinceC i = Rti ti−1 ς2(r)d ˜N(r), where ˜N(t) =N(t)− Rt 0λ(r)dr; •E[A i(τj−1)Bi|Fti−] = 0, sinceE[U i(U 2 i −1)|Fti−] = 0; •E[A i(τj−1)Ci|Fti−] =E[B iCi|Fti−] = 0, sinceC i isF ti−-measurable; •E[B 2 i|Fti−] = 2ς4(ti), sinceE[(U 2 i −1) 2|Fti−] = 2; •E[C 2 i|Fti−1] =E hRti ti−1 ς4(r)dN(r)|Fti−1 i =E  ς4(ti)|Fti−1  by the Ito isometry of the stochastic integral. We first derive the MSE result by computing the expected quadratic variation in (38) and then show the appropriate moment bounds. We apply Lemma E.4 multiple times to various sums and σ-algebras such that we can use the properties above and thatE hP τj−1<ti≤τjA2 i (τj−1) Fτj−1 i = 2 3 E  r4(τj−1,τj) Fτj−1  −2E  IQ(τj−1,τj) Fτj−1  by Lemma E.5 and find the MSE result: E[(RV(τ)−IV(0,T)) 2] =E[[A+B+C] T ] (39) =E   MX j=1 X τj−1<ti≤τj {A2 i (τj−1) + 2Ai(τj−1)Bi + 2Ai(τj−1)Ci}+ X 0≤ti≤T {B2 i +C 2 i + 2BiCi}   (40) =E   MX j=1 E   X τj−1<ti≤τj A2 i (τj−1) Fτj−1     +E   X 0≤ti≤T E[B2 i|Fti−]   +E   X 0≤ti≤T E[C2 i|Fti−1]   (41) = 2 3 E   MX j=1 r4(τj−1,τj)   +E[IQ(0,T)].(42) It remains to show thatE[[A] T ],E[[B] T ] andE[[C] T ] are finite such that the equality in (38) holds and that the we can apply Lemma E.4 in equation (41). By applying Lemma E.4 to the positive increments of the quadratic variations and by using the Burkholder-Davis-Gundy 39 inequalities we have that E[[A]T ] = 2 3 E   MX j=1 E  r4(τj−1,τj) Fτj−1   −2E[IQ(0,T)] (43) ≤CE   MX j=1 E   [P]τj−[P] τj−1 2 Fτj−1  ≤CE  [P] 2 T  (44) for some constantC >0,E[[B] T ] = 2E[IQ(0,T)] andE[[C] T ] =E[IQ(0,T)]. By Assumption 1 E  [P] 2 T  <∞and we have 3E[IQ(0,T)] = 3E Z T 0 ς4(r)dN(r)  =E  X ti≤T (∆Pti)4  ≤E[[P] 2 T ].(45) Proof of Theorem 8.The results follow from applying Lemma E.7 to the MSE results in The- orem 5 and Corollaries 6 and 7. Note that in the latter two cases the additional assumption on the independence between Brownian motion and the other processes implies that the remainder termE[R(τ)] in the MSE results in (14) and (16) is zero. Similarly, by additionally assuming thatNis a doubly stochastic Poisson process, the second remainder termE[ ˜R(τ)] in (16) is zero, since in that caseE hRτj τj−1 ς2(r)dN(r) Fλ,ς τj i = Rτj τj−1 ς2(r)λ(r)dr. 40 Supplementary Material This supplemental material contains a comparison of the TTSV model to discretized diffusions in Appendix B, additional finite sample theory in a setting where sampling can use information from the end of the trading day in Appendix C, and a specific comparison to the results of Oomen (2006) in Appendix D. All proofs, except those of the main results, are collected in Appendix E, while Appendix F provides arguments regarding the remainder terms of Corollary 6. Finally, Appendix G presents additional empirical results. B A Comparison to Discretized Diffusions In this section, we compare the TTSV model to the “discretized” diffusion framework of Jacod et al. (2017, 2019); Da and Xiu (2021); Li and Linton (2022) as an alternative modeling choice that exhibits random observation times. The proposed model for the underlying log-price process is a possibly discontinuous Itˆ o semimartingale that can (under standard regularity assumptions forb,σandδ) be written as 16 Q(t) =Q(0) + Z t 0 b(r)dr+ Z t 0 σ(r)dB(r) + Z [0,t]×E δ(r,z)p(dr,dz). The crucial components that facilitate comparability to the TTSV model are the possibly random observation times of the log-price process. Following Jacod et al. (2019, p.3), observations of the underlying log-price take place based on the (possibly irregularly spaced and random) observation times 0 =T(n,0)< T(n,1)< ...for a triangular sequenceT(n,i) of finite times, where the “stagen” diverges in the asymptotic setting. Further define Nn(t) := X i≥1 1{T(n,i)≤t},and ∆(n,i) =T(n,i)−T(n,i−1), such thatN n(t) + 1 denotes the number of observations up to timetand ∆(n,i) is the time between observation numberi−1 andi. Given the assumption that for alli, the ∆(n,i) are in an appropriate sense of the same order of magnitude as the deterministic and positive sequence ∆n that converges to zero asndiverges, the observations timesT(n,i) are such that for allt, ∆nNn(t) P−→ Z t 0 α(r)dr,(46) whereα(t) is an appropriately regular and strictly positive Itˆ o semimartingale that, in a sta- tistical sense, modulates the difference of the observation scheme from a regular equally-spaced (calendar time) grid. These conditions allow for flexible observation times such as equidistant sampling, (modulated) Poisson sampling schemes and time-changed regular sampling schemes (Jacod et al., 2019). The log-pricesQ(t) can further be contaminated with (different specifications of) MMN as 16See Jacod et al. (2019, Equation (2.2)) and the following assumptions for more details. 41 eQ(T(n,i)) =Q   T(n,i)  +ϵn(i) for some noise termϵ n(i), resembling our specification in (25). Therefore, similar to the TTSV model, the observed price is constant between observation points that are potentially irregularly spaced and random. In comparison, the discretized diffusions and the TTSV model share the properties of having observed price paths that are constant between the random observation points with the technical difference that this is achieved by a time-change with a jump process in the TTSV model and by random observation times in the discretized diffusions. This implies the conceptual difference that in the TTSV model, realized transactions drive price changes and in the discretized diffusion framework, transaction times are simply the observation times of the prices. An important difference of the models arises in the interpretation of the observation times T(n,i) in the discretized diffusions, where sparse sampling could be included as follows: First, as in Jacod et al. (2019), theT(n,i) can be interpreted as the observed transaction times. To consider sparsely sampled returns (as is our main focus of interest), we would however require another layer of random times that represent the sampling schemes. Second, one could directly consider the random timesT(n,i) as the sampling points. The current standard assumption on the sampling points (see e.g., Assumption (O)(ii) in Jacod et al. (2017), Assumption O 2.(c) in Li and Linton (2022) and Assumption A on page 302 in the book A¨ ıt-Sahalia and Jacod (2014)) however imposes that the duration ∆(n,i) is conditionally independent from the entire filtration conditional on the information up to observation time T(n,i−1). This assumption rules out the consideration of the sampling schemes such as the realizedTTS and BTS variants and HTS, which we advocate in this paper. Therefore, while the discretized diffusion literature imposes very weak assumptions on the price process and the noise distribution, relaxing the modeling assumption on the observation times to account for “realized” sampling schemes would require additional work. We mention that there is also literature such as Fukasawa (2010) and Robert and Rosenbaum (2012) that allow for more general dependence for the duration ∆(n,i) within the discretized diffusions framework, though this is under specific assumptions on the observation times (hitting times at the trading grid) and the noise process. Hence, while both these modeling possibilities do not immediately show how the research question of finding optimal (sparse) sampling points could be analyzed within the setting of discretized diffusions, a derivation of similar results might in principle be feasible. Furthermore, the discretization schemes might be promising alternatives for future research to e.g., robustify our findings to different (possibly weaker) modeling assumptions, or extensions to asymptotic results. We continue to examine in more detail how the discretization framework described above could produce similar results to ours reported in the main paper for the TTSV model. For this, we consider the diffusion (that is later on discretized) Q(t) =Q(0) + Z t 0 ς(r) p λ(r)dB(r),(47) for some strictly positive Itˆ o processesς(r) andλ(r) that are also used for the corresponding specification of the TTSV model in (6). These models are related as both have a spot variance 42 process ofς 2(r)λ(r).17 Furthermore, if we discretize the diffusion in (47) with Poisson random times that follow a modulating process withα(t) =λ(t)∆ n in the sense of (46), the count process of the discretizationN n(t) resembles the jump processN(t) of the TTSV model (forn large enough in the sense of the asymptotic approximation in (46)). IfP(·) denotes the log-price of the TTSV model, under Assumptions (1)–(3), we also get that theex ante(conditional onF s) conditional variance of the prices in the interval [s,t] is the same for both processes as E h  P(t)−P(s) 2 Fs i =E Z t s ς2(r)dN(r) Fs  =E Z t s ς2(r)λ(r)dr Fs  =E h  Q(t)−Q(s) 2 Fs i . However, when considering theex postvariance over the interval [s,t] (i.e., conditioning on Fλ,ς,N t , thus implying knowledge of the intensities and the transaction/observation times) we get that E h  P(t)−P(s) 2 Fλ,ς,N t i =E Z t s ς2(r)dN(r) Fλ,ς,N t  = rIV(s,t) (48) under the TTSV model. In the discretized diffusion, when defining the last observation time prior to timetbyτ(t) := max{s≤t:∃i∈N:s=T(n,i)}, we however get that E h  Q(t)−Q(s) 2 Fλ,ς,Nn t i =E "Z τ(t) τ(s) ς2(r)λ(r)dr Fλ,ς,Nn t # = IV   τ(s),τ(t)  .(49) In this calculation, conditioning onN n(·) corresponds to knowledge of the observation times, similar as conditioning onN(·) in the TTSV model. While the right-hand side of (49) equals the IV between the last observations beforesandtre- spectively, we obtain therealizedIV betweensandtfor the TTSV model under (48). Hence, the comparison of (48) and (49) illustrates that when employing jump-based sampling/observation schemes and by conditioning onF λ,ς,N t , therealizedIV only arises under the TTSV model. Consequently, with the choice of a discretized diffusion described in (47) and below, we would be unable to theoretically derive therealizedBTS scheme. Notice that therealizedBTS scheme appears to be superior to the classicalintensityBTS scheme in both, the estimation and fore- casting setting of our empirical application in Section 4 as can be seen in Table 1 and Figure 12. Since these results are obtained in the model-free empirical application, this illustrates that the TTSV model allows to develop theory for a new, efficient sampling scheme, which is practically relevant as it performs well in the empirical application. 17A notable difference between the discretized diffusion in (47) and the TTSV model is that in the latter, the jump variance between two trading times at jump timet i isς 2(ti), whereas for the former, the price jump has a variance of Rti ti−1 ς 2(r)λ(r)dr. 43 C Efficient Sampling Using Information of the Entire Day In this section, we derive the conditional bias and MSE of the RV estimator based on general sampling schemesτthat are allowed to incorporate information up to theend of the trading day, which are hence not necessarily stopping times. The use of the information of the entire day allows to fix the number of sampled returns of a sampling scheme to a deterministic number Mand corresponds to the empirical practice of computing RV at the end of the trading day, often with a fixed frequency (amount of samples)M. In this way we can explicitly control the noise picked up be the RV estimator, when applying it to observed price data. Since the sampling times considered here are no longer stopping times with respect to the filtrationF, we deviate from the setup in Section 2 and develop new theory in this section. We consider results pertaining to the bias and the MSE of RV,conditionalon the following information sets that are defined for allt∈[0,T], Fλ,ς t =σ   λ(s),ς(s); 0≤s≤t  ⊂F t,and Fλ,ς,N t =σ   λ(s),ς(s),N(s); 0≤s≤t  ⊂F t. In a similar spirit, we distinguish between sampling schemesτthat areF λ,ς T - andF λ,ς,N T - measurable, where the latter “realized” or “jump-based” case allows for a dependence of the sampling times on the realized tick pattern of the particular day. Here, a sampling scheme is understood to beG-measurable for some information setG, if all the sampling times inτare G-measurable. Opposed to the results of Theorem 8 (a), the theory in this section cannot deal with sampling schemes that are allowed to usepriceinformation inF T . In order to get conditional results for the sampling schemes that use information of the entire day, we impose the following, additional assumptions: Assumption (2).The process{B(n)} n≥0 is independent from{N(t)} t≥0 and from{ς(t)} t≥0. Assumption (3).The expectationsE RT t ς2(r)λ(r)dr|F t  ,E  ς4 (t)  andE Rt 0ς4 (r)λ(r)dr  exist and are finite for allt∈[0,T]. Assumption (4).(a) The counting process{N(t)} t≥0 is a doubly stochastic Poisson process, adapted toFt, which has a positive,Ft-measurable and continuous intensity{λ(t)}t≥0 such that Rt 0λ(s)ds<∞a.s. for allt≥0; see Br´ emaud (1981, Chapter II.1) for details; (b) The processes{N(t)} t≥0 and{ς(t)} t≥0 are independent. Theorem C.1.Let the sampling schemeτbeF λ,ς,N T -measurable. (a) Under Assumptions (1)–(3), it holds thatE h RV(τ) Fλ,ς,N T i = rIV(0,T). (b) Under Assumptions (1)–(4), it holds thatE h RV(τ) Fλ,ς T i = IV(0,T). Part (b) of this theorem shows that for anyF λ,ς,N T -measurable sampling scheme, RV is an Fλ,ς T -conditionally unbiased estimator for IV under the TTSV model based on a doubly stochastic Poisson processN(t) as specified in Assumption (4). When conditioning onF λ,ς,N T however, part (a) shows that for the general TTSV model, RV is conditionally unbiased for the realized IV, which can be interpreted as anN(t)-dependent refinement of IV. 44 While similar to Theorem 4, there is no theoretical distinction between different sampling schemesτin terms of a bias of the RV estimator (when either staying in setting (a) or (b) of Theorem C.1), we continue by showing that similar to Theorem 8, the choice ofτentails a difference in the estimation efficiency. For this, we derive a closed-form expression for the MSE of the RV estimator depending on the sampling gridτwith a finite amount ofMsampling points. Theorem C.2. (a) Under Assumptions (1)–(3) and given that the sampling timesτareF λ,ς,N T -measurable, E h  RV(τ)−IV(0,T) 2 Fλ,ς,N T i =   rIV(0,T)−IV(0,T) 2 + 2PM j=1 rIV(τj−1,τj)2. (b) Under Assumptions (1)–(4) and given that the sampling timesτareF λ,ς T -measurable, E h  RV(τ)−IV(0,T) 2 Fλ,ς T i = 3 IQ(0,T) + 2PM j=1 IV(τj−1,τj)2, where IQ(s,t) := Rt s ς4(r)λ(r)drdenotes the Integrated Quarticity of the TTSV model. Part (a) of Theorem C.2 provides the MSE result forF λ,ς,N T -measurable sampling times for general jump processeswithoutimposing the Poisson Assumption (4) such that it e.g., also applies to Hawkes processes. In contrast, the Poisson restriction is required for part (b) as the proof relies on the zero-mean martingale property of the compensated jump process conditional onF λ,ς T , which is only satisfied under Assumption (4). In both parts of Theorem C.2, the MSE is bounded from below by the constant factors  rIV(0,T)−IV(0,T) 2 and 3 IQ(0,T), respectively. Most important for our purposes are how- ever the terms 2PM(T) j=1 IV(τj−1,τj)2 and 2PM j=1 rIV(τj−1,τj)2, which depend on the sum of the squared intraday (realized) IVs according to the chosen sampling gridτ. Hence, the results of Theorem C.2 align with Corollary 6 and Corollary 7 and show that the sampling points should be chosen to homogenize the realized and classical IV, respectively. As in Section 2.3, we see that by applying the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, these terms are minimized by sampling times that are chosen such that the intraday returns become as homogeneous as possible in terms of their (realized) IV. It is important to notice that Theorem C.2 is valid for any finite (and in practice user-chosen) value of sampling pointsM. This allows the subsequent analysis of the finite sample efficiency of different sampling schemes through the terms 2PM j=1 IV(τj−1,τj)2 and 2PM j=1 rIV(τj−1,τj)2, respectively.18 We continue to investigate the MSE for the specific (theoretical) sampling schemes introduced above. The two MSE expressions in Theorem C.2 can be further simplified under the iBTS and rBTS schemes as MX j=1 IV(τ iBTS j−1 ,τ iBTS j )2 = IV(0,T) 2 M and MX j=1 rIV(τ rBTS j−1 ,τ rBTS j )2 = rIV(0,T) 2 M .(50) This implies that the iBTS and rBTS schemes respectively make the distribution of the sampled intraday returns as homogeneous as possible, which we formalize in the following Corollary that follows directly from Theorem C.2, equation (50) and the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality. 18While choosing realized IV as the estimation target for part (a) would eliminate the first term   rIV(0,T)− IV(0,T) 2 , it would have leave the more important quantity 2PM j=1 rIV(τj−1,τj)2 unchanged, hence not affecting the relative finite sample efficiencies of different sampling schemes; see Appendix D and in particular Table D.2 for details. 45 Corollary C.3. (a) Under Assumptions (1)–(3) and given that the sampling timesτareF λ,ς,N T -measurable, E h  RV(τ)−IV(0,T) 2 Fλ,ς,N T i ≥E h  RV(τrBTS)−IV(0,T) 2 Fλ,ς,N T i , with equality if and only ifτ≡τ rBTS. (b) Under Assumptions (1)–(4) and given that the sampling timesτareF λ,ς T -measurable, E h  RV(τ)−IV(0,T) 2 Fλ,ς T i ≥E h  RV(τiBTS)−IV(0,T) 2 Fλ,ς T i , with equality if and only ifτ≡τ iBTS. This implies that for a fixed value ofM, the rBTS scheme provides the smallest MSE among all possibleF λ,ς,N T -measurable sampling schemes. Equivalently, if we only considerF λ,ς T - measurable sampling, the iBTS scheme achieves the lowest MSE. The proof techniques used in this section unfortunately do not allow for the consideration of the most general class of FT -measurable sampling, such that an “end of the day variant” of HTS cannot be considered here. D A Comparison with the Results of Oomen (2006) In this section, we thoroughly relate the theory results of Appendix C to the results of Oomen (2006), who uses a simplified version of the TTSV model with a constant tick variance process ς(t) =ς c and a non-homogeneous Poisson processN(t). He derives MSE expressions in his equations (9)–(10), which are in the spirit of our Theorem C.2 and Corollary C.3.19 This section illustrates how our results nest the ones of Oomen (2006) and additionally clarifies the specific settings under which the MSE results in Oomen (2006, Equations (9)–(10)) can be derived. For this, we impose Assumptions (1)–(4) throughout this section. In order to conduct a formal comparison with our results, we have to distinguish four settings with respect to the information set that is used for the sampling grids and the conditioning in the MSE (eitherF λ,ς T orF λ,ς,N T ), and with respect to the estimation target (either IV or rIV), that we give in Table D.1. While settings (i) and (ii) allow for the comparison ofF λ,ς,N T - measurable sampling schemes, we should only compareF λ,ς T -measurable sampling schemes in settings (iii) and (iv). It is crucial to note that MSE comparisons between sampling schemes are only meaningful when carried out under the same setting. Information Set\Target rIV = RT 0 ς2(r)dN(r) IV = RT 0 ς2(r)λ(r)dr Fλ,ς,N T (i) (ii) Fλ,ς T (iii) (iv) Table D.1: Overview of the four considered settings in deriving MSE results. 19The past literature on sampling schemes often uses inconsistent terminologies, which requires special care when comparing the results among different papers. E.g., Oomen (2006) refers to BTS as sampling with respect to the “expected number of transactions” and to TTS as sampling with respect to the “realized number of trans- actions”, which matches our definitions of iTTS and rTTS. Furthermore, Griffin and Oomen (2008) differentiate between the tick and transaction time sampling, where the former samples with respect to transactions with non-zero price changes. 46 Table D.2 reports the conditional MSE results, together with the efficient sampling schemes and their respective MSE for the four settings (i)–(iv). The upper Panel A gives results for the TTSV model (restricted to a doubly stochastic Poisson processN(t)), where the lower Panel B presents simplifications to the caseς(t) =ς c, hence allowing for a direct comparison with the results of Oomen (2006). The MSE results under settings (ii) and (iv) are stated in our Theorem C.2. For the settings (i) and (iii), the results can be easily obtained from the proof of Theorem C.2; in particular see the quadratic expansions in equations (100) and (106). Further notice that the ranking of the sampling schemes is the same for settings (i) and (ii) and for settings (iii) and (iv), respectively, as the conditional MSEs only differ by a term that is invariant from the sampling scheme. Setting Conditional MSE Eff. Sampl. Cond. MSE of Eff. Sampl. Panel A: TTSV model (i) 2 PM j=1 rIV(τj−1,τj)2 rBTS 2 rIV 2/M (ii) 2 PM j=1 rIV(τj−1,τj)2 + (rIV−IV) 2 rBTS 2 rIV 2/M+ (rIV−IV) 2 (iii) 2 PM j=1 IV(τj−1,τj)2 + 2 IQ iBTS 2 IV 2/M+ 2 IQ (iv) 2 PM j=1 IV(τj−1,τj)2 + 3 IQ iBTS 2 IV 2/M+ 3 IQ Panel B: Model of Oomen (2006) with constant tick varianceς(t) =ς c (i) 2ς 4 c PM j=1   N(τj)−N(τ j−1) 2 rTTS = rBTS 2ς 4 cN(T) 2/M (ii) 2ς 4 c PM j=1   N(τj)−N(τ j−1) 2 +ς 4 c (N(T)−Λ(T)) 2 rTTS = rBTS 2ς 4 cN(T) 2/M+ς 4 c (N(T)−Λ(T)) 2 (iii) 2ς 4 c PM j=1   Λ(τj)−Λ(τ j−1) 2 + 2ς4 c Λ(T) iTTS = iBTS 2ς 4 c Λ(T) 2/M+ 2ς 4 c Λ(T) (iv) 2ς 4 c PM j=1   Λ(τj)−Λ(τ j−1) 2 + 3ς4 c Λ(T) iTTS = iBTS 2ς 4 c Λ(T) 2/M+ 3ς 4 c Λ(T) Table D.2: MSE results and efficient sampling schemes under the settings (i)–(iv) described in Table D.1 for the general TTSV model in Panel A and for the simplified version of Oomen (2006) in Panel B. The table is expressed in terms of our notation, where we use the shorthands IV := IV(0,T), rIV := rIV(0,T), IQ := IQ(0,T) and Λ(t) := Rt 0 λ(s)dsfort∈[0,T]. The efficient sampling schemes in settings (iii) and (iv) are taken among the Fλ,ς T -measurable sampling schemes (that are in particular not based on the realizations of the processN(t)). The results of Panel B of Table D.2 are obtained as under the simplifications of Oomen (2006), we get rIV(τ j−1,τj) =ς 2 c·   N(τj)−N(τ j−1)  , IV(τj−1,τj) =ς 2 c·   Λ(τj)−Λ(τ j−1)  , and IQ(0,T) =ς 4 c Λ(T), where Λ(t) = Rt 0λ(s)dsfort∈[0,T]. The MSE result of Oomen (2006, Equation (9)) for iTTS (denoted BTS in his paper) corresponds to the result derived in our setting (iv), whereas the MSE result for rTTS (denoted TTS in his notation) in his equation (10) corresponds to setting (i), hence rendering these conditional MSEs not directly comparable. (Notice here that the notation Σ in Oomen (2006) is unfortunately used for both, IV in his equation (9) and rIV in his equation (10).) However, the conclusion that rTTS is more efficient than iTTS in his setting still holds true, but should formally be concluded from the MSE calculations under setting (ii) as Oomen (2006) allows forF λ,ς,N T -measurable, jump-based sampling schemes and considers IV as the estimation target. 47 E Proofs We structure the proofs as follows: Subsection E.1 contains the proofs for the results in the Sections 2.2 and 2.3 apart from the proofs for the main results, which are contained in Appendix A. We give proofs for our results on sampling efficiency using information of the entire day in Appendix C in Subsection E.2. E.1 Remaining Proofs for the Results in the Sections 2.2 and 2.3 Proof of Proposition 1.By Assumption 1, the jump process has finite activity, such that Nt−N s <∞a.s. for any 0≤s≤t≤T. For eachn∈Nwe define the stopping time ρn := sup{t∈[0,T] :N(t)< n}, which equals then-th jump time or the final timeT, if the process jumps has fewer thannjumps. In particular note thatP(ρ n→T) = 1, becauseNis of finite activity. The stopped processP ρn ={P ρn∧t}t∈[0,T] is a martingale for eachn∈N, since we can condition on theσ-algebras just before the jump timesF ti− and use Lemma E.4 such that E[P ρn t −P ρn s |Fs] =E " Nt∧nX i=Ns+1∧n ς(ti)Ui Fs # =E " Nt∧nX i=Ns+1∧n ς(ti)E[Ui|Fti−] Fs # = 0,(51) which implies thatPis a local martingale. In particular in (51), we use theF ti−-measurability of the tick volatility and the conditional distribution ofU i E[Ui|Fti−] =E[B(N(t i))−B(N(t i−1))|Fti−] = 0.(52) The bound required for Lemma E.4 holds, because E[|Pρn t −P ρn s |]≤ √n p E[[P]T ] (53) by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality and we assumeE[[P] 2 T ]<∞in Assumption 1 which implies E[[P]T ]<∞by Jensen’s inequality. SinceE[[P] T ]<∞,Pis square-integrable and this implies thatPis a true martingale. Lemma E.4.Consider a sequence of integrable random variablesA 1,A 2,..., a sequence ofσ- algebrasG 1⊆G 2,...∈Fand an almost surely finite integer-valued random variableM. Assume for eachj∈Nthat{j≤M}∈G j.20 IfA j≥0 for eachj∈Nor there exist random variables ¯A and ˜Asuch that PM j=1Aj ≤ ¯A,E[ ¯A]<∞, PM j=1 E[Aj|Gj] ≤ ˜AandE[ ˜A]<∞, then we have for anyσ-algebraG⊆G 1 that E   MX j=1 Aj G   =E   MX j=1 E[Aj|Gj] G  .(54) Proof of Lemma E.4.BecauseMis almost surely finite, we have the almost sure convergence 20Interpretation: the sequence ofσ-algebras forms a discrete-time filtration (G j)j=1,... andM+ 1 is required to be a stopping time with respect to that filtration, i.e.{M=j−1}∈G j. 48 limn→∞M∧n=M. The result now follows, as E   MX j=1 Aj G   = lim n→∞ E   M∧nX j=1 Aj G   = lim n→∞ E   nX j=1 1{j≤M}Aj G   = lim n→∞ nX j=1 E  1{j≤M}Aj G  (55) = lim n→∞ nX j=1 E  E  1{j≤M}Aj|Gj  G  = lim n→∞ nX j=1 E  1{j≤M} E[Aj|Gj] G  (56) = lim n→∞ E   M∧nX j=1 E[Aj|Gj] G   =E   MX j=1 E[Aj|Gj] G  ,(57) where the first and last equality follow from the Monotone Convergence Theorem in the case thatA j ≥0 for eachj∈Nand from the Dominated Convergence Theorem for conditional expectations under the assumption of the existence of integrable bounding random variables. Proof of Proposition 2. lim δ↓0 1 δ E  (Pt+δ−Pt)2 Ft  = lim δ↓0 1 δ E  [P]t+δ−[P] t Ft  (58) = lim δ↓0 E " IV(t,t+δ) δ Ft # (59) =E " lim δ↓0 IV(t,t+δ) δ Ft # (60) =ς 2(t+)λ(t+),(61) where we use the Dominated Convergence Theorem in the third step to exchange the limit and the expectation with the bound coming from the integrable random variableZ(t) and we apply the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus in the last step to the right-sided derivative of IV(0,·) at tand use the right-continuity of the filtration. Proof of Proposition 3.This result is a special case of Theorem 4 that appears in Section 2.3 by choosing the trivial sampling schemeτ={0,T}. Lemma E.5.Under Assumption 1 for any pair of stopping times 0≤σ≤τ≤T E  ((Pτ−Pσ)2−([P] τ−[P] σ))2|Fσ  =E   X σ<ti≤τ A2 i (σ) Fσ   (62) = 2 3 E  r4(σ,τ)|F σ  −2E[IQ(σ,τ)|F σ] (63) = 2E  rIV(σ,τ)(2(P τ−Pσ)2−rIV(σ,τ))|F σ  (64) −2E[IQ(σ,τ)|F σ],(65) whereA i(σ) = 2(Pti−−Pσ)ς(ti)Ui. 49 Proof of Lemma E.5.As noted in the proof of Theorem 5, we can write (Pτ−Pσ)2−([P] τ−[P] σ) = 2 Z τ σ (Pr−−Pσ)dPr,(66) as a stochastic integral with respect to the price processP. Using the Itˆ o isometry for the stochastic integral and the Optional Stopping Theorem it follows that E  ((Pτ−Pσ)2−([P] τ−[P] σ))2|Fσ  =E " 4 Z τ σ (Pr−−Pσ)2d[P]r Fσ # (67) =E  4 X σ<ti≤τ (Pti−−Pσ)2(∆Pti)2 Fσ   (68) =E   X σ<ti≤τ A2 i (σ) Fσ  .(69) By iteratively using the binomial formula, the fourth power of the intraday returnr(σ,τ) can be written as (Pτ−Pσ)4 =   X σ<ti≤τ ∆Pti   4 (70) = 6 X σ<ti≤τ (Pti−−Pσ)2(∆Pti)2 + X σ<ti≤τ (∆Pti)4 +Qσ(τ−σ) (71) whereQ σ is a process defined by Qσ(t) = 4 X σ≤ti≤σ+t∧T (Pti−−Pσ)3∆Pti + 4 X σ≤ti≤σ+t∧T (Pti−−Pσ)(∆Pti)3 (72) fort≥0. If we show thatE[Q σ(τ−σ)|F σ] = 0 we can conclude from (68) and (71) that we have that E  ((Pτ−Pσ)2−([P] τ−[P] σ))2 Fσ  = 2 3 E  (Pτ−Pσ)4− X σ<ti≤τ (∆Pti)4 Fσ  ,(73) which implies the result, since we can apply Lemma E.4 to show that E   X σ<ti≤τ (∆Pti)4 Fσ   =E   X σ<ti≤τ E[(∆Pti)4|Fti−] Fσ   =E   X σ<ti≤τ 3ς(ti)4 Fσ   = 3E[IQ(σ,τ)|F σ]. (74) To show thatE[Q σ(τ−σ)|F σ] = 0, we use the Optional Stopping Theorem. To this end, we begin by showing thatQσ is a martingale with respect to the filtration{Fσ+t∧T}t≥0. Clearly,Q σ is adapted to the filtration{F σ+t∧T}t≥0 andQ σ(0) = 0 is integrable. The martingale property 50 follows as E[Qσ(t)−Q σ(s)|Fσ+s∧T ] (75) =E  4 X σ+s∧T<ti≤σ+t∧T (Pti−−Pσ)3∆Pti Fσ+s∧T   (76) +E  4 X σ+s∧T<ti≤σ+t∧T (Pti−−Pσ)(∆Pti)3 Fσ+s∧T   (77) =E  4 X σ+s∧T<ti≤σ+t∧T (Pti−−Pσ)3E[∆Pti|Fti−] Fσ+s∧T   (78) +E  4 X σ+s∧T<ti≤σ+t∧T (Pti−−Pσ)E[(∆Pti)3|Fti−] Fσ+s∧T   (79) =E  4 X σ+s∧T<ti≤σ+t∧T (Pti−−Pσ)3ς(ti)E[Ui|Fti−] Fσ+s∧T   (80) +E  4 X σ+s∧T<ti≤σ+t∧T (Pti−−Pσ)ς(ti)3E[U 3 i|Fti−] Fσ+s∧T   (81) = 0,(82) where in the last step we use that at each jump time the Brownian incrementsUi|Fti−∼N(0,1) under Assumption 1 such thatE[Ui|Fti−] =E[U 3 i|Fti−] = 0. In the second step, we apply Lemma E.4 in a similar way as in the proof of Proposition 1. Note thatQ σ(t) can be written in terms of (Pt−Pσ)4,P ti≤t(Pt−−Pσ)2∆P 2 ti andP ti≤t ∆P 4 ti and it is possible to bound these latter terms in expectation byE[[P] 2 T ] by applying the Burkholder-Davis-Gundy inequalities. The Optional Stopping Theorem now gives the desired result that E[Qσ(τ−σ)|F σ] =E[Q σ(0)|Fσ] = 0.(83) To show the last equation in the statement of the Lemma, we use the integration by parts formula for the stochastic integral and work out the resulting expectation by using the conditioning as in Lemma E.4: E  4 X σ<ti≤τ (Pti−−Pσ)2(∆Pti)2 Fσ   = 4E "Z τ σ (Pr−−Pσ)2drIV(σ,r) Fσ # (84) = 4E " (Pτ−Pσ)2 rIV(σ,τ)− Z τ σ rIV(σ,r−)d((P·−Pσ)2)r−  rIV(σ,·),(P·−Pσ)2 τ Fσ # (85) = 4E " (Pτ−Pσ)2 rIV(σ,τ)− Z τ σ rIV(σ,r−)d[P] r− Z τ σ ς2(r)d[P]r Fσ # (86) 51 = 4E " (Pτ−Pσ)2 rIV(σ,τ)− 1 2  rIV(σ,τ) 2− Z τ σ ς4(r)dN(r)  − Z τ σ ς4(r)dN(r) Fσ # (87) = 2E  rIV(σ,τ)(2(P τ−Pσ)2−rIV(σ,τ))|F σ  −2E[IQ(σ,τ)|F σ].(88) In the second equality we use thatE Rτ σ rIV(σ,r−)Pr−dPr|Fσ  = 0, which follows from Lemma E.4, and the integrability can be shown to follow from Assumption 1 in which we assume that E[[P] 2 T ] andE[rIV(0,T) 2] are finite. Proof of Corollary 6.The contribution of the sampling scheme to the MSE is only through the first term in Equation (41), which is computed in Lemma E.5. Instead of conditioning on Fτj−1 in the first term in (41), we now choose to condition onF λ,ς,N τj and we can still apply Lemma E.4, because the sampling schemeτisF λ,ς,N -measurable such that we have that E   MX j=1 E   X τj−1<ti≤τj A2 i (τj−1) Fτj−1     (89) = 2E   MX j=1 E h rIV(τj−1,τj)  2   Pτj−Pτj−1 2−rIV(τj,τj−1)  Fλ,ς,N τj i   (90) −2E   MX j=1 E h IQ(τj,τj−1) Fλ,ς,N τj i   (91) = 2E   MX j=1 rIV(τj−1,τj)  2E h  Pτj−Pτj−1 2 Fλ,ς,N τj i −rIV(τj,τj−1)   −2E[IQ(0,T)]. (92) Under the assumption thatU 2 i for anyi= 1,...,N(T) is independent of the paths ofλ,ςand N, we have that E h (P(τj)−P(τ j−1))2 Fλ,ς,N τj i = rIV(τj−1,τj) +E h (P(τj)−P(τ j−1))2−([P] τj−[P] τj−1) Fλ,ς,N τj i (93) The result now follows by applying Lemma E.4 once more. Proof of Corollary 7.By the Itˆ o isometry for the stochastic integral we have that E  rIV(τj−1,τj)2|Fτj−1  =E " IV(τj−1,τj)2 + IQ(τj−1,τj) + 2 IV(τj−1,τj) Z τj τj−1 ς2(r)d ˜N(r) Fτj−1 # . (94) Using this result and applying Lemma E.4 to the MSE result in (14), we find for anFλ,ς-adapted 52 sampling scheme that 2E   MX j=1 rIV(τj−1,τj)2   = 2E   MX j=1 IV(τj−1,τj)2   + 2E[IQ(0,T)] +E h ˜R(τ) i ,(95) which implies the MSE result in (16). Definition E.6.For any random sequenceA={A 1,A 2,...}taking values inR ∞ ≥0 such that eventuallyA j = 0 for large enoughj, we defineM(A) = min(m∈N:A j = 0 for allj >m). Lemma E.7.Given two constants ¯M∈NandQ∈R >0, denote byA( ¯M,Q) the collection of all random sequencesAtaking values inR ∞ ≥0 such thatM(A)>0 almost surely andE[M(A)] = ¯M andE hPM(A) j=1 Aj i =Q, whereM(A) is defined in Definition E.6. The minimization min A∈A( ¯M,Q) E   M(A)X j=1 A2 j   (96) is attained by the deterministic sequenceA ∗ such thatA ∗ j = Q ¯M forj≤ ¯MandA ∗ j = 0 for j > ¯M. Proof of Lemma E.7.A lower bound for the minimization objective in (96) follows by apply- ing the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality twice: E   M(A)X j=1 A2 j  ≥E   PM(A) j=1 Aj 2 M(A)   (97) ≥ Q2 E[M(A)].(98) The first application of the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality is for the standardl 2 inner product for square-summable sequences and the second inequality is for the inner product for random vari- ables given byE[XY], where we chooseX= PM(A) j=1 Aj√ M(A) andY= p M(A). It is straightforward to show thatA∗ satisfies the required conditions and that the lower bound in (98) is reached for A∗. 53 E.2 Proofs for Appendix C Proof of Theorem C.1.Let{t i}m i=n witht n < ... < tm,n,m∈Nandn≤mdenote the sequence of arrival times in the interval (τ j−1,τj]. Then, it holds that E h r2 j Fλ,ς,N T i =E   Z τj τj−1 ς(r)dB(N(r)) !2 Fλ,ς,N T   =E     X τj−1<ti≤τj ς(ti)Ui   2 Fλ,ς,N T   =E     X tn≤ti≤tm ς(ti)Ui   2 Fλ,ς,N T   =E     X tn≤ti≤tm−1 ς(ti)Ui +ς(t m)Um   2 Fλ,ς,N T   =E     X tn≤ti≤tm−1 ς(ti)Ui   2 + (ς(tm)Um)2 + 2   X tn≤ti≤tm−1 ς(ti)Ui  ς(tm)Um Fλ,ς,N T  . (99) From Assumption (1) and the independence in Assumption (2), we obtainU i|F λ,ς,N T ∼N(0,1) andU i|F λ,ς,N T ∨Fti−∼N(0,1). Using the predictability ofςand the tower property, noting thatF λ,ς T ⊂  Fλ,ς,N T ∨Ftm−  , it follows that E     X tn≤ti≤tm−1 ς(ti)Ui  ς(tm)Um Fλ,ς,N T   =E  E     X tn≤ti≤tm−1 ς(ti)Ui  ς(tm)Um Fλ,ς,N T ∨Ftm−   Fλ,ς,N T   =E     X tn≤ti≤tm−1 ς(ti)Ui  ς(tm)E h Um Fλ,ς,N T ∨Ftm− i Fλ,ς,N T   = 0, and thus, the third term in the last row of (99) is zero. Similarly, E h (ς(tm)Um)2 Fλ,ς,N T i =E h E h (ς(tm)Um)2 Fλ,ς,N T ∨Ftm− i Fλ,ς,N T i =E h ς2 (tm)E h U 2 m Fλ,ς,N T ∨Ftm− i Fλ,ς,N T i =E h ς2 (tm) Fλ,ς,N T i . Repeatedly splitting up the squared sum in (99) hence yields E h r2 j Fλ,ς,N T i =E   X tn≤ti≤tm ς2 (ti) Fλ,ς,N T   =E   X τj−1<ti≤τj ς2 (ti) Fλ,ς,N T   =E "Z τj τj−1 ς2 (r)dN(r) Fλ,ς,N T # = Z τj τj−1 ς2 (r)dN(r). 54 Summing up, we get that E h RV(τ) Fλ,ς,N T i =E   M(T)X j=1 r2 j Fλ,ς,N T   = Z T 0 ς2 (r)dN(r) = rIV (0,T). Given the additional Assumption (4) we use the Doob-Meyer decomposition of the jump pro- cess into the zero-mean martingale ˜N(t) w.r.tF t and theF t-predictable compensator Rt 0λ(r)dr. For ˜N(t) =N(t)− Rt 0λ(r)dr, Br´ emaud (1981, Lemma L3, page 24) yields that RT 0 ς2(r)d ˜N(r) also has a zero-mean conditioning onF λ,ς T .21 Hence with the the tower property, we obtain: E h RV(τ) Fλ,ς T i =E h E h RV(τ) Fλ,ς,N T i Fλ,ς T i =E h rIV(0,T) Fλ,ς T i =E Z T 0 ς2 (r)dN(r) Fλ,ς T  =E Z T 0 ς2 (r)d ˜N(r) Fλ,ς T  +E Z T 0 ς2 (r)λ(r)dr Fλ,ς T  = Z T 0 ς2 (r)λ(r)dr= IV(0,T), which finishes this proof. Proof of Theorem C.2.We begin by proving part (a): Given Assumptions (1), (2) and (3), we get that E h (RV(τ)−IV(0,T)) 2 Fλ,ς,N T i =E h (RV(τ)−rIV(0,T) + rIV(0,T)−IV(0,T)) 2 Fλ,ς,N T i =E h (RV(τ)−rIV(0,T)) 2 Fλ,ς,N T i + 2E h (RV(τ)−rIV(0,T)) (rIV(0,T)−IV(0,T)) Fλ,ς,N T i +E h (rIV(0,T)−IV(0,T)) 2 Fλ,ς,N T i =E h (RV(τ)−rIV(0,T)) 2 Fλ,ς,N T i + (rIV(0,T)−IV(0,T)) 2. (100) The mixed term disappears sinceE h RV(τ)−rIV(0,T) Fλ,ς,N T i = 0 and (rIV(0,T)−IV(0,T)) is Fλ,ς,N T -measurable. We proceed by calculating the first term. From the conditional unbiasedness in Theorem C.1, it follows that E h (RV(τ)−rIV (0,T)) 2 Fλ,ς,N T i =E h (RV(τ))2−2 RV(τ) rIV (0,T) + rIV (0,T) 2 Fλ,ς,N T i =E h (RV(τ))2 Fλ,ς,N T i −rIV (0,T) 2. (101) 21With the more general jump process, the information setF λ,ς T could also contain the information ofNwhich would result in ˜NbeingF λ,ς T -measurable. The conditional expectation wouldn’t be zero anymore. 55 Applying the multinomial theorem, we get   RV(τ) 2 =   M(T)X j=1 r2 j   2 = M(T)X j=1 r4 j + M(T)X j,k=1 j̸=k r2 jr2 k.(102) We now split the proof into three parts: 1.We begin by analyzing the first term in (102). Let{t i}m i=n witht n <...<t m,n,m∈N andn≤mdenote the series of jump times of the counting processNin the interval (τ j−1,τj]. By subsequently detaching the smallest term in the sums to the fourth power and applying the binomial theorem, we get for allj= 1,...,M(T) that E h r4 j Fλ,ς,N T i =E     X τj−1<ti≤τj ς(ti)Ui   4 Fλ,ς,N T   =E     X tn+1≤ti≤tm ς(ti)Ui   4 +ς 4 (tn)U 4 n +4   X tn+1≤ti≤tm ς(ti)Ui   3 ς(tn)Un +6   X tn+1≤ti≤tm ς(ti)Ui   2 ς2 (tn)U 2 n +4   X tn+1≤ti≤tm ς(ti)Ui  ς3 (tn)U 3 n Fλ,ς,N T   =E  3 X τj−1<ti≤τj ς4 (ti) + 6 X τj−1<ti<τj X ti+1≤th≤τj ς2 (th)ς 2 (ti) Fλ,ς,N T   =E  3   X τj−1<ti≤τj ς2 (ti)   2 Fλ,ς,N T   = 3 rIV(τj−1,τj)2,(103) where we use Assumption (2), and especially, the moment structure ofU i|F λ,ς,N T ∼N(0,1) resulting from Assumption (1) and (2). 2.We continue by simplifying the second term in (102). For the non-overlapping intervals 56 (τj−1,τj] and (τk−1,τk] forj̸=k, it holds that E h r2 jr2 k Fλ,ς,N T i =E     X τj−1<ti≤τj ς(ti)Ui   2  X τk−1<ti≤τk ς(ti)Ui   2 Fλ,ς,N T   =E     X τj−1<ti≤τj ς2 (ti)     X τk−1<ti≤τk ς2 (ti)   Fλ,ς,N T   =E " Z τj τj−1 ς2 (r)dN(r) ! Z τk τk−1 ς2 (r)dN(r) ! Fλ,ς,N T # = Z τj τj−1 ς2 (r)dN(r) ! Z τk τk−1 ς2 (r)dN(r) ! = rIV(τj−1,τj) rIV(τk−1,τk), (104) due to the independence ofς(t i) andU i. 3.We proceed by inserting the results from (103) and (104) into equation (102) and summing them up according to (101). We get E h (RV(τ)−rIV(0,T)) 2 Fλ,ς,N T i =E h (RV(τ))2 Fλ,ς,N T i −rIV (0,T) 2 = 3 M(T)X j=1 rIV (τj−1,τj)2 + MX j,k=1 j̸=k rIV (τj−1,τj) rIV (τk−1,τk)−rIV (0,T) 2 = 2 M(T)X j=1 rIV (τj−1,τj)2 + rIV (0,T) 2−rIV (0,T) 2 =2 M(T)X j=1 rIV (τj−1,τj)2. Inserting this result into (100) then yields the claim (a): E h (RV(τ)−IV(0,T)) 2 Fλ,ς,N T i = (rIV(0,T)−IV(0,T)) 2 + 2 M(T)X j=1 rIV(τj−1,τj)2.(105) We proceed to show the claim (b): Let Assumptions (1)–(4) hold. We calculate the condi- tional MSE of RV(τ) onF λ,ς T by taking the conditional expectation of the result in claim (a). 57 With the tower property the following holds: E h (RV(τ)−IV(0,T)) 2 Fλ,ς T i =E h E h (RV(τ)−IV(0,T)) 2 Fλ,ς,N T i Fλ,ς T i =E  (rIV(0,T)−IV(0,T)) 2 + 2 M(T)X j=1 rIV(τj−1,τj)2 Fλ,ς T   =E h (rIV(0,T)−IV(0,T)) 2 Fλ,ς T i + 2 M(T)X j=1 E h rIV(τj−1,τj)2 Fλ,ς T i . (106) We begin by calculating the first term. Note that the following result only applies to sampling schemesτthat areF λ,ς T -measurable. We denote the compensated jump process by ˜N(t) = N(t)− Rt 0λ(r)dr, and get E h rIV(τj−1,τj)2 Fλ,ς T i =E   Z τj τj−1 ς2 (r)dN(r) !2 Fλ,ς T   =E   Z τj τj−1 ς2 (r)d ˜N(r) + Z τj τj−1 ς2 (r)λ(r)dr !2 Fλ,ς T   =E   Z τj τj−1 ς2 (r)d ˜N(r) !2 + 2 Z τj τj−1 ς2 (r)d ˜N(r) Z τj τj−1 ς2 (r)λ(r)dr + Z τj τj−1 ς2 (r)λ(r)dr !2 Fλ,ς T   =E   Z τj τj−1 ς2 (r)d ˜N(r) !2 Fλ,ς T   + 2E "Z τj τj−1 ς2 (r)d ˜N(r) Fλ,ς T # IV (τj−1,τj) + IV (τj−1,τj)2. The second term above is zero due to the zero-mean martingale property of Rt 0ς2 (r)d ˜N(r) w.r.t Fλ,ς T based on Assumption (4) (see Br´ emaud (1981, Lemma L3, page 24)).22 To further simplify the first term, we need the quadratic variation  ˜N  t since by the Itˆ o’s isometry for martingales it holds that E   Z τj τj−1 ς2 (r)d ˜N(r) !2 Fλ,ς T   =E "Z τj τj−1 ς4 (r)d h ˜N i r Fλ,ς T # . 22The martingale property is w.r.t. the filtrationG t :=F λ,ς T ∨F t, i.e. with respect to the filtration of the smallestσ-algebras containing bothF λ,ς T andF t. We specifically need the zero-mean property which is fulfilled in case of a doubly stochastic Poisson process since the trades arrive independently and are can not be recovered from the evolution ofλ. 58 Further let 0 =s 0<s 1<...<s n =tdenote a partition of [0,t] such that max 1≤k≤n |sk−sk−1|→0 asn→∞. Then, using thatN(t) is a pure jump process and thatt7→ Rt 0λ(r)dris continuous, we have that h ˜N i t = plimn→∞ nX k=1  ˜N(s k)− ˜N(s k−1) 2 = plimn→∞ nX k=1 N(s k)−N(s k−1) + Z sk sk−1 λ(r)dr !2 = plimn→∞ nX k=1      N(s k)−N(s k−1) 2 + Z sk sk−1 λ(r)dr !2    = [N]t + Z · 0 λ(r)dr  t = X 0<s≤t (N(s)−N(s−)) 2 = X 0<s≤t (N(s)−N(s−)) =N(t). Hence, it follows that E   Z τj τj−1 ς2 (r)d ˜N(r) !2 Fλ,ς T   =E "Z τj τj−1 ς4 (r)dN(r) Fλ,ς T # =E "Z τj τj−1 ς4 (r)d ˜N(r) + Z τj τj−1 ς4 (r)λ(r)dr Fλ,ς T # =E "Z τj τj−1 ς4 (r)λ(r)dr Fλ,ς T # = IQ (τj−1,τj), where we apply the martingale property of Rt 0ς4 (r)d ˜N(r). We again use the assumption that the sampling schemeτisF λ,ς T -measurable here. The first term in (106) now simplifies the following way: E h (rIV(0,T)−IV(0,T)) 2 Fλ,ς T i =E "Z T 0 ς2(r)dN(r)− Z T 0 ς2(r)λ(r)dr 2 Fλ,ς T # =E "Z 0 ς2 (r)d ˜N(r) 2 Fλ,ς T # = IQ (0,T). For the second term in (106) we accordingly find 2 M(T)X j=1 E h rIV(τj−1,τj)2 Fλ,ς T i = 2 M(T)X j=1 IV(τj−1,τj)2 + 2 M(T)X j=1 IQ (τj−1,τj) 59 = 2 M(T)X j=1 IV(τj−1,τj)2 + 2 IQ(0,T). Summing the results up yields claim (b) and finishes the proof: E h (RV(τ)−IV(0,T)) 2 Fλ,ς T i = 3 IQ(0,T) + 2 M(T)X j=1 IV(τj−1,τj)2. 60 F Approximating the remainder term in Corollary 6 Consider the remainder term from Corollary 6 given by R(τ) = 4 MX j=1   (Pτj−Pτj−1)2−([P] τj−[P] τj−1)  rIV(τj−1,τj). We start to only consider the initial term of the sum above and refer to the first sampling time asτ. Then, we have that (P 2 τ−[P] τ)·rIV(0,τ) = X 0≤ti<tj≤τ 2ς(ti)ς(tj)UiUj X 0≤tk≤τ ς2(tk) = X 0≤ti<tj≤τ X 0≤tk≤τ 2ς(ti)ς(tj)UiUjς2(tk),(107) where we used thatP(t) = P 0≤tj≤tς(tj)Uj. We will now see that in expectation, many of the terms in (107) are zero. Namely, for allt k such thatt k≤t j, we can condition onF tj− (and apply Lemma E.4) such that E[(P 2 τ−[P] τ)·rIV(0,τ)] =E   X 0≤ti<tj≤τ X tj<tk≤τ 2ς(ti)ς(tj)UiUjς2(tk)  . This last expression shows that the dependence between the tick variance after the jump time tj, i.e.,ς 2(tk), and the productς(t i)ς(tj)UiUj is important. For the sake of argument, suppose that there exists aj′∈Nsuch that for eachk≥j+j ′, the tick varianceς 2(tk) is independent fromς(t j) andU j. This characterizes that the dependence of theςprocess on its past and on the past of the price-changes dies out after some time (similar tok-dependence orα-mixing). Then, we can also condition onF tj− and use the independence ς(tk)⊥ς(t j),Uj, ift k≥t j+j′, as well as the independence ofς(t i)⊥ς(t j),Uj, ift i≤t j−j′, such that E[(P 2 τ−[P] τ)·rIV(0,τ)] =E   X 0<tj≤τ    X tj−j′<ti<tj 2ς(ti)ς(tj)UiUj X tj<tk≤tj+j′∧τ ς2(tk)     .(108) For many of thet j’s in the above sum, the terms do not depend on the sampling timeτ. This is only the case ift j is such thatt j+j′≥τ. So we can approximate E[(P 2 τ−[P] τ)·rIV(0,τ)]≈E   X 0<tj≤τ    X tj−j′<ti<tj 2ς(ti)ς(tj)UiUj X tj<tk≤tj+j′ ς2(tk)     ,(109) where the approximation is accurate if the sampling timeτis large in comparison to the time it takes for the dependence between the tick variance and the past price changes and the past tick variance to become negligible. Generalizing the previous argument to all sampling points, we get the following approxima- 61 tion for the entire remainder term, E[R(τ)]≈E   X 0<tj≤T    X tj−j′<ti<tj 2ς(ti)ς(tj)UiUj X tj<tk≤tj+j′ ς2(tk)     .(110) Most importantly, the approximation in (110) does not depend on the employed sampling scheme such that we conjecture that the efficiency result of Theorem 8 (b) continues to hold under mild forms of dependencies, as can be seen from our simulation results. Notice again that the accuracy of the above approximations depends on a dependence structure that dies out quick enough (in (108)) and a relatively sparse sampling frequency (in (109)). Although some arguments in this section are informal, they offer valuable intuition and can serve as a foundation for more rigorous mathematical analysis in future research. 62 G Additional Empirical Results δ ≈ 0.0033, M ≈ 12 −0.0025 0.0000 0.0025 0 100 200 300 400 return count δ ≈ 0.0012, M ≈ 80 −0.002 −0.001 0.000 0.001 0.002 0 1000 2000 return count δ ≈ 0.00038, M ≈ 720 −0.001 0.000 0.001 0 5000 10000 15000 return count Figure G.1: Histograms of the simulated HTS returns at different values ofδin (19) (and corresponding average values Mshown in the plot titles). Here, we see the “overshooting” effect of the HTS returns in discrete price processes that becomes more severe for smaller values ofδ. 63 0% Noise 25% Noise 50% Noise 100% Noise 2000 Ticks per day8000 Ticks per day32000 Ticks per day 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 0.0625 0.5000 4.0000 0.0625 0.5000 4.0000 0.0625 0.5000 4.0000 Amount of samples: M Relative RMSE Sampling scheme CTS rTTS rBTS HTS Figure G.2: Relative RMSE of the RV estimator under the Hawkes-type TTSV process using different sampling schemes in color plotted against the (for HTS average) sampling frequenciesMon the horizontal axis. The plot columns refer to the (i.i.d.) noise magnitude described below (25) and the plot rows refer to different amounts of expected ticks per day. 64 0% Noise 25% Noise 50% Noise 100% Noise i.i.d. noiseARMA noisediurnal ARMA noise 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 0.0625 0.2500 1.0000 0.0625 0.2500 1.0000 0.0625 0.2500 1.0000 Amount of samples: M Relative RMSE Sampling scheme CTS rTTS rBTS HTS Figure G.3: Relative RMSE of the RV estimator under the Hawkes-type TTSV process using different sampling schemes in color plotted against the (for HTS average) sampling frequenciesMon the horizontal axis. The plot rows refer to different specifications of the noise process and the plot columns refer to the noise magnitude described below (25). 65 0% Noise 25% Noise 50% Noise 100% Noise TTSBTS 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 0.03125 0.06250 0.12500 0.25000 0.50000 0.03125 0.06250 0.12500 0.25000 0.50000 Amount of samples: M Relative RMSE Sampling scheme Realized (estimated) Realized (true) Intensity (estimated) Intensity (true) Figure G.4: Relative RMSE of the RV estimator (for TTS and BTS in the plot rows) plotted against the sampling frequenciesMand for different realized and intensity based sampling schemes in color. The “estimated” schemes refer to estimation of the underlying intensities whereas the “true” versions employ the true (oracle) intensities. 0% Noise 25% Noise 50% Noise 100% Noise TTSBTS 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 26 78 390 1560 0.03125 0.06250 0.12500 0.25000 0.50000 0.03125 0.06250 0.12500 0.25000 0.50000 Amount of samples: M Relative RMSE Sampling scheme Realized stopping time Realized (using information in Φ (T)) Figure G.5: Relative RMSE of the RV estimator (for TTS and BTS in the plot rows) plotted against the (average) sampling frequenciesM, where the colored lines refer to the stopping time versions (that generate random values forM) and the versions that use information Φ(T) to fixM; see the discussion in Section 2.4. 66 Sampling vs. CTS Sampling vs. rBTS MSE QLIKE MSE QLIKE Sampling pos neg pos neg Sampling pos neg pos neg Panel A: MatchingM δ toMseparately for everyday and asset: CTS 0 56 2 90 rTTS 46 0 64 8 rTTS 3 42 0 89 iBTS 43 1 95 0 iBTS 4 29 14 27 rBTS 56 0 90 2 HTS 56 3 86 4 HTS 33 19 73 10 Panel B: Matching (monthly average of)M δ toM, separately on everymonth and asset: CTS 0 56 2 90 rTTS 45 0 65 8 rTTS 3 42 0 89 iBTS 44 1 95 0 iBTS 4 29 14 27 rBTS 56 0 90 2 HTS 49 2 86 4 HTS 32 14 71 10 Panel C: Matching (all-time average of)M δ toM, separately for everyasset: CTS 0 56 2 90 rTTS 45 0 64 8 rTTS 4 42 0 89 iBTS 43 1 95 0 iBTS 4 29 14 26 rBTS 56 0 90 2 HTS 47 4 85 4 HTS 31 15 67 10 Panel D: Matching (average over days and assets)M δ toM: CTS 0 55 2 90 rTTS 47 0 64 8 rTTS 4 42 0 89 iBTS 43 1 95 0 iBTS 4 29 14 27 rBTS 56 0 90 2 HTS 44 4 85 6 HTS 30 16 64 12 Table G.3: Percentage values of significantly positive (“pos”) and negative (“neg”) MSE and QLIKE loss dif- ferences between the sampling schemes mentioned in the column “Sampling” against the one in the title using the method of Patton (2011a). The percentage values are computed over the 27 assets and the seven employed values ofMfor the respective estimators. The four panels A–D correspond to different methods how the daily varyingMδ of HTS is matched to the fixed values ofMof the other sampling schemes, which is further described in footnote 15. Panel A corresponds to the results presented in Table 1. 67 Realized TTS vs. CTS Intensity BTS vs. CTS Realized BTS vs. CTS HTS vs. CTS 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 XOM WMT VZ UTX PG PFE NKE MRK MO MMM MCD KO JPM JNJ IP IBM HPQ HON HD GS GE DIS CAT BAC BA AXP AA M Asset Relative RMSE Improvement −10% 0% 10% 20% Realized TTS vs. CTS Intensity BTS vs. CTS Realized BTS vs. CTS HTS vs. CTS 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 XOM WMT VZ UTX PG PFE NKE MRK MO MMM MCD KO JPM JNJ IP IBM HPQ HON HD GS GE DIS CAT BAC BA AXP AA M Asset Relative QLIKE Improvement −10% 0% 10% 20% Figure G.6: RMSE (top) and QLIKE (bottom) loss differences for the RV estimator based on different sampling schemes and a range of sampling frequenciesMfor the 27 considered assets. Each point corresponds to a (at the 5% level) significant loss difference of the corresponding RV estimator to abenchmark CTS R V estimator with the same sampling frequency. For the evaluation proxy, we use daily squared returns here. Insignificant loss differences are omitted. The color scale of the points shows the relative improvement in terms of RMSE/QLIKE, where black (red) colors refer to an improvement (decline). 68 CTS vs. Realized BTS Realized TTS vs. Realized BTS Intensity BTS vs. Realized BTS HTS vs. Realized BTS 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 XOM WMT VZ UTX PG PFE NKE MRK MO MMM MCD KO JPM JNJ IP IBM HPQ HON HD GS GE DIS CAT BAC BA AXP AA M Asset Relative RMSE Improvement −20% −10% 0% 10% CTS vs. Realized BTS Realized TTS vs. Realized BTS Intensity BTS vs. Realized BTS HTS vs. Realized BTS 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 XOM WMT VZ UTX PG PFE NKE MRK MO MMM MCD KO JPM JNJ IP IBM HPQ HON HD GS GE DIS CAT BAC BA AXP AA M Asset Relative QLIKE Improvement −10% 0% 10% Figure G.7: RMSE (top) and QLIKE (bottom) loss differences for the RV estimator based on different sampling schemes and a range of sampling frequenciesMfor the 27 considered assets. Each point corresponds to a (at the 5% level) significant loss difference of the corresponding RV estimator to abenchmark rBTS R V estimator with the same sampling frequency. For the evaluation proxy, we use daily squared returns here. Insignificant loss differences are omitted. The color scale of the points shows the relative improvement in terms of RMSE/QLIKE, where black (red) colors refer to an improvement (decline). 69 CTS vs. PreAvg RV Realized TTS vs. PreAvg RV Realized BTS vs. PreAvg RV HTS vs. PreAvg RV 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 XOM WMT VZ UTX PG PFE NKE MRK MO MMM MCD KO JPM JNJ IP IBM HPQ HON HD GS GE DIS CAT BAC BA AXP AA M Asset Relative RMSE Improvement −20% −10% 0% 10% 20% Figure G.8: RMSE loss differences for the RV estimator based on different sampling schemes and a range of sampling frequenciesMfor the 27 considered assets. Here, unlike Figure 11, we use the (leaded) CTS RV estimator withM= 78 as the proxy in the evaluation framework of Patton (2011a). Each point corresponds to a (at the 5% level) significant loss difference of the corresponding RV estimator to abenchmark pre-averaging R V estimatorusing all tick-level returns. Insignificant loss differences are omitted. The color scale of the points shows the relative improvement in terms of RMSE, where black (red) colors refer to an improvement (decline). CTS vs. PreAvg RV Realized TTS vs. PreAvg RV Realized BTS vs. PreAvg RV HTS vs. PreAvg RV 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 13 26 39 78 130 260 390 XOM WMT VZ UTX PG PFE NKE MRK MO MMM MCD KO JPM JNJ IP IBM HPQ HON HD GS GE DIS CAT BAC BA AXP AA M Asset Relative RMSE Improvement −20% −10% 0% 10% 20% Figure G.9: RMSE loss differences for the RV estimator based on different sampling schemes and a range of sampling frequenciesMfor the 27 considered assets. Here, unlike Figure 11, we use the (leaded) pre-averaging RV estimator as the proxy in the evaluation framework of Patton (2011a). Each point corresponds to a (at the 5% level) significant loss difference of the corresponding RV estimator to abenchmark pre-averaging R V estimator using all tick-level returns. Insignificant loss differences are omitted. The color scale of the points shows the relative improvement in terms of RMSE, where black (red) colors refer to an improvement (decline). 70