Can we infer microscopic financial information from the long memory in market-order flow?: a quantitative test of the Lillo-Mike-Farmer model Yuki Sato and Kiyoshi Kanazawa ∗ Department of Physics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan (Dated: August 4, 2023) In financial markets, the market order sign exhibits strong persistence, widely known as the long-range cor- relation (LRC) of order flow; specifically, the sign autocorrelation function (ACF) displays long memory with power-law exponentγ, such thatC(τ )∝τ −γ for large time-lagτ. One of the most promising microscopic hy- potheses is the order-splitting behaviour at the level of individual traders. Indeed, Lillo, Mike, and Farmer (LMF) introduced in 2005 a simple microscopic model of order-splitting behaviour, which predicts that the macro- scopic sign correlation is quantitatively associated with the microscopic distribution of metaorders. While this hypothesis has been a central issue of debate in econophysics, its direct quantitative validation has been missing because it requires large microscopic datasets with high resolution to observe the order-splitting behaviour of all individual traders. Here we present the first quantitative validation of this LMF prediction by analysing a large microscopic dataset in the Tokyo Stock Exchange market for more than nine years. On classifying all traders as either order-splitting traders or random traders as a statistical clustering, we directly measured the metaorder-length distributionsP (L)∝L−α−1 as the microscopic parameter of the LMF model and examined the theoretical prediction on the macroscopic order correlationγ≈α− 1. We discover that the LMF prediction agrees with the actual data even at the quantitative level. We also discuss the estimation of the total number of the order-splitting traders from the ACF prefactor, showing that microscopic financial information can be in- ferred from the LRC in the ACF. Our work provides the first solid support of the microscopic model and solves directly a long-standing problem in the field of econophysics and market microstructure. Introduction. Can a statistical-physics approach help in understanding macroscopic phenomena in financial markets from their microscopic dynamics [1, 2]? In posing this chal- lenging thought, physicists have greatly benefitted from re- cent high-frequency data for econophysics modelling of mar- ket microstructure [3, 4], even at the level of individual traders [5, 6]. In this Letter, we provide the first quantita- tive evidence of a historic econophysics theory regarding the long-range correlation (LRC) in the market order flow [7–9]. Let us briefly review the trading rules in recent financial markets, where traders have two options. The first option is the limit order, by which traders provide the market liq- uidity and show the potential prices at which they are will- ing to transact. The second option is the market order, by which traders immediately consume the liquidity and transact at the best prices (i.e., the highest bid or the lowest ask prices). This Letter tests an econophysics microscopic model for the market-order flow, particularly on their statistical persistence. The strong persistence of the market-order flow under- scores an established empirical law in financial markets [3, 8, 9]: i.e., once a buy (sell) market order is observed, a buy (sell) market order is likely to be observed (see Fig. 1). This predictability regarding market orders is mathematically char- acterised by a power-law decay for the order-sign autocorre- lation function (ACF): C(τ ) :=⟨ϵ(t)ϵ(t +τ )⟩≈ c0τ−γ, 0<γ < 1, (1) for large time-lag τ≫ 1. Here ϵ(t) is the market order sign at timet defined byϵ(t) = +1 (ϵ(t) =−1) for the buy (sell) market order,⟨...⟩ represents the ensemble average,c0 is the prefactor, andγ is the power-law exponent for the LRC. Be- cause it is ubiquitously observed across broad markets, the LRC is believed essential to a market microstructure. Then, what is the microscopic origin of the LRC as a macroscopic phenomenon? One promising response is the order-splitting hypothesis for individual traders’ be- haviours [7] (Fig. 1(a)). This hypothesis claims the LRC ap- pears because some traders split large metaorders into a long series of small child orders. Because all the child orders share for a while the same sign, there is weak predictability of the future order sign, which is ultimately reflected in the power- law decay of the ACF as summarised in Eq. (1) (Fig. 1(b)). Furthermore, Lillo, Mike, and Farmer (LMF) proposed a sim- ple microscopic theory based on the order-splitting hypothe- sis. They assumed (i) the presence of splitting traders (STs), and (ii) the power-law probability density function (PDF) for the metaorder length L such that P (L)∝ L−α−1 with mi- croscopic exponent α > 1. By assuming random order sub- missions, the ACF macroscopically exhibits a power-law de- cay (1). Specifically, they showed γ =α− 1, (2) which in this Letter we refer to as the quantitative LMF pre- diction. The prediction (2) is beautiful and quantitatively pow- erful because it connects the macroscopic and microscopic parameters in alignment with the central spirit of statistical physics. While the plausibility of this scenario was confirmed quali- tatively in [10] (i.e., a decomposition of the ACF into an order- splitting component and the remainder), the detailed verifica- tion of the quantitative prediction (2) has been missing for 18 years. The original LMF paper [7] reported an initial at- tempt to test their prediction. However, they only confirmed a minimum consistency of their theory (i.e., the theoretical line passes through the centre of the mass in the scatterplot; see Fig. 5 and Sec. III B in [11] for a brief review) when lacking arXiv:2301.13505v2 [q-fin.TR] 3 Aug 2023 2 FIG. 1: Schematic of the LRC of the market-order flow and the order-splitting hypothesis (particularly, the LMF model); as a shorthand notation for +1 (−1), “+” (“−”) signifies a buy (sell). (a) As a microscopic model, we assume the presence of STs. Also, STs successively submit the child orders with the same sign forL times, whereL is called the metaorder length and obeys power law statistics,P (L)∝L−α−1. (b) Consequently, the LRC appears as a macroscopic phenomenon. The LMF theory predicts a quantitative relation γ = α− 1, which we empirically establish in this Letter through data analysis. suitably large datasets. In this Letter, together with companion paper [11], we solve this long-standing econophysics problem precisely by analysing a large comprehensive microscopic dataset of the Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE). We accessed a special micro- scopic dataset, including trading-account identifiers (IDs) on the TSE, enabling us to track effectively the behaviour of trad- ing accounts. Using our microscopic dataset, we first applied a strategy clustering of individual traders to test assumption (i). In regard to market orders, and after classifying all traders as STs or random traders (RTs), we confirmed the presence of STs in most of the TSE markets. We next studied the em- pirical metaorder-length PDF P (L) to test assumption (ii), which we validated from our dataset. With the measured mi- croscopic parameterα, we generated a scatterplot between α andγ to test the quantitative LMF prediction (2). Finally, we found the prediction (2) agreed with our dataset, providing quantitatively the first solid support for the LMF model as the minimal microscopic description of the order-splitting be- haviour. As the last discussion, we estimate the total number of the STs from the observed prefactor c0. Our findings im- ply that the long memory in the market-order ACF is useful in inferring microscopic financial information. Data description. Let us briefly describe our dataset pro- vided by the Japan Exchange (JPX) Group, the platform man- ager of the TSE. The TSE being the biggest stock market in Japan, our dataset covers all the order flows in the TSE (market orders, limit orders, and cancellations), enabling us to track their complete life cycle for all the stocks for nine years (from the 4th January 2012 to the 30th December 2020). Fur- thermore, this dataset includes virtual server IDs (VSIDs), a unit of trading accounts on the TSE. The VSID is not tech- nically equivalent to the membership ID, because any trader may have several VSIDs. However, we can effectively define trader IDs to track individual trader behaviour with high res- olution by appropriately aggregating VSIDs [12, 13] (e.g., if a limit order is submitted by VSID 1 and is cancelled from VSID 2, both VSIDs are associated with the same trader); see also [11] for more technical details. Our study focused on the sign sequences of market orders during double auctions from 09:00-11:30 and 12:30-15:00 Japan Standard Time. A yearly segmented order-sign se- quence was extracted for each stock to obtain one market datapoint. We only used datapoints with more than 0.5 mil- lion transactions and removed transaction data from the open- ing and closing ten minutes of auctions to suppress intraday- seasonality effect. Assumptions of the LMF model. As summarised in Fig. 1, there are two key assumptions in the LMF model: (i) the pres- ence of STs who have large latent demand ( metaorders) and split them into small child orders, which are assumed to share the same sign for L successive times, and (ii) the metaorder lengthL obeys a power lawP (L)∝L−α−1 withα> 1. In previous literature, there was no solid direct evidence of assumption (i), although [10] shows indirect but promising evidence based on the ACF decomposition. Also, the plausi- bility of assumption (ii) was studied in [7] by analysing the off-book data for the London stock exchange market as an “imperfect proxy”. However, with the absence of appropri- ate datasets at that time, the precise estimation of α became a technical problem for LMF verification. To verify assump- tions (i) and (ii) directly, it is necessary to identify STs by strategy clustering at the level of individual traders and then study their metaorder-length PDF to measureα precisely. Presence of STs. We proceeded with strategy clustering to identify STs. We studied the order-sign sequence for each ST (Fig. 1(a)) to construct the metaorder lengthL by defining L as a length of successively equal signs. Concerning excep- tional handling, if there was more than one business day be- tween two successive orders, we assume they belong to differ- ent metaorders [14] to avoid overestimating metaorder length. For a given metaorder-length sequence, we apply the bi- 3 FIG. 2: Presence of the STs by our strategy clustering. (a) Empir- ical PDF for the percentage of STs in each market, showing direct evidence of the presence of STs. Typically, 25% of all traders were STs. (b) Empirical PDF for STs’ contribution to market orders in each market. Typically, 80% of all the market orders were issued by the STs, implying their overwhelming contribution to market orders. FIG. 3: The aggregated CCDFs for STs with our strategy cluster- ing. (a) Empirical CCDF aggregated regarding metaorder length L among STs using data for the Toyota Motor Corporation in 2020 as a typical example. The CCDF obeys the power law P>(L)∝ L−α withα≈ 1.62. Likewise, most empirical aggregated CCDF for STs obey similar power laws. (b) Empirical PDF of the power-law expo- nentα for all the markets. The power-law exponents were evaluated systematically using Clauset’s algorithm [15, 16] across all the mar- kets. The exponent α typically satisfies 1< α <2, consistent with the standard assumption for the LMF model. nomial test for strategy clustering; the null hypothesis is that the order-sign sequence is purely random (obeying a symmet- ric Bernoulli process) and, thus, the trader belongs to the RT set. The trader is regarded as an ST if the null hypothesis is rejected with a significance levelθ := 0.01. On the basis of this clustering scheme, we identified the ST set for each market datapoint. With summary statistics across all the markets during nine years, we evaluated the empirical PDF for the ST percentage in each market [Fig. 2(a)], and the contribution to market orders from the ST set [Fig. 2(b)]. We concluded that typically a quarter of all traders are STs, but they dominate the total market orders. Via this strategy clustering, we thus validated assumption (i) directly. Metaorder-length PDF . Having identified the set of STs, we measured the aggregated empirical PDF for the metaorder length of all STs. Most of the aggregated complementary- cumulative distribution functions (CCDFs) for the metaorder length of STs obey a power law P>(L) ∝ L−α with the CCDF defined by P>(L) := R∞ L P (L′)dL′. As a typical ex- ample, we plotted the metaorder-length CCDF for the Toy- ota Motor Corporation (with ticker number 7203) in 2020 [Fig. 3(a)]; it features a power-law asymptotic tail for largeL. We then evaluatedα using Clauset’s algorithm [15, 16] to plot the empirical PDF ofα [Fig. 3(b)] across all the stocks. Typi- cally, the exponentα is distributed over values 1<α< 2, in agreement with the standard assumption for the LMF model. We thus validated assumption (ii) for our dataset. Power-law exponent in the ACF . Having measured the microscopic power-law exponent α, we next measured the macroscopic power-law exponentγ of the ACF, which we did by fitting directly the sample order-sign ACF as follows (see [11] for details of the method): We first calculated the sample ACF fromCsample(τ ) :=PNϵ−τ t=1 ϵ(t)ϵ(t +τ )/(Nϵ−τ ) with time-lagτ and total number of market ordersNϵ. We fixed the fitting range [τ− th,τ + th] automatically such that only the power- law decay is observed in the ACF for [τ− th,τ + th]. We applied logarithmic smoothing and a final fitting C(τ ) = C0τ−γNLLS for the range [τ− th,τ + th] employing the relative nonlinear least square (NLLS) estimation. Although the NLLS estimator γNLLS gives numerical con- sistency for the LMF model, we noticed that the NLLS es- timator γNLLS has a finite-sample-size bias. To remove this bias, we constructed heuristically an approximate unbiased estimatorγunbiased based on the LMF model (see companion paper [11] for details). For this Letter, we used this unbiased estimatorγunbiased for the final scatterplot. As a robustness check, we also measured the power-law exponentγ via the power-spectral density (PSD) method (see [11]). The exponent measured by the ACF and PSD fittings are respectively denoted by γ(a) unbiased and γ(s) unbiased. Both methods exhibit reasonable and consistent results, implying the statistical robustness of our results. Scatterplot. Having evaluated the microscopic and macroscopic power-law exponents α and γ using our huge TSE dataset, we are ready to draw the scatterplot between α andγ and test the LMF prediction (2). As the main result, we provide the scattered boxplots (Figs. 4(a) and (b) for the ACF and PSD methods, respectively) between α and γunbiased with focus on the range 1 < α < 2 in accordance with the standard LMF assumption [21]. These figures exhibit excellent agreement with the theoretical line (2). From these figures, we conclude that with our microscopic dataset the LMF prediction (2) has quantitative validity. Discussion on the prefactor. While we extracted the mi- croscopic information α from the ACF power-law exponent γ via Eq. (2), is it possible to extract other microscopic in- formation from the prefactor c0? The LMF theory predicts c0≃Nα−2 ST /α with the total number of the STs NST, imply- ing thatNST can be estimated by the LMF estimator N LMF ST (c0,γ ) := 1 [(γ + 1)c0] 1 1−γ , (3a) 4 FIG. 4: (a, b) Scattered boxplots between α andγ with the median, the first and third quartiles for (a) the ACF and (b) the PSD methods, exhibiting excellent agreement with the LMF prediction (2) (black line).γ was evaluated using the approximate unbiased estimatorγunbiased, based on the NLLS estimator and the LMF model. (c, d) Scattered boxplots between the LMF estimatorN LMF ST and the actual total number of the STsNST for (c) the ACF and (d) the PSD methods for the datapoints with α <2. The LMF estimator is highly correlated with the true value ofNST as the classical theory predicts, but systematically underestimatesNST, such thatN LMF ST ≲NST. This observation is consistent with a generalised LMF theory [17] with heterogeneous intensities{λ(i)}i. whereγ andc0 can be observed from publicly data. Note that original LMF work made an assumption of the homogeneiety of order-splitting intensities {λ(i)}i among traders in [7], such that λ(i) = 1 /NST for all i. While we noticed that this homogeneiety assumption is unrealistic, we tested this prediction in our dataset by drawing the scat- tered boxplots (Fig. 4(c) and (d) based on the ACF and PSD methods, respectively) between log10N 1−γ ST and the LMF es- timator log10   N LMF ST 1−γ with the finite-sample size bias re- moved (see Ref. [11]). We find that the LMF estimatorN LMF ST is highly correlated with the true valueNST, implying that the ACF prefactor is a useful resource to infer NST. At the same time, the LMF estimatorN LMF ST systematically underestimates the true valueNST, such thatN LMF ST ≲NST. Interestingly, our finding is consistent with a generalised LMF model with the heterogeneous intensity distribution {λ(i)}i. Indeed, Ref. [17] shows the ACF formula (3a) is non- robust but sensitive to the heterogeneous intensity distribution, while the power-law-exponent formula (2) is robust. Further- more, the LMF estimatorN LMF ST is shown to provide the lower bound of the true value ofNST, such that N LMF ST ≲NST, (3b) showing the consistency with Fig. 4(c, d). Thus, we have suc- cessfully confirmed the qualitative validity of the LMF picture even for the estimation of NST, while for better quantitative understanding it might require theoretical updates regarding the heterogeneity of trading strategies. Conclusion. Although the power-law memory character in the order-sign ACF has been a central issue in econo- physics, and with the absence of an appropriate huge micro- scopic dataset, no quantitative evidence had been provided for the corresponding microscopic model (the LMF model). In this Letter, we have provided the first solid evidence for the LMF model at the quantitative level (2) at least for the TSE market and, thus, solved this long-lasting problem. Let us briefly discuss the implication of our findings. Our work shows that the microscopic parametersα andNST (usu- ally unobservable because its direct estimation requires spe- cial microscopic datasets like ours) can be inferred via the LMF predictions (2) and (3), where γ andc0 are observable even for public data. This is reminiscent of Einstein’s theory for physical Brownian motions: Avogadro’s numberNA (un- observable) was indirectly estimated from the thermal fluctu- ations via the Einstein relation for the diffusion constant. The LMF theory can play a similar role in inferring microscopic financial parameters from financial fluctuations. The microscopic parameter set (α,N ST) quantifies how the latent demand is hidden in the long term. For markets with smallα, the revealed liquidity on the limit-order book is in- sufficient for liquidity takers, and takers have no choice but to split their large metaorders into a longer series of child orders (see also [3] for a standard interpretation of the order-splitting behaviour from the viewpoint of practitioners). In this sense, markets with smaller α and large NST might not be liquid enough because many large institutional investors are wait- ing for the liquidity to replenish during their order-splitting. This characteristic of liquidity has not been captured in prac- tice through conventional metrics such as market spread (the difference between the best bid and ask prices), market depth (the typical volume size at the best prices), and market im- pact (the average price movement after a market order). Thus, the parameter set (α,N ST) is a new measure quantifying how the market is potentially illiquid due to the hidden demand by large institutional investors. Remarkably, successful strategy clustering was the key to our data analysis at the individual trader level in revealing the market ecology from a microscopic viewpoint. This research direction aligns with the previous literature [18–20] propos- ing the need of market-ecology analyses. We believe that this direction of research holds promise, particularly for econo- physics and sociophysics modelling [4] at it benefits from re- cent microscopic financial datasets. YS was supported by JST SPRING (Grant Number JP- MJSP2110). KK was supported by JST PRESTO (Grant 5 Number JPMJPR20M2), JSPS KAKENHI (Grant Numbers 21H01560 and 22H01141), and JSPS Core-to-Core Program (Grant Number JPJSCCA20200001). We greatly appreciate the data provision and careful review of this Letter by the JPX Group, Inc. We declare no financial conflict of interest. The JPX Group, Inc. provided the original data for this study with- out any financial support. We thank Richard Haase, PhD, from Edanz for editing a draft of this manuscript. ∗ Electronic address: kiyoshi@scphys.kyoto-u.ac.jp [1] R. N. Mantegna and H. E. Stanley, An Introduction to Econo- physics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2000). [2] F. Slanina, Essentials of Econophysics Modelling (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2014). [3] J.-P. Bouchaud, J. Bonart, J. Donier, and M. Gould, Trades, quotes and prices: financial markets under the microscope (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2018). [4] M. Jusup et al., Social physics, Phys. Rep. 948, 1 (2022). [5] K. Kanazawa, T. Sueshige, H. Takayasu, and M. Takayasu, Derivation of the Boltzmann equation for financial Brownian motion: Direct observation of the collective motion of high- frequency traders, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 138301 (2018). [6] K. Kanazawa, T. Sueshige, H. Takayasu, and M. Takayasu, Ki- netic theory for financial Brownian motion from microscopic dynamics, Phys. Rev. E 98, 052317 (2018). [7] F. Lillo, S. Mike, and J. D. Farmer, Theory for long memory in supply and demand, Phys. Rev. E 71, 066122 (2005). [8] J.-P. Bouchaud, Y . Gefen, M. Potters, and M. Wyart, Fluctu- ations and response in financial markets: the subtle nature of ‘random’ price changes, Quant. Financ. 4, 176 (2003). [9] F. Lillo and J. D. Farmer, The long memory of the efficient market, Studies in nonlinear dynamics and econometrics 8, 1 (2004). [10] B. T ´oth, I. Palit, F. Lillo, and J. D. Farmer, Why is equity order flow so persistent? J. Econom. Dynam. Control 51, 218 (2015). [11] Y . Sato and K. Kanazawa, companion paper, Quantitative sta- tistical analysis of order-splitting behaviour of individual trad- ing accounts in the Japanese stock market over nine years, arXiv:2308.01112 (2023). [12] K. Goshima, R. Tobe, and J. Uno, Trader Classification by Cluster Analysis: Interaction between HFTs and Other Traders, Waseda University Institute for Business and Finance Working Paper Series 19 (2019). [13] M. Hirano, K. Izumi, H. Matsushima, and H. Sakaji, Compar- ing Actual and Simulated HFT Traders’ Behavior for Agent De- sign, J. Artif. Soc. Soc. Simulat. 23, 6 (2020). [14] J. Donier and J. Bonart, A million metaorder analysis of mar- ket impact on the Bitcoin, Mark. Microstruct. Liq. 1, 1550008 (2015). [15] A. Clauset, C. R. Shalizi, and M. E. Newman, Power-law dis- tributions in empirical data, SIAM Review 54, 661 (2009). [16] J. Alstott, E. Bullmore, and D. Plenz, powerlaw: a Python package for analysis of heavy-tailed distributions, PloS one 9, e85777 (2014). [17] Y . Sato and K. Kanazawa, Exact solution to a generalised Lillo- Mike-Farmer model with heterogeneous order-splitting strate- gies, arXiv:2306.13378 (2023). [18] M. Tumminello, F. Lillo, J. Piilo, and R. N. Mantegna, Identifi- cation of clusters of investors from their real trading activity in a financial market, New J. Phys. 14, 013041 (2012). [19] T. Sueshige, K. Kanazawa, H. Takayasu, and M. Takayasu, Ecology of trading strategies in a forex market for limit and market orders, PloS one 13, e0208332 (2018). [20] T. Sueshige, D. Sornette, H. Takayasu, and M. Takayasu, Clas- sification of position management strategies at the order-book level and their influences on future market-price formation, PloS one 14, e0220645 (2019). [21] The scattered boxplot is composed of both boxplot and scatter- plot. The datapoints are drawn on the centre of the bins along theα-axis.