Domain-adapted Learning and Imitation: DRL for Power Arbitrage Yuanrong Wang University College London Shell Global Solutions International UK Vignesh Raja Swaminathan Shell Shared Service Center Chennai India Nikita P Granger Shell Energy North America USA Carlos Ros Perez Shell Global Solutions International UK Christian Michler∗ Shell Global Solutions International The Netherlands ABSTRACT In this paper, we discuss the Dutch power market, which is com- prised of a day-ahead market and an intraday balancing market that operates like an auction. Due to fluctuations in power supply and demand, there is often an imbalance that leads to different prices in the two markets, providing an opportunity for arbitrage. To address this issue, we restructure the problem and propose a collaborative dual-agent reinforcement learning approach for this bi-level simu- lation and optimization of European power arbitrage trading. We also introduce two new implementations designed to incorporate domain-specific knowledge by imitating the trading behaviours of power traders. By utilizing reward engineering to imitate domain expertise, we are able to reform the reward system for the RL agent, which improves convergence during training and enhances overall performance. Additionally, the tranching of orders increases bid- ding success rates and significantly boosts profit and loss (P&L). Our study demonstrates that by leveraging domain expertise in a general learning problem, the performance can be improved sub- stantially, and the final integrated approach leads to a three-fold improvement in cumulative P&L compared to the original agent. Furthermore, our methodology outperforms the highest benchmark policy by around 50% while maintaining efficient computational performance. KEYWORDS Reinforcement Learning, Algorithmic Trading, Power Trading, In- traday Arbitrage ACM Reference Format: Yuanrong Wang, Vignesh Raja Swaminathan, Nikita P Granger, Carlos Ros Perez, and Christian Michler. 2023. Domain-adapted Learning and Imitation: DRL for Power Arbitrage. . , 10 pages. 1 INTRODUCTION Two main characteristics render the power markets different from the general financial spot market. Firstly, European power markets are mostly energy-only markets where generators are remunerated for generating electric energy instead of capacity, and power stor- age, e.g. in the form of batteries, is limited and costly. Therefore, the ∗Corresponding author. , , © 2023 majority of the power markets are not exchange-based real-time spot markets. Instead, forward markets such as day-ahead and intra- day market play an important role. Secondly, electricity markets must continuously balance their supply and demand all the time. The national transmission system operator (TSO) is ultimately re- sponsible for maintaining instantaneous generation-consumption balance. Greater penetration of renewable energy and variation in consumption complicates the process of continuous balancing, leading to moments of surplus/shortage. Arbitrage trading between these markets helps to settle such imbalances. Arbitrage between two dependent levels of market has been addressed in the literature mostly by bi-level optimization over the last two decades [2, 9, 10, 16, 19, 22, 32, 35]. It addresses an optimiza- tion problem under an embedded dependency between two tasks, where one tasks depends on the optimization outcome of the other. Bi-level optimization problems are usually solved after convert- ing them to single-level mathematical programs with equilibrium constraints (MPEC) with equivalent Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) op- timality conditions or linear programming problems. Nevertheless, this modelling framework relies on a non-practical fundamental assumption, i.e. that the underlying problems are continuous and convex [4]. This limitation is particularly important when mod- elling markets with complex bidding mechanisms, whose clearing algorithm involves the solution of a multi-period, mixed-integer unit commitment problem, such as many markets in the USA (e.g. CAISO, PJM, NYISO) and the intra-day balancing market in Europe. Driven by the advances in artificial intelligence, reinforcement learning (RL) has recently attracted increasing research interest in the power systems community and has emerged as a promising alternative to MPEC formulations in electricity market modeling. Under this framework, RL agents learn to optimize strategies by utilizing experiences acquired from their repeated interactions with the environment, the market clearing process. As learning from experience avoids the derivation of the equivalent KKT optimality conditions, it is capable of addressing the aforementioned challenge of incorporating non-convex operating characteristics into the mar- ket bidding process. Previous work employing RL in electricity market modeling [17, 18, 21, 24, 26, 31, 33] has employed conven- tional Q learning algorithms and its variants [25], which rely on look-up tables to approximate the action-value function for each possible state-action pair and thus require discretization of both state and action spaces. Furthermore, a fitted Q-iteration algorithm arXiv:2301.08360v3 [q-fin.TR] 10 Sep 2023 , , Y. Wang et al. with kernel-based approximation of the action-value function is pro- posed in Ormoneit [20]. However, the heuristic choice of the kernel function significantly affects its performance, as it may easily over- fit to the history and ignore non-stationarity in the time-series data [28]. More recently, interest has been growing in deep reinforce- ment learning (Deep RL), which combines RL with deep learning principles and is driven by the universal function approximation properties of deep neural networks (DNN) [11, 29]. As an extension of Q-learning using a neural network to map the state space to the action space, Mnih [13, 14] proposed the Deep Q Network (DQN) method which employs a DNN to approximate the action-value function and has performed at the level of expert humans in play- ing Atari 2600 games. Inspired by this pioneering work, several recent papers have employed various Deep RL methods to many applications such as voltage control [8], residential load control [7], building energy management systems [15], electric vehicles [27], energy storage scheduling [3], energy trading for prosumers [6], natural gas future spot trading [30] and process optimization [23]. In this project, arbitrage trading is carried out between the day- ahead market and the balancing market. The participants in the day-ahead market submit bids and offers in advance for the fol- lowing day. The auction-like balancing market opens before each 15-minute slot to adjust and settle potential outstanding imbalances. The details of the markets will be discussed in Section 2. As the optimization in the balancing market is also dependant on the posi- tion and price from the day-ahead market, this is a bi-level problem, which is modelled by collaborative dual-agent reinforcement learn- ing. Multi-agent RL is challenging due to slow convergence and high dimensionality, see e.g. [5, 34]. We designed two novel practi- cal implementations for training and performance enhancement, which are reward engineering based on prior domain knowledge and portfolio tranching for optimized bidding execution, as will be discussed in Section 3.2 and Section 3.3. In the remainder of this paper, we present our solutions of a dual- agent deep reinforcement learning framework to solve the bi-level deregulated electricity markets. The details of market composition and structure are presented in Section 2, and based on that, the de- rived simulation environment and associated data are discussed in Section 3. Experimental setup are presented in Section 4 and results are showcased and discussed in Section 5. Concluding remarks are presented in Section 6. 2 PROBLEM STATEMENT 2.1 Power Markets There are various futures markets, addressing time periods from decades in advance, to 15 minutes prior to delivery. Participants can follow load produced by a renewable park and capitalize on price/load variability within the market Mid/long term contracts are conducted as “over the counter” (OTC) transactions. OTC transactions are responsible for generators and consumers agree on trade contract bilaterally or through a broker, from years up to days before delivery. Regulated exchanges allow parties to submit bids and offers for standardized short-term markets up to 15 minutes before delivery. All positions must balance and clear after day-ahead and intra-day markets, otherwise the imbalance will be settled in the imbalance market. Ancillary services provided to the Transmission System Operator (TSO) are balancing options of last resort. Figure 1: Trading and delivery time of day ahead (DA) and balancing market (BM). Day-ahead auction for all hourly slots closes at 12:00 noon the previous day, balancing market closes 15 minutes prior to the delivery time. For short-term markets, electricity is traded one day before deliv- ery in the day-ahead market, where all imbalance from the long and mid-term markets must be cleared. However, shifts in day-ahead nominations might still occur due to, e.g., forecast errors. Partici- pants can correct such imbalances in the intra-day market and in the 96 slots of the balancing market (each slot being 15 mins), a detailed schematic is showed in fig 1. Any surplus or shortage in the balancing market creates price volatility, and the market rewards parties keeping the grid in equilibrium, e.g., electrolyser day-ahead positions can be sold in the balancing market during shortage and conversely incentivised to consume during surplus. 2.2 Bidding in the Balancing Market The balancing market operates as an order-book structured auction, where bids and asks are settled/cleared in a centralized way at the end of the 15-min interval. Hence, bids and asks outside of the current spread (settlement price range) in the 15-minute interval will not be considered, and these bids are discarded, demonstrated by fig 2. The settlement price range is determined by the supply and demand of electricity under the sole discretion of TenneT. To in- crease the success rate of bidding, tranching is used to break a large order into smaller orders across the bid ladder to take advantage of the paid-as-bid nature of capacity auctions. A flexible asset can be used for optimization power consumption and generation across markets. In our project, an electrolyser is used to take positions in the day-ahead market and then offload them in the balancing market. Yet, positioning to capture the best price is an extremely difficult balancing act and is highly dependent on local conditions in a given zonal market. Therefore, we explore a RL-based algorithmic trading strategy to optimize the positioning in the day-ahead market and optimal bidding in the balancing market. 3 METHODOLOGY 3.1 Virtual Market Simulation Environment RL agents learn continuously from a simulation environment. Hence, the accuracy and efficiency of the environment directly impact the Domain-adapted Learning and Imitation: DRL for Power Arbitrage , , Figure 2: Balancing Market (BM) auction ladder. Only the merit order (blue and yellow colour) within the settlement price range will be accepted by TenneT and settled at the set- tlement price, other bidding (while colour) will be discarded. learning ability of the agent. We separate the environment into two levels, the day-ahead (DA) market level and the balancing mar- ket (BM) level. The DA agents observe the day-ahead features and decide the amount of power to be purchased in the DA market (the continuous action space is one-dimensional). Then, based on the observed BM features and the brought position and associated settlement price in the DA market, the BM agents output desired bid and ask prices for the BM bidding where at most one will be executed according to the regulatory state and settlement price range (the continuous action space is two-dimensional), e.g., the bid is executed in the surplus state, and the ask is executed in the shortage state if the submitted price is within the settlement range. A 3-day look-back window is added in both DA and BM market levels for agents to learn from history. The DA market operates hourly, while the BM market operates in 15-minute intervals. To simulate a one-hour time slot, an episode is created, which consists of five steps: one DA step and four BM steps per quarter hour. In the first DA step, the initial purchase of electricity is deducted. Then, in the following BM steps, depending on the settlement range and regulatory state, the agent will sell all of the purchased electricity in the BM market, buy more BM positions and convert it into hydrogen which is in average sold to 75 Euro/MWh, or not operate in this interval and convert all remained DA position into hydrogen for profit. Then. The final hourly P&L is the reward for this episode, shared by both agents. Additionally, due to a physical constraint from the electrolyzer, the agents must keep the operating power range of the electrolyzer between 20 MW and 200 MW, which limits the action space of the DA and BM agents. The key elements are outlined as follows: Agents In each hour, A DA agent decides the day-ahead position in advance for the entire hour slot, while a BM agent executes bidding in the balancing market for 4 15-minute intervals. The agents learn individually how to improve their day-ahead strategy and balance bidding by learning from repeated interactions with the virtual market environment. State Space DA agent has 344 observation states and BM agent has 156 observation states corresponding to the actual and forecast features mentioned in Section 4.1 with associated lags, a detailed feature list is included in the Appendix A, where the column title matches exactly the raw data source in the TenneT databse. Action Space The action space of DA agent is a one-dimensional continuous space with a physical constraint from the electrolizer between 20 MWh to 200 MWh, representing the amount of the day ahead position bought, 𝑠𝐷𝐴∈[ 20, 200]. The action space of BM agent is a two-dimensional continuous space,[𝑃𝑏,𝑃𝑎]. We limit the bidding price between -200 and 200𝐸𝑢𝑟𝑜/𝑀𝑊ℎ , where we have the balancing bid price𝑃𝑏∈[− 200, 200] and the balancing ask price 𝑃𝑎∈[− 200, 200]. Reward Function The DA agent and the BM agent are con- nected through the reward function, expressed by the P&L in each hour or 15-min slot respectively. The BM agent receives a reward, 𝑟𝐵𝑀 𝑡 , at𝑡𝑡ℎ 15-minute interval. which is defined as 𝑟𝐵𝑀 𝑡 =(𝑠𝐵𝑀+𝑠𝐷𝐴)× 𝑝𝐻−𝑠𝐷𝐴×𝑝𝐷𝐴−𝑠𝐵𝑀×𝑝𝐵𝑀 (1) where𝑠𝐵𝑀 is the position bought/sold in the Balancing Market, 𝑝𝐵𝑀 is the associated execution price (i.e. an executed bid buys position and results in𝑠𝐵𝑀 > 0, and instead, an executed ask sells position and results𝑠𝐵𝑀 < 0),𝑝𝐷𝐴 is the price paid to buy position in the DA market ,and𝑝𝐻 is the hydrogen price at which the re- maining position is settled by generating green energy, hydrogen. Therefore, the reward is the net difference between the selling price and buying price in both DA and BM if the position has been cleared in BM, otherwise, all the remaining positions will be converged to hydrogen and settled. For the DA agent, the reward at 𝑇𝑡ℎ hour is simply the sum- mation of the separate rewards in 4 15-min intervals, which is expressed as: 𝑟𝐷𝐴 𝑇 = ∑︁ 𝑡∈𝑇 𝑟𝐵𝑀 𝑡 (2) 3.2 Reward Engineering The training of RL agents is computationally demanding and dif- ficult, and agents can easily get stuck in local minima. Hence, to further improve the learning of the agents, we propose the reward engineering setup to leverage domain knowledge to guide training. The initial rewards for BM and DA agents are defined by equation 1 and 2, which is simply the quarterly and hourly P&L generated from each episode. The power system is intrinsically a physical system, heuristic methods can be constructed and serve as a baseline / benchmark. We construct the reward as the difference between the quarterly P&L generated by the RL agents and the quarterly P&L generated by the heuristic methods. This way, we incorporate additional domain knowledge as a prior in the reward function to guide the RL agents to learn outperform the baseline. Therefore the updated reward function for BM agent, denoted as𝑟𝐵𝑀 𝐼,𝑡 is: 𝑟𝐵𝑀 𝐼,𝑡 =𝑟𝐵𝑀 𝑡 −(𝐹1+𝐹2+𝐹3)/3 (3) where,𝐹1,𝐹2 and𝐹3 are the quarterly P&L generated the P1, P2 and P3 defined in table 3. , , Y. Wang et al. 3.3 Portfolio Tranching The BM market operates in an order-book-like auction structure, where bids and asks are settled in a centralized way at the end of each quarter-hour interval. Bids and asks outside of the current spread will not be executed and are discarded. To enhance the success rate of bidding, tranching is leveraged to break a large order into smaller orders distributed across the bid ladder to take advantage of the paid-as-bid nature of auctions. By allocating the volume from our day-ahead market position across the different price levels of the bid ladder we can treat this as a portfolio of assets. The volume is allocated for different price levels,𝑙, spaced over 20 EUR/MWh, starting at 75 EUR/MWh and ending at 275 EUR/MWh for ask and starting at -125 EUR/MWh and ending at 75 EUR/MWh for bid. The choice of 75 EUR/MWh derives from the price received for hydrogen. Therefore, the reward function for BM agent,𝑟𝐵𝑀 𝑃,𝑡 is expressed as: 𝑟𝐵𝑀 𝑃,𝑡 =( ∑︁ 𝑙 𝑠𝐵𝑀 𝑙 +𝑠𝐷𝐴)× 𝑝𝐻−𝑠𝐷𝐴×𝑝𝐷𝐴− ∑︁ 𝑙 𝑠𝐵𝑀 𝑙 ×𝑝𝐵𝑀 𝑙 (4) where𝑠𝐵𝑀 𝑙 and𝑝𝐵𝑀 𝑙 represent the volume and price at price level 𝑙. Hence, the integrated reward engineering and portfolio tranching BM reward function,𝑟𝐵𝑀 𝐼𝑃,𝑡 , is defined as: 𝑟𝐵𝑀 𝐼𝑃,𝑡 =𝑟𝐵𝑀 𝑃,𝑡 −(𝐹4+𝐹5)/2 (5) where𝐹4 and𝐹5 are the quarterly P&L generated the P4 and P5 defined in table 3. 4 EXPERIMENT SETUP 4.1 Data Settlement in power markets operates on a interval basis, where equity-spot-like continuous time series are absent. Therefore, tech- nical analysis is hard to perform, and fundamental features are crucial to train and optimising RL agents. For the day-ahead mar- ket, we consider cross-border flows, TenneT (a transmission system operator in the Netherlands and in large part of Germany) fore- casted Net Transfer Capacities (NTCs), TenneT forecasted solar and wind generation, TenneT forecasted load, as well as 24 h lagged day-ahead electricity prices, actual generation from biomass, gas, nuclear, solar, waste, wind (offshore/onshore), actual total load, ac- tual NTCs and residual load. For the balancing market, since time slots are correlated on an hourly basis, only one-hour lags are con- sidered for the lagged features mentioned above while balancing market bid and ask prices and the regulatory state are considered with 24-hour lags. In addition, balancing market prices and bid- ding volumes are provided to balancing market agents. All the raw features mentioned above are from the dataset which is open and publicly accessible from the TenneT database. Besides raw features which are listed in Appendix A, we con- struct the probability of a shortage/surplus regulatory state as an additional feature based on logistic regression prediction from the 24-hour lagged actual load, 24-hour lagged generation by type, forecasted generation by wind/solar, forecasted load day-ahead, forecasted NTCs, 24-hour lagged actual NTCs, day-ahead price actuals, residual demand as well as a weekend Boolean. Train Test Accuracy 2015 2016 62.5% 2015 2016 63.5% 2015 2020 61.4% 2017 2018 63.1% 2017 2020 58.3% 2018 2020 60.4% 2020 2018 65.1% Table 1: Accuracy of walk forward logistic regression of pre- diction of shortage/surplus. The performance of the prediction is presented in Table 5. Cu- riously, the accuracy remains roughly constant despite the gap between the training and testing set. 4.2 dual-agent DDPG Implementation We build two Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) [ 12] agents for the dual-agent reinforcement learning framework. The bi-level problem is solved independently by optimizing the reward function, strategy P&L in the hourly slot and quarterly intervals for the DA and BM agent respectively. However, as the hourly reward is the summation of the four quarterly rewards, the learning of the two agents are, thus associated with one objective function. For simplicity, for both agents, the actor and critic network employ a 2-layer Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) of 64 and 32 hidden neurons with Batch Normalization and ReLU as the activation function. The detailed optimal hyper-parameter values of each agent during our experiments are listed below in Table 2 for reference, where𝛼𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐 and𝛼𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 is the learning rate for the critic and actor network. Agent 𝛼𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐 𝛼𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 Optimiser Batch Size BM Agent 0.0025 0.00025 Adam 64 DA Agent 0.0025 0.00025 Adam 64 Table 2: Optimal Hyper-parameter values. 4.3 Walk Forward Optimization Walk forward optimization is a method used in finance to determine the optimal parameters for a trading strategy. The trading strategy is optimized with in-sample data for a time window in a data series. The remaining data is reserved for out of sample testing. A small portion of the reserved data following the in-sample data is tested and the results are recorded. The in-sample time window is shifted forward by the period covered by the out of sample test, and the process is repeated. Lastly, all of the recorded results are used to assess the trading strategy. We run walk forward optimization to reduce overfitting in our optimizations. Overfitting in trading is the process of designing a trading system that adapts so closely to the noise in historical data that it becomes ineffective in the future. A walk forward optimization forces us to verify that we are adjusting our strategy parameters to signals in the past by constantly testing our optimized parameters from out-of-sample Domain-adapted Learning and Imitation: DRL for Power Arbitrage , , Benchmark Policy P1 DA position with 150 MWh, and a fixed BM strategy of Bid at -100 Euro/MWh and Ask at 100 Euro/MWh P2 Buy max position (200 MWh) and convert everything to hydrogen (no BM) P3 Buy max position (200 MWh) if hydrogen price exceeds the DA price, else buy min position (20 MWh), and convert all positions to hydrogen (no BM) P4 DA position is predicted by agent, and fixed BM strategy of equally weighted portfolio P5 Buy max position (200 MWh) if the hydrogen price is greater than the DA price, else buy min position (20 MWh), and fixed BM strategy of an equally weighted portfolio (P2+P4) Table 3: Table of benchmark policies. data. Inexperienced traders tend to spend a lot of time optimizing every parameter of the entire historical data, and then they proceed to trade on these “optimized” parameters. The objective function here is to maximize the reward function. The agent learns from in-sample data on what parameters to be selected and optimized to maximize the reward, based on the selected best parameters model performance is evaluated. In our experiments, we train the model with two years of sliding window data and test on consecutive years. 4.4 Benchmarks In our experiments, we depict five benchmarks to compare the performance of our RL agents. These benchmarks are constructed based on market understanding. P1, P2 and P3 are simple bench- marks which buy a fixed DA position, and place bidding in the BM on a single price ladder at both Bid and Ask. P4 and P5, however, are portfolio benchmarks, while buying similarly a fixed DA posi- tion, they place bidding across a range of price levels. The detailed benchmark policies are summarized in Table 3. 5 RESULTS 5.1 Decision Analytics To analyze the series of decision made by the agent during trading and bidding, Figure 3 is presented outlining the ensemble statistics of hourly P&L, DA volume as well as BM Bid/Ask decisions in histograms. Figure 3.a shows the distribution of hourly cumula- tive P&L of the agent. This negatively skewed distribution centres around 9000 with a long right tail, suggesting an average positive P&L with occasional big gains on the right fat tail, which is often seen in other successful arbitrage trading systems [1]. Figure 3.b explains the distribution of agent DA actions. The maximum and minimum DA volume are constrained from 20 to 200 by the elec- trolyzer. This distribution roughly lies in the middle of the range, which shows extreme DA position are rarely taken by the agent unlike the defined benchmarks. Figure 3.c shows the distribution of agent bid market actions. Fig- ure 3.d shows the distribution of agent ask market actions. The two distributions show very profitable strategies taken by the agent in both bid and ask, compared to the hydrogen price at 75 EUR/MWh. 5.2 Reward Engineering Result Illustrated in Figure 4 is the testing performance of our trained agent, marked as Raw RL Agent (blue), with respect to simple benchmarks (P1, P2 and P3). The agent is trained on 2018-2019 and tested on 2020. It is noticed that despite being profitable, the general performance of the Raw RL Agent is inferior to the three simple benchmarks constructed by our market understanding. The main reason for this inferiority is most likely resulted by the complexity of the market, and associated complicated bi-level problems sim- ulated by our dual-agent setup. Therefore, to guide our agent to faster and better convergence in training, we leverage the knowl- edge in the three benchmarks as a prior for reward engineering. Detailed implementation is outlined in Section 3.2, and the testing performance is shown by the yellow line in Figure 4, denoted as Taught RL Agent. The cumulative P&L of the Raw RL Agent in 2020 is 38M Euro, compared to P1 of 75M Euro, P2 of 75M Euro (P1 and P2 largely overlap) and P3 of 26M Euro. It achieves about only a half of the two most performing benchmarks out of the three. However, after leveraging reward engineering techniques, the Taught RL Agent achieves 106M Euro cumulative P&L, which is about 40% and 180% improvement from the most performing benchmarks and the Raw RL Agent. Therefore, incorporating the knowledge from the bench- marks as a prior to guide learning in this scenario results in a significant uplifting in the performance. 5.3 Portfolio Tranching Results The Dutch balancing market is an order-book structural auction market. Hence, instead of placing entire volume of bidding at only one price level, we can also train the RL agent to split the volume into different levels of the book, termed portfolio tranching. In Figure 5, we demonstrate the performance of the Raw RL Port- folio Agents and the benchmarks. P1, P2 (P1 and P2 largely overlap) and P3 are the same simple benchmark reported in Figure 4, and P4 and P5 are portfolio benchmarks. The details of each benchmark are referenced in Section 4.4. It is notable that by employing port- folio tranching, even the Raw RL Portfolio Agent with standard reward function achieves 91M Euro outperforming P1, P2 by about 20%, and naive Raw RL Agent in Section 5.2 by about 140%. This significant improvement illustrates the importance and efficacy of portfolio tranching. , , Y. Wang et al. Figure 3: Characteristic of trades and agent decisions in Walk Forward V1 (trained with 2015 & 2016 and tested with 2017). The subfigures show a) the hourly P&L, b) the distribution of agent DA actions, c) the distribution of agent bid BM actions, and d) the distribution of agent ask BM actions. Figure 4: Comparison of agent P&L against benchmarks, trained with 2018 & 2019 and tested on 2020. P1, P2 and P3 are the benchmarks (P1 and P2 largely overlap). The Raw RL agent is the agent trained with standard reward function, and the Taught RL agent has a reconstructed reward as the difference between the standard reward and the performance of benchmarks. Furthermore, in order to outperform the two portfolio bench- marks, P4 with cumulative P&L of97M Euro and P5 with cumulative P&L of 100M Euro, we also leverage reward engineering on the portfolio tranching agent, denoted as Taught RL Portfolio Agent, which achieves cumulative P&L of 148M Euro. The guided learning method remarkably improve the cumulative P&L by about 60% from the Raw RL Portfolio Agent. Moreover, addictively incorpo- rating both reward engineering and portfolio tranching methods, Figure 5: Comparison of portfolio agent P&L against bench- marks, trained with 2018 & 2019 and tested on 2020. P4 and P5 are the portfolio benchmarks. The Raw RL Portfolio agent is the agent trained with standard reward function and port- folio tranching, and the Taught RL Portfolio Agent employs portfolio tranching with a reconstructed reward as the dif- ference between the standard reward and the performance of P4 and P5. the cumulative P&L is uplifted from 38M Euro to 148M Euro for about three-fold, while outperforms the highest benchmark P5 by about 50%. The notable results from this section clearly demonstrate the performance uplifting of the two practical implementations in- troduced by this paper, which also illustrates the importance of incorporating domain specific knowledge in RL problem settings. Domain-adapted Learning and Imitation: DRL for Power Arbitrage , , 6 CONCLUSION Power arbitrage trading is a complicated yet very profitable niche field in systematic commodity trading. The non-standard market structures and low transparency of the physical power grid set- tlement system prevent extensive exploration from the general quantitative finance community. In this paper, we present one of the first dual-agent Deep RL implementations for power arbitrage between the day-ahead market and the auction-like balancing mar- ket. The result is significant in that the cumulative P&L of the RL agents outperform all the heuristic benchmarks. Furthermore, we have explored two novel practical implemen- tations to improve the training of the aforementioned framework. By leveraging the idea of reward engineering and restructuring the reward as the difference between the original reward and heuristic results, we incorporate additional domain information as a prior to guide agents to learn more effectively. This method has improved the performance of the naive RL agent and the portfolio RL agent by about 180% and 60% respectively. Additionally, considering the order-book auction structural prop- erties in the Dutch balancing power market, we introduce portfolio tranching to split a large order into equally weighted portfolio across several price levels. Not only does portfolio tranching im- prove the success bidding rate, moreover the performance has up- lifted by about 140%. Hence, the combined final framework achieves an around three-fold improvement in cumulative P&L, and outper- forms the highest benchmark policy by around 50%. Notably, in this paper, we have used a common RL algorithm (DDPG) with standard network configuration. Nevertheless, the two novel implementations inspired from domain specific knowledge and a representable virtual learning environment constructed from a realistic problem setting have boosted the results significantly. Therefore, from a practical point of view, the stable and performing deployment of RL does not need complicated state-of-art models, but an insightful settings and understanding of the problem. This project has been a successful example of deep reinforcement learning implementation in power trading space. Further work is focusing on practical deployment and transforming this framework into other power markets across the globe. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would like to acknowledge the contributions of and collaboration with Simon Oliver (Shell), Tashi Erdmann (Shell) and Hossein Khadivi Heris (Microsoft Bons.ai). Moreover, the authors would like to acknowledge the funding of the Shell.ai Futures Programme which has enabled this research and the Computational Sciences and Digital Innovations (CSDI) Lab for providing the compute resources (Azure). , , Y. Wang et al. REFERENCES [1] Rui Albuquerque. 2010. Skewness in Stock Returns: Reconciling the Evidence on Firm versus Aggregate Returns. American Finance Association Meetings (AFA) (2010). [2] Anastasios G. Bakirtzis, N. P. Ziogos, A. C. Tellidou, and Grigorios A. Bakirtzis. 2007. Electricity Producer Offering Strategies in Day-Ahead Energy Market With Step-Wise Offers. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 22 (2007), 1804–1818. [3] Ioannis Boukas, Damien Ernst, Thibaut Théate, Adrien Bolland, Alexandre Huy- nen, Martin Buchwald, Christelle Wynants, and Bertrand Corn’elusse. 2021. A Deep Reinforcement Learning Framework for Continuous Intraday Market Bid- ding. Mach. Learn. 110 (2021), 2335–2387. [4] Stephen P. Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. 2006. Convex Optimization. IEEE Trans. Automat. Control 51 (2006), 1859–1859. [5] Lucian Buşoniu, Robert Babuka, and Bart De Schutter. 2010. Multi-agent Rein- forcement Learning: An Overview. [6] Tao Chen and Wencong Su. 2018. Local Energy Trading Behavior Modeling With Deep Reinforcement Learning. IEEE Access 6 (2018), 62806–62814. [7] Bert Claessens, Peter Vrancx, and Frederik Ruelens. 2018. Convolutional Neural Networks for Automatic State-Time Feature Extraction in Reinforcement Learn- ing Applied to Residential Load Control.IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 9 (2018), 3259–3269. [8] Ruisheng Diao, Z. Wang, Di Shi, Qianyun Chang, Jiajun Duan, and Xiaohu Zhang. 2019. Autonomous Voltage Control for Grid Operation Using Deep Reinforcement Learning. 2019 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM) (2019), 1–5. [9] Benjamin F. Hobbs, Carolyn B. Metzler, and J. S. Pang. 2000. Strategic gaming analysis for electric power systems: an MPEC approach. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 15 (2000), 638–645. [10] S. Jalal Kazempour, Antonio J. Conejo, and Carlos Ruiz. 2015. Strategic Bidding for a Large Consumer. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 30 (2015), 848–856. [11] Shiyu Liang and Rayadurgam Srikant. 2017. Why Deep Neural Networks for Function Approximation?. In ICLR. [12] Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jonathan J. Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Manfred Otto Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa, David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. 2016. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. CoRR abs/1509.02971 (2016). [13] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wierstra, and Martin A. Riedmiller. 2013. Playing Atari with Deep Reinforcement Learning. ArXiv abs/1312.5602 (2013). [14] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin A. Riedmiller, Andreas Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen, Charlie Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wierstra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. 2015. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 518 (2015), 529–533. [15] Elena Mocanu, Decebal Constantin Mocanu, Phuong H. Nguyen, Antonio Liotta, Michael E. Webber, Madeleine Gibescu, and Johannes G. Slootweg. 2019. On- Line Building Energy Optimization Using Deep Reinforcement Learning. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 10 (2019), 3698–3708. [16] Ekaterina Moiseeva, Mohammad Reza Hesamzadeh, and Darryl R. Biggar. 2015. Exercise of Market Power on Ramp Rate in Wind-Integrated Power Systems. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 30 (2015), 1614–1623. [17] Mohammad-Bagher Naghibi-Sistani, M. R. Akbarzadeh-Tootoonchi, Mohammad Hossein Javidi Dasht Bayaz, and H. Rajabi-Mashhadi. 2006. Application of Q- learning with temperature variation for bidding strategies in market based power systems. Energy Conversion and Management 47 (2006), 1529–1538. [18] Vishnuteja Nanduri and Tapas K. Das. 2007. A Reinforcement Learning Model to Assess Market Power Under Auction-Based Energy Pricing. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 22 (2007), 85–95. [19] Ehsan Nasrolahpour, Jalal Kazempour, Hamidreza Zareipour, and William D. Rosehart. 2018. Impacts of Ramping Inflexibility of Conventional Generators on Strategic Operation of Energy Storage Facilities. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 9 (2018), 1334–1344. [20] Dirk Ormoneit and Śaunak Sen. 2017. Kernel-Based Reinforcement Learning. In Encyclopedia of Machine Learning and Data Mining . [21] Mina Rahimiyan and Habib Rajabi Mashhadi. 2010. An Adaptive $Q$-Learning Algorithm Developed for Agent-Based Computational Modeling of Electricity Market. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews) 40 (2010), 547–556. [22] Carlos Ruiz and Antonio J. Conejo. 2009. Pool Strategy of a Producer With Endogenous Formation of Locational Marginal Prices. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 24 (2009), 1855–1866. [23] Nitin Singh, Jasper Stolte, Bei Li, Stanislav Jaso, and Christian Michler. 2022. Real- time Optimization of Industrial Processes using Deep Reinforcement Learning. Shell Technical Report (2022). [24] Haili Song, Chen-Ching Liu, Jacques Lawarree, and R. W. Dahlgren. 2000. Optimal electricity supply bidding by Markov decision process.IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 15 (2000), 618–624. [25] Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. 2005. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 16 (2005), 285–286. [26] A. C. Tellidou and Anastasios G. Bakirtzis. 2007. Agent-Based Analysis of Capacity Withholding and Tacit Collusion in Electricity Markets. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 22 (2007), 1735–1742. [27] Zhiqiang Wan, Hepeng Li, Haibo He, and Danil V. Prokhorov. 2019. Model-Free Real-Time EV Charging Scheduling Based on Deep Reinforcement Learning.IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 10 (2019), 5246–5257. [28] Yuanrong Wang and Tomaso Aste. 2021. Dynamic Portfolio Optimization with Inverse Covariance Clustering. In ArXiv. [29] Yuanrong Wang and Tomaso Aste. 2022. Sparsification and Filtering for Spatial- temporal GNN in Multivariate Time-series. ArXiv abs/2203.03991 (2022). [30] Yuanrong Wang, Yinsen Miao, Nikita Granger, Alexander Wong, and Christian Michler. 2022. Deep Reinforcement Learning for Gas Trading. Shell Technical Report (2022). [31] Gaofeng Xiong, Tomonori Hashiyama, and Shigeru Okuma. 2002. An electricity supplier bidding strategy through Q-Learning. IEEE Power Engineering Society Summer Meeting, 3 (2002), 1516–1521 vol.3. [32] Yujian Ye, Dimitrios Papadaskalopoulos, and Goran Strbac. 2018. Investigating the Ability of Demand Shifting to Mitigate Electricity Producers’ Market Power. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 33 (2018), 3800–3811. [33] Nan Yu, Chen-Ching Liu, and Jeffrey Price. 2010. Evaluation of Market Rules Using a Multi-Agent System Method. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 25 (2010), 470–479. [34] K. Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tamer Başar. 2019. Multi-Agent Reinforce- ment Learning: A Selective Overview of Theories and Algorithms. ArXiv abs/1911.10635 (2019). [35] Peng Zou, Qixin Chen, Qing Xia, Guannan He, Chongqing Kang, and Antonio J. Conejo. 2016. Pool equilibria including strategic storage. Applied Energy 177 (2016), 260–270. Domain-adapted Learning and Imitation: DRL for Power Arbitrage , , A APPENDIX , , Y. Wang et al. DA No-lag DA 24h-lag BZN|BE > BZN|NL Biomass - Actual Aggregated BZN|NL > BZN|BE Fossil Gas - Actual Aggregated BZN|DE-AT-LU > BZN|NL Fossil Hard coal - Actual Aggregated BZN|NL > BZN|DE-AT-LU Hydro Run-of-river and poundage BZN|DK1 > BZN|NL Nuclear - Actual Aggregated BZN|NL > BZN|DK1 Other - Actual Aggregated BZN|NO2 > BZN|NL Solar - Actual Aggregated BZN|NL > BZN|NO2 Waste - Actual Aggregated BZN|GB > BZN|NL Wind Offshore - Actual Aggregated BZN|NL > BZN|GB Wind Onshore - Actual Aggregated Day-ahead Total Load Forecast - BZN|NL Actual Total Load - BZN|NL Generation - Solar Day Ahead/ BZN|NL Day-ahead Price [EUR/MWh] Generation - Wind Offshore Day Ahead/ BZN|NL BZN|BE > BZN|NL Total Generation - Wind Onshore Day Ahead/ BZN|NL BZN|NL > BZN|BE Total BZN|BE > BZN|NL Day Ahead BZN|DE-AT-LU > BZN|NL Total BZN|NL > BZN|BE Day Ahead BZN|NL > BZN|DE-AT-LU Total BZN|DE-AT-LU > BZN|NL Day Ahead BZN|DK1 > BZN|NL Total BZN|NL > BZN|DE-AT-LU Day Ahead BZN|NL > BZN|DK1 Total BZN|DK1 > BZN|NL Day Ahead BZN|NO2 > BZN|NL Total BZN|NL > BZN|DK1 Day Ahead BZN|NL > BZN|NO2 Total BZN|GB > BZN|NL Total BZN|NL > BZN|GB Total Table 4: DA Feature List with no lag an 24h lag BM No-lag BM 1h-lag BM 24h-lag BZN|BE > BZN|NL Biomass - Actual Aggregated take_from_system_EUR_MWh BZN|NL > BZN|BE Fossil Gas - Actual Aggregated feed_into_system_EUR_MWh BZN|DE-AT-LU > BZN|NL Fossil Hard coal - Actual Aggregated Regulation_state BZN|NL > BZN|DE-AT-LU Hydro Run-of-river and poundage BZN|DK1 > BZN|NL Nuclear - Actual Aggregated BZN|NL > BZN|DK1 Other - Actual Aggregated BZN|NO2 > BZN|NL Solar - Actual Aggregated BZN|NL > BZN|NO2 Waste - Actual Aggregated BZN|GB > BZN|NL Wind Offshore - Actual Aggregated BZN|NL > BZN|GB Wind Onshore - Actual Aggregated Day-ahead Total Load Forecast - BZN|NL Actual Total Load - BZN|NL Generation - Solar Day Ahead/ BZN|NL BZN|BE > BZN|NL Total Generation - Wind Offshore Day Ahead/ BZN|NL BZN|NL > BZN|BE Total Generation - Wind Onshore Day Ahead/ BZN|NL BZN|DE-AT-LU > BZN|NL Total Day-ahead Price [EUR/MWh] BZN|NL > BZN|DE-AT-LU Total BZN|BE > BZN|NL Day Ahead BZN|DK1 > BZN|NL Total BZN|NL > BZN|BE Day Ahead BZN|NL > BZN|DK1 Total BZN|DE-AT-LU > BZN|NL Day Ahead BZN|NO2 > BZN|NL Total BZN|NL > BZN|DE-AT-LU Day Ahead BZN|NL > BZN|NO2 Total BZN|DK1 > BZN|NL Day Ahead BZN|GB > BZN|NL Total BZN|NL > BZN|DK1 Day Ahead BZN|NL > BZN|GB Total Table 5: BM Feature List with no lag an 24h lag