Noname manuscript No. (will be inserted by the editor) Order book regulatory impact on stock market quality: a multi-agent reinforcement learning perspective Johann Lussange 1 · Boris Gutkin 1,2 Received: date / Accepted: date Abstract Recent technological developments have changed the fundamental ways stock markets function, bringing regulatory instances to assess the bene- ﬁts of these developments. In parallel, the ongoing machine learning revolution and its multiple applications to trading can now be used to design a next gen- eration of ﬁnancial models, and thereby explore the systemic complexity of ﬁ- nancial stock markets in new ways. We here follow on a previous groundwork, where we designed and calibrated a novel agent-based model stock market simulator, where each agent autonomously learns to trade by reinforcement learning. In this Paper, we now study the predictions of this model from a regulator’s perspective. In particular, we focus on how the market quality is impacted by smaller order book tick sizes, increasingly larger metaorders, and higher trading frequencies, respectively. Under our model assumptions, we ﬁnd that the market quality beneﬁts from the latter, but not from the other two trends. Keywords agent-based model· reinforcement learning· order book· multi- agent system· stock markets· regulation· high-frequency trading · tick· decimalization· metaorders· machine learning Acknowledgements We graciously acknowledge this work was supported by the HSE Basic Re- search Program and the Russian Academic Excellence Project “5-100” and CNRS PRC nr. 151199, and received support from FrontCog ANR-17-EURE- 1 Group for Neural Theory, Laboratoire des Neurosciences Cognitives et Computationnelles, INSERM U960, D´ epartement des ´ etudes Cognitives, ´ ecole Normale Sup´ erieure, 29 rue d’Ulm, 75005, Paris, France. 2 Center for Cognition and Decision Making, Department of Psychology, NU University Higher School of Economics, 8 Myasnitskaya st., 101000, Moscow, Russia. arXiv:2302.04184v1 [q-fin.TR] 8 Feb 2023 2 Johann Lussange 1, Boris Gutkin 1,2 0017. We also thank Michael Benzaquen and Bence T´ oth, fromCapital Fund Management, for their helpful insights and fruitful discussions. 1 Introduction Financial market economics has had a rich background in a bottom-up ap- proach to systemic complexity [47]. In this approach, one can especially men- tion agent-based modelling, which relies on multi-agent systems (MAS) to study and describe ﬁnancial markets. These agent-based models (ABM) have been used to study, in particular, market regulatory impact [11,29] and exoge- nous eﬀects [31], the impact of high-frequency trading [51,5] and quantitative easing [52]. Together with their cousin order book models, ABM have been used to study game theoretic [25] and ﬂow aspects of the law of supply and demand [8] in order books [34]. Beyond all these particular studies, a main task for ABM and MAS has been to re-enact so-called stylised facts, which are certain recurrent (or rather, lack of) statistics found in ﬁnancial markets, both across asset classes and over diﬀerent time scales, that have been deemed universal [12]. These are: non-gaussian price returns [20], clustered price volatilities [36], and decaying price auto-correlations with time [19]. ABM have two major advantages in the way they can re-enact these stylized facts: ﬁrstly, they require fewer model assumptions (no gaussian distributions, no eﬃcient market hypothesis [26,9]). Secondly, they naturally display the speciﬁc emergent phenomena proper to complex systems [13]. A recurrent and historical critic of ABM addresses the challenges of mod- elling the agents constituting the model itself. However, the ongoing role played by machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence in ﬁnance [30,33,42,23] changes the epistemological weight of this consideration. Notably, one should especially highlight how reinforcement learning [16,45], with its numerous links to de- cision theory and the neurosciences [24,28,35,43,22], could impact the use of ABM as statistical inference tools [37], not unlike what has been done with the recent, AI-augmented, order book models [48,10,46]. In a previous groundwork [38], we have described in details the design and parameter selection of a next generation stock market ABM, where each agent learns to forecast and trade by reinforcement learning in an autonomous fash- ion. This ABM has been cautiously calibrated to real ﬁnancial data, namely the end-of-day stock prices and volumes of 642 stocks from the London Stock Exchange, between years 2007 and 2018. In another previous work [39], we also used this multi-agent reinforcement learning model to study agent learn- ing and its mesoscale market impact. In this paper, we do not review all of the details of this model, but will simply describe in Section 2 its general ar- chitecture, together with the machine learning features of its agents. We shall also display some of its key results as supplementary material, in Fig. 14-17. We will then show, in Section 3, how such a model can be used to study the Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 3 impact of smaller order book tick sizes on market quality. Then, in Section 4, we will display some of the model’s predictions concerning the impact of larger metaorders on the market microstructure. Finally, we shall study how market quality can beneﬁt from higher frequency trading in Section 5, and present a brief conclusion of all these results in Section 6. 2 Groundwork The ABM model of this groundwork [38,39] relies on a collection of I au- tonomous reinforcement learning agents, which trade a set of J stocks over a simulation time ofT time steps, and over a numberS of simulations, as shown in the sum up diagram of Fig. 1. At each time step t of the simulation, the agents learn to better forecast future stock prices at their own investment hori- zon, and then may (or may not) send a trading order to a centralized, double- auction order book. At time t = 0, each agenti is ﬁrst initialized with a given portfolio consisting of risk-free assets (e.g. a bank account) of value Ai bonds(t), and a numberQi,j(t) of stocks j, with a valueAi equity(t) = ∑J j=0Qi,j(t)Pj(t). The stock price is initialized asPj(t = 0) = £100. A central challenge of these agents, just as for real traders and portfolio managers, is to derive an accu- rate pricing of the traded assets at their own investment horizon. Similarly to other models [17,27], the model at time t = 0 ﬁrst generates a given time seriesTj(t) corresponding to the fundamental values of each stock j. These fundamental values are not fully known by the agents, who compute an ap- proximation of Tj(t) according to a proprietary rule κi,j[Tj(t)] = Bi,j(t) of cointegration [40]. The asset pricing process autonomously conducted by each agent hence partly relies on such a fundamental approach (via its cointegrated approximation of the fundamental value Tj(t)), and partly on a chartist ap- proach (via its forecasting of historical market data). In fact, based on the market state, each agent learns by reinforcement how much more fundamen- talist or chartist it should be in its asset price estimation (see below). The entire simulation procedure follows four major steps, as shown below. i- Agents initialisation : We consider a trading year on the London Stock Exchange as Ty = 281 time steps, and similarly set a trading month and week as Tm = 21 and Tw = 5, respectively. At time t = 0, all agents have reinforcement learning policies set with equal probabilities associated with each state-action pair. In other words, the agents do not yet know how to forecast nor trade: they need to engage in exploratory action selections. At the beginning of the simulation, they are given a learning phase of 1000 time steps to learn this, after which their portfolio net asset value is set back to its initial value. LetU() andU{} denote the continuous and discrete uniform distributions, respectively. Then, at time t = 0, all agents are initialised with the following parameters: – A reinforcement learning rate α∼U (0.05, 0.20): This is proper to both reinforcement learning algorithms (see below). 4 Johann Lussange 1, Boris Gutkin 1,2 Fig. 1 (a) Diagram of the MAS stock market simulator for each stock j; (b) diagram of the I agents and J order books process over the simulations T time steps. – An investment horizonτi∼U{ Tw, 6Tm}: This is the number of time steps after which the agent liquidates its position. – A memory intervalhi∼U{ Tw,T−τi− 2Tw}: This is the past lag interval used by each agent for its learning process. – A reﬂexivity parameter ρi∼U (0, 100%): This gauges how fundamentalist or chartist the agent is, via an average of its price forecast weighted by Pj(t) and Bi,j(t). – A drawdown limit li ∼U (50%, 60%): This is the threshold of the year- to-date, peak-to-bottom loss in net asset value, above which the agent is listed as bankrupt, and unable to interact with the market anymore. – A trading window wi∼U{ Tw,τ i}: This assesses the optimal trading time for sending an order. – A transaction gesture gi∼U (0.2, 0.8): This scales with the bid-ask spread (see below) to set how far above or below the value of its own stock pricing the agent is willing to deal the transaction. Order book: The double-auction order book [41] receives the trading orders of the agents at each time step t of the simulation in a random manner, so that no agent has any priority over another. The order book then sorts the bids from largest to lowest, and the oﬀers from lowest to largest, for each stock j. After matching these bid and ask orders with one another, the order book then clears them when the ask prices are below the bid prices, starting from the top of the order book. Such transactions are cleared at mid-price between the two. If the quantity of stocks that one of the agent wanted to trade is not entirely transacted, this brings in another transaction with the next agent in queue. The market price Pj(t + 1) at the next time step of the simulation is deﬁned as the price of the last transaction that was cleared by the order book at time t. Then the transaction volume Vj(t + 1) is taken as the total number of stocks that were transacted at time t, and the bid-ask spread Sj(t + 1) as the absolute diﬀerence between the average of all bids and asks involved in transactions cleared at time t. Based on current industrial broker fees for the London Stock Exchange [2], we model each agent’s transaction as subject to Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 5 broker fees of 0.1%. Also, based on an approximation of the one-year gilt or UK bond yield average between January 2008 and January 2018 [3], we model the risk-free assets of each agent as subject to an annual risk-free rate of 1.0%. Finally, based on the current dividend impacts of FTSE 250 stocks [1], we set the annual stock dividend yield of each agent to 2 .0%. In this Paper, we set J = 1 and thus study agents trading only one stock, over the course of S simulation runs. Agents reinforcement learning : As shown on Fig. 2, the agents rely on two distinct reinforcement learning algorithms before sending any transaction order to the order book [49,53,50,38,39]. A ﬁrst one Fi, is aimed at providing accurate market price forecasting at the agent’s proprietary investment horizon τi, taking into consideration the market pricesPj(t) together with the agent’s own cointegrated approximation of the stock fundamental values Tj(t). This ﬁrst algorithm thus forecasts a future price estimation that in turn serves as input to a second reinforcement algorithm Ti, whose task is to decide which trading strategy should be employed at this time t, and hence which transaction order should be sent to the order book. In these two reinforcement algorithms, a direct policy search algorithm is conducted by each agent i, for each stock j, and at each time step t. According to the general reinforcement procedure, the statess of the environment are monitored by each agent, which then selects a given action a according to its current policy π(s,a ) = P(s,a ), eventually obtaining a resulting reward r for this action, hence allowing the agent to update its policy accordingly for a more eﬃcient action selection at next time steps, in an iterative way. – Forecasting algorithmFi: The states of the environment are given by all the possible combinations of the combination of the longer-term volatil- ity of the stock prices sF 0 ={low,mid,high}, their shorter-term volatility sF 1 ={low,mid,high}, and the gap between the agent’s own present funda- mental valuation and the market price sF 2 ={low,mid,high}. With these states of the environment, the agent also has the following possible action selection: choosing a simple forecasting econometric tool based on mean- reverting, averaging, or trend-following market pricesaF 0 ={revert,mean,trend}, choosing the size of the historical lag interval for this forecastaF 1 ={low,mid,high}, and choosing the weight of its own fundamental stock pricing in an over- all future price estimation, that is both fundamentalist and chartist aF 2 = {low,mid,high}. In this environment states, if these actions are taken at time t, the ensuing rewards are then retrospectively derived τi time steps later, asrF ={−4,−2,−1, 1, 2, 4}, according to percentiles in the distribu- tion of the agent’s mismatches between past forecasts at time t and their actual price realization at time t+τi. Along with these rewards, the policy ofFi is then updated so as to increase the probabilities associated with the state-action pairs yielding lesser prediction errors. With 3× 3× 3 = 27 states and 3 × 3× 3 = 27 actions, the ﬁrst reinforcement learning algo- rithmFi thus has 27× 27 = 729 state-action pairs for its exploration and exploitation. 6 Johann Lussange 1, Boris Gutkin 1,2 – Trading algorithm Ti: The states of the environment are derived from a combination of the forecasting output of the former algorithm sT 0 = {revert,mean,trend}, the longer-time price volatilitysT 1 ={low,mid,high}, the level of the agent’s risk-free assets since the beginning of the simula- tion sT 2 ={low,high}, the level of the agent’s stock holdings since the beginning of the simulation sT 3 ={low,high}, and the traded volumes of stock j at former time step sT 4 ={zero,low,high}. With these states of the environment, the agent also has the following possible action selec- tion: sending a transaction order to the order book as holding, buying, or selling a position in a given amount proportional to its risk-free assets or stock holdingsaT 0 ={short,hold,long}, and at what price wrt. the current bid-ask spread aT 1 ={soft,neutral,hard }. In these environment states, if these actions are taken at time t, the ensuing rewards are then retrospec- tively derived τi time steps later, as rT ={−4,−2,−1, 1, 2, 4}, according to percentiles in the distribution of the agent’s past cashﬂow diﬀerences. Along with these rewards, the policy of Ti is then likewise updated so as to increase the probabilities of action-pairs yielding lesser prediction error. With 3× 3× 2× 2× 3 = 108 states and 3 × 3 = 9 actions, the ﬁrst rein- forcement learning algorithmFi thus has 108× 9 = 972 state-action pairs for exploration and exploitation. Fig. 2 Procedure of the two reinforcement learning algorithmsF() andT () autonomously performed by the agents, the latter taking as input the forecast of the former. Algorithm F() relies on a combination of 27 states and 27 actions, whereas T () on 108 states and 9 actions. 3 Impact of tick size Such a groundwork and MAS stock market model can be used to quantita- tively study the market impact of an ever-lower order book tick size, which is the minimum regulatory interval between prices in an order book. With regards to this, one can especially mention the live experiment called the Tick Size Pilot Program [32,7] conducted from 2016 to 2018 by the U. S. Securities Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 7 and Exchange Commission (SEC). This experiment examined the eﬀects on average stock market quality of a smaller order book tick size, albeit only for the stocks of smaller capitalisation companies. Over all, this Program found a deterioration in market quality, with ensuing larger spreads and price volatil- ities. Similar recent studies have been conducted in Europe [4], derived from the impact of the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID 2), with similar conclusions. In our MAS approach, we model the order book tick size by the number of possible signiﬁcant digits of the transaction prices, start- ing with prices set as integers (or zero signiﬁcant digits) in order to identify general trends as we vary tick sizes. – We see on Fig. 3 an increase and quick convergence in price absolute returns and volatilities at several time intervals, for smaller tick sizes (or equiva- lently, larger signiﬁcant digits). Notice this quantities are normalised, as divided by real data metrics and expressed in percent. – Likewise, we similarly see on Fig. 4 an increase and convergence in the average formal market bid-ask spreads. Under our model assumptions, this would tend to conﬁrm the results of the other aforementioned studies [32, 4]. Notice this is counter-intuitive, as one could have expected larger tick sizes to constrain the agent bid and ask prices and thus widen the spread. – As seen on Fig. 5, we ﬁnd a mild increase in trading volumes, in line with the results of previous studies such as [4,18], the latter ﬁnding that ETFs experienced an increase in trading volume following decimalisation. – If we study the market regimes by recording the number of consecutive days of daily increasing prices (positive values) and decreasing prices (negative values), as shown on the distribution of Fig. 6, we ﬁnd that smaller tick sizes greatly amplify both bullish and bearish market regimes, as one can see from the tails of the distributions. This is congruent with the increasing price volatilities and bid-ask spreads mentioned above. We posit this to be a strong factor of market instability. Also, we ﬁnd no correlation between the average number of market crashes and varying tick sizes: over all signiﬁcant digits, we ﬁnd an average of 1.86± 0.61 crash per simulation run. – At the agents level, we see on Fig. 7 that decreasing the tick size tends to lower the general wealth of the agents on the long-term. This is seen through a steady decrease in average net asset value of all agents at the end of each simulation. The market quality wrt. overall agent economic growth and survival rates is thus not gaining from smaller tick sizes. Thus, we ﬁnd overall a greater market instability due to smaller tick sizes allowed in the order book, in line with the SEC’s pilot program mentioned above [32,7]. From the perspective of agent economic growth and survival rates, we ﬁnd such lower tick sizes to also diminish overall market quality. 8 Johann Lussange 1, Boris Gutkin 1,2 Fig. 3 Means of absolute logarithmic returns (blue) and volatilities (deﬁned as standard deviations of price normalised to price itself σ/P (t)) computed over lags of two weeks (red), three months (yellow), and one year (green) intervals, for simulations with an order book accounting for transaction prices with 0 , 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 signiﬁcant digits only. These values are displayed as percentages of those coming from real data. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, T = 2875, S = 20. Fig. 4 Means of bid-ask spreads Sj(t) (as a percentage of the price, and deﬁned as the absolute average of all bid and ask prices of the orders leading to transactions), for simula- tions with an order book accounting for transaction prices with 0 , 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 signiﬁcant digits only. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, T = 2875, S = 20. Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 9 Fig. 5 Means of trading volumesV j(t) (as basis points of the number of stock outstanding), for simulations with an order book accounting for transaction prices with 0 , 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 signiﬁcant digits only. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, T = 2875, S = 20. Fig. 6 Distribution of the number of consecutive days of rising prices (positive values) and dropping prices (negative values) for both real data (dashed black curve) and simulated data with a tick size of 0 (red continuous curve) and 5 (blue continuous curve) signiﬁcant digits. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, T = 2875, S = 20. 10 Johann Lussange 1, Boris Gutkin 1,2 Fig. 7 Means of the net asset value of all agents att =T , for simulations with an order book accounting for transaction prices with 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 signiﬁcant digits only. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, T = 2875, S = 20. Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 11 4 Impact of metaorders Following a rich literature on the topic of metaorders [15,44], we want to study the impact of very large orders on the market microstructure. In order to do this, we randomly select an agent once every trading year of the simulations according to a uniform distribution, and endow it with an arbitrary large amount of stock holdings (in case of a short order sent by the agent to the order book) or risk-free assets (in case of a buy order). As soon as this agent has sent its very large order to the order book, its portfolio’s net asset value is reset to its former value. Not unlike [15], we then record for a given stock j the following statistics: ρ(t) = Q(t) Qtot (1) IP (t) = σP [t→t+τ ]−σP [t−τ→t] σP [t−τ→t] (2) Here, ρ(t) is the ratio of traded stocks at time t expressed in percent, Q(t) is the number of stocks traded at time t, and Qtot the total shares outstanding. IP (t) is the impact on price volatilities at time t. We denote σP [t0→t1] as the standard deviation of prices P on the interval t∈ [t0,t 1]. The quantity τ is a given time interval. On Fig. 8, we then show the average impacts on price volatilityIP (t), given by equ. 2, for diﬀerent sizes of orders: those with ratios ρ(t)∈ [0, 5%] (blue curves),ρ(t)∈ [5, 10%] (red curves), andρ(t)∈ [10, 15%] (yellow curves). Both results are displayed as functions of various volatility intervals τ. We ﬁnd that price volatilities display a sharp increase, especially for larger intervalsτ and orders of larger amplitudesρ. We posit this increase with larger intervals τ to be caused by the greater amount of total assets and cashﬂow being present among agents after the very large order has been cleared by the order book. In other words, a continuous market activity proceeds from this very large order, thereby increasing the impact IP over longer time intervals. This is why we see steeper slopes for the curves corresponding to larger orders. Another thing one can notice from Fig. 8, is that irrespectively of τ, the impactIP corresponding to very large orders seems to scale non-linearly with ρ(t). In other words, the values of IP seem to increase exponentially with ρ(t), and very large orders, above a certain threshold of cashﬂow, may cause irreversible changes to a market. Finally, as one could have expected, all these curves display a positive in- crease in price volatilityIP (t). As a conclusion, we see that increasing the order size a strong impact on the volatilities of prices, and that extra-large orders can make volatility explode and hence deteriorate overall market quality. 12 Johann Lussange 1, Boris Gutkin 1,2 Fig. 8 Average impacts on price volatility I P (t) of orders of ratio ρ(t)∈ [0, 5%] (blue curve),ρ(t)∈ [5, 10%] (red curve), and ρ(t)∈ [10, 15%] (yellow curve), as a function of such volatility interval τ. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, T = 2875, S = 150. Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 13 5 Impact of trading frequency We now want to study the market impact of increasingly larger percentages of agents set with a higher frequency of trading. The interest of such a study can be linked with the role played by high frequency trading in modern stock exchanges. However, we recall that our model is calibrated to daily stock mar- ket data, and that the interest of such a study is simply to gauge the eﬀect of larger populations of agents trading more frequently and at shorter time- scales within the scope of our model assumptions. As increasingly more agents trade at ever higher frequencies, one could ask if this is beneﬁciary or not to market quality [6,14]. The rush for higher frequency trading can be linked to the importance of reducing portfolio drawdowns and smoothening equity curves in the asset management industry. We here model high frequency trad- ing by agents being initialised with a much lower investment horizon τi, now drawn from a discrete uniform distributionU[Tw, 2Tw(. Compared to the other agents, these high frequency agents thus have a trading horizon reduced by one order of magnitude, on average. For simulations with increasing percentages of such agents, we observe the following: – We see on Fig. 9 a strong decrease in absolute logarithmic price returns. This can be explained from the order book, at each time step t being ﬁlled with a larger quantity of transaction orders, and hence invariably, a greater probability for spread-centered orders to be sent, matched, and cleared by the order book. – We see on Fig. 10 a steady decrease in short-term price volatility, together with an increase in long-term volatility. This again could be explained by the greater quantity of trading orders being cleared by the order book at each time step, smoothening the stock price curve at shorter scales. At larger scales, we ﬁnd increasing volatility (here at the semester-interval), in line with longer market regimes (see below). – We see on Fig. 11 a very strong increase in trading volumes, as expected, since agents with a shorter investment horizon will tend to trade more frequently. – We see on Fig. 12 a steady decrease in market bid-ask spread, which can be explained by the larger amounts of trading orders being sent to the order book. – We see on Fig. 13 a greater propensity for longer bull and bear market regimes. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that the rates of agent bankruptcies remain stable, regardless of these varying percentages, with an average of 2 .86± 0.97 crashes (deﬁned as a 20% decrease in stock daily price) for each of the S = 20 simulation runs (and each run lasting T = 2875 time steps). Under our model assumptions, increasing numbers of such higher frequency trading agents are thus posited to be beneﬁcial to stock market stability, by lowering general volatility and increasing trading volumes, and thus tackling the issue of market illiquidity propitious to crashes. Although the market im- pact of high frequency trading has been an active ﬁeld of research in quan- 14 Johann Lussange 1, Boris Gutkin 1,2 titative ﬁnance [14], there is, to our knowledge, no other study that probes the eﬀects of larger populations of high frequency traders in a given market. One should consider these results together with the means that have been pro- posed for high-frequency trading regulation [21]. Finally, one should consider and study from an economic perspective why larger proportions of higher frequency agents would bring larger amplitudes of both bearish and bullish market regimes. Fig. 9 Means of all absolute logarithmic price returns for simulations with a percentage p of agents corresponding top = 0%, 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, 100% of the total agent population, that are initialized at time t = 0 with an investment horizon τ i ∼ U[Tw, 2Tw(, while the remaining 100 −p% agents’ investment horizon τ i are drawn from U{Tw, 6Tm}. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, T = 2875 (corresponding to about 11 years), and S = 20. Fig. 10 Means of all volatilities (deﬁned as standard deviations of price normalised to price itself σ/P (t)) computed over lags of one weeks (black), one month (red), and six months (blue) intervals, for simulations with a percentage p of agents corresponding to p = 0%, 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, 100% of the total agent population, that are initialized at time t = 0 with an investment horizon τ i∼U [Tw, 2Tw(, while the remaining 100 −p% agents’ investment horizon τ i are drawn from U{Tw, 6Tm}. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, T = 2875 (corresponding to about 11 years), and S = 20. Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 15 Fig. 11 Means of all trading volumes, for a percentage p of agents corresponding to p = 0%, 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, 100% of the total agent population, that are initialized at time t = 0 with an investment horizon τ i∼U [Tw, 2Tw(, while the remaining 100 −p% agents’ investment horizon τ i are drawn from U{Tw, 6Tm}. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, T = 2875 (corresponding to about 11 years), and S = 20. Fig. 12 Means of all bid-ask spread in percent of price, for a percentage p of agents corresponding to p = 0%, 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, 100% of the total agent population, that are initialized at time t = 0 with an investment horizon τ i∼U [Tw, 2Tw(, while the remaining 100−p% agents’ investment horizon τ i are drawn from U{Tw, 6Tm}. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, T = 2875 (corresponding to about 11 years), and S = 20. 16 Johann Lussange 1, Boris Gutkin 1,2 Fig. 13 Distribution of the number of consecutive days of rising prices (positive values) and dropping prices (negative values). This is for both real (dashed black curve) and simulated (continuous curves) data, the latter being for a percentage p of agents corresponding to p = 0% (red), p = 20% (yellow), p = 40% (green), p = 60% (brown), p = 80% (light blue), and p = 100% (dark green) of the total agent population, that are initialized at time t = 0 with an investment horizon τ i∼U [Tw, 2Tw(, while the remaining 100 −p% agents’ investment horizon τ i are drawn from U{Tw, 6Tm}. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, T = 2875 (corresponding to about 11 years), and S = 20. Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 17 6 Conclusion Based on a previous groundwork [38,39] detailing an ABM stock market simu- lator where the agents autonomously learn to forecast and trade by reinforce- ment learning, we presented here some of its predictions concerning certain speciﬁc regulatory issues. We ﬁrst studied the theoretical impact of lowered tick sizes in stock market order books, and found under our model’s assump- tions a greater market instability due to larger tick sizes allowed in the order book, in line with the SEC’s pilot program mentioned above [32,7]. From the perspective of agent economic growth and survival rates, we ﬁnd such larger tick sizes to also diminish overall market quality. We then studied the impact of larger metaorders on the market, and found an increase in price volatility after a very large order has been cleared in the order book, scaling with the time interval of this volatility. Also we found this increase to be non-linear with the order size: it seems very large orders above a certain threshold can cause lasting and irreversible damage to the market volatility. This should be further studied, in a coming work. Finally, we studied the impact of larger populations of agents in a given market engaging in higher frequency trading, by modelling such agents with much shorter investment horizons. We found that larger populations of such agents are beneﬁcial to stock market stability, lowering general volatility and increasing trading volumes, thereby tackling the issue of market illiquidity, that is propitious to crashes. A next improve- ment and ﬁeld of study would be to calibrate our model to intraday data, and consider a time step to be equivalent, say, to a minute. This would allow us to check on market microstructure eﬀects, and see how these would relate to the former regulatory trends. 18 Johann Lussange 1, Boris Gutkin 1,2 References 1. Current dividend impacts of FTSE-250 stocks. URL https://www.dividenddata.co.uk. Accessed: 2020-05-19 2. IG fees of Contracts For Diﬀerence. URL https://www.ig.com. Accessed: 2020-05-19 3. UK one-year gilt reference prices. URL https://www.dmo.gov.uk. Accessed: 2020-05-19 4. MIFID II: Impact of the New Tick Size Regime. Autorite des Marches Financiers (2018) 5. Aloud, M.: Agent-based simulation in ﬁnance: design and choices. Proceedings in Fi- nance and Risk Perspectives ‘14 (2014) 6. Angel, J.: When ﬁnance meets physics: The impact of the speed of light on ﬁnancial markets and their regulation. Wiley Online Library (2014) 7. Authority, F.I.R.: Assessment of the Plan to Implement a Tick Size Pilot Program. FINRA (2018) 8. Benzaquen, M., Bouchaud, J.P.: A fractional reaction–diﬀusion description of supply and demand. The European Physical Journal B 91(23) (2018) 9. Bera, A.K., Ivliev, S., Lillo, F.: Financial Econometrics and Empirical Market Mi- crostructure. Springer (2015) 10. Biondo, A.E.: Order book modeling and ﬁnancial stability. Journal of Economic Inter- action and Coordination 14(3) (2019) 11. Boero, R., Morini, M., Sonnessa, M., Terna, P.: Agent-based models of the economy, from theories to applications. Palgrave Macmillan (2015) 12. Bouchaud, J.P.: Handbook of Computational Economics 4 (2018) 13. Bouchaud, J.P.: Econophysics: Still fringe after 30 years? arXiv:1901.03691 (2019) 14. Breckenfelder, J.: Competition among high-frequency traders, and market quality. Eu- ropean Central Bank Working Paper Series nr. 2290 (2019) 15. Bucci, F., Benzaquen, M., Lillo, F., Bouchaud, J.P.: Slow decay of impact in equity markets: insights from the ancerno database. arXiv:1901.05332 (2019) 16. Charpentier, A., Elie, R., Remlinger, C.: Reinforcement learning in economics and ﬁ- nance. arXiv:2003.10014 (2020) 17. Chiarella, C., Iori, G., Perell, J.: The impact of heterogeneous trading rules on the limit order book and order ﬂows. arXiv:0711.3581 (2007) 18. Chou, R.K., Chung, H.: Decimalization, trading costs, and information transmission between etfs and index futures. Journal of Futures Markets 26(2), 131–151 (2006) 19. Cont, R.: Chapter 7 - Agent-Based Models for Market Impact and Volatility. A Kirman and G Teyssiere: Long memory in economics, Springer (2005) 20. Cristelli, M.: Complexity in Financial Markets. Springer (2014) 21. Currie, W.L., Seddon, J.J.M.: The regulatory, technology and market ?dark arts trilogy? of high frequency trading: a research agenda. Journal of Information Technology 32 (2017) 22. Dayan, P., Daw, N.D.: Decision theory, reinforcement learning, and the brain. Cognitive, Aﬀective, and Behavioral Neuroscience 8(4), 429–453 (2008) 23. Deng, Y., Bao, F., Kong, Y., Ren, Z., Dai, Q.: Deep direct reinforcement learning for ﬁnancial signal representation and trading. IEEE Trans. on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 28(3) (2017) 24. Eickhoﬀ, S.B., Yeo, B.T.T., Genon, S.: Imaging-based parcellations of the human brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 19, 672–686 (2018) 25. Erev, I., E.Roth, A.: Maximization, learning and economic behaviour. PNAS 111, 10818–10825 (2014) 26. Fama, E.: Eﬃcient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work. Journal of Finance 25, 383–417 (1970) 27. Franke, R., Westerhoﬀ, F.: Structural stochastic volatility in asset pricing dynamics: Estimation and model contest. BERG Working Paper Series on Government and Growth 78 (2011) 28. Frydman, C., Camerer, C.F.: The psychology and neuroscience of ﬁnancial decision making. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 20, 661–675 (2016) 29. Furtado, B.A., Eberhardt, I.D.R.: A simple agent-based spatial model of the economy: Tools for policy. Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation 19(4) (2016) Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 19 30. Ganesh, S., Vadori, N., Xu, M., Zheng, H., Reddy, P., Veloso, M.: Reinforcement learning for market making in a multi-agent dealer market. arXiv:1911.05892 (2019) 31. Gualdi, S., Tarzia, M., Zamponi, F., Bouchaud, J.P.: Tipping points in macroeconomic agent-based models. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 50, 29–61 (2015) 32. Hu, E., Hughes, P., Ritter, J., Vegella, P., Zhang, H.: U. S. Securities and Exchange Commission white papers (2018) 33. Hu, Y.J., Lin, S.J.: Deep reinforcement learning for optimizing portfolio management. 2019 Amity International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (2019) 34. Huang, W., Lehalle, C.A., Rosenbaum, M.: Simulating and analyzing order book data: the queue-reactive model. Journal of the American Statistical Association 110, 509 (2015) 35. Lefebvre, G., Lebreton, M., Meyniel, F., Bourgeois-Gironde, S., Palminteri, S.: Be- havioural and neural characterization of optimistic reinforcement learning. Nature Hu- man Behaviour 1(4) (2017) 36. Lipski, J., Kutner, R.: Agent-based stock market model with endogenous agents’ impact. arXiv:1310.0762 (2013) 37. Lussange, J., Belianin, A., Gutkin, B., Bourgeois-Gironde, S.: Learning and cognition in ﬁnancial markets: A paradigm shift for agent-based models. Proceedings of SAI Intelligent Systems Conference pp. 241–255 (2020) 38. Lussange, J., Lazarevich, I., Bourgeois-Gironde, S., Palminteri, S., Gutkin, B.: Modelling stock markets by multi-agent reinforcement learning. Computational Economics pp. 1– 35 (2020) 39. Lussange, J., Palminteri, S., Bourgeois-Gironde, S., Gutkin, B.: Stock price forma- tion: useful insights from a multi-agent reinforcement learning model. arXiv:1910.05137 (2020) 40. Murray, M.P.: A drunk and her dog: An illustration of cointegration and error correction. The American Statistician 48(1), 37–39 (1994) 41. N, R.M., Larralde, H.: A detailed heterogeneous agent model for a single asset ﬁnancial market with trading via an order book. arXiv:1601.00229 (2016) 42. Neuneier, R.: Enhancing q-learning for optimal asset allocation. Proc. of the 10th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (1997) 43. Palminteri, S., Khamassi, M., Joﬃly, M., Coricelli, G.: Contextual modulation of value signals in reward and punishment learning. Nature communications pp. 1–14 (2015) 44. Said, E., Ayed, A.B.H., Husson, A., Abergel, F.: Market impact: A systematic study of limit orders. arXiv:1802.08502 (2019) 45. Silver, D., Hubert, T., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Lai, M., Guez, A., Lanctot, M., Sifre, L., Kumaran, D., Graepel, T., Lillicrap, T., Simonyan, K., Hassabis, D.: A general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi and go through self- play. Science 362(6419), 1140–1144 (2018) 46. Sirignano, J., Cont, R.: Universal features of price formation in ﬁnancial markets: per- spectives from deep learning. Quantitative Finance 19(9) (2019) 47. Sornette, D.: Physics and ﬁnancial economics (1776-2014): Puzzles, ising and agent- based models. Rep. Prog. Phys. 77 (2014) 48. Spooner, T., Fearnley, J., Savani, R., Koukorinis, A.: Market making via reinforcement learning. Proceedings of the 17th AAMAS (2018) 49. Sutton, R., Barto, A.: Reinforcement Learning, second edition: An Introduction. Brad- ford Books (2018) 50. Szepesvari, C.: Algorithms for Reinforcement Learning. Morgan and Claypool Publish- ers (2010) 51. Way, E., Wellman, M.P.: Latency arbitrage, market fragmentation, and eﬃciency: a two- market model. Proceedings of the fourteenth ACM conference on Electronic commerce pp. 855–872 (2013) 52. Westerhoﬀ, F.H.: The use of agent-based ﬁnancial market models to test the eﬀectiveness of regulatory policies. Jahrbucher Fur Nationalokonomie Und Statistik 228(2), 195 (2008) 53. Wiering, M., van Otterlo, M.: Reinforcement Learning: State-of-the-Art. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2012) 20 Johann Lussange 1, Boris Gutkin 1,2 7 Supplementary material We recall here on Fig. 14-17 the main calibration results found in [38], per- taining to logarithmic price returns, price volatilities at diﬀerent time scales, and auto-correlations of such logarithmic price returns and price volatilities. Via a careful parameter selection, we recall that such a model was calibrated to end-of-day prices and volumes of 642 stocks traded on the London Stock Exchange, between the years 2007 and 2018. Fig. 14 Distribution of logarithmic returns of prices log[ P (t)/P (t− 1)] of real (dashed black curve) and simulated (continuous red curve) data. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, T = 2875, and S = 20. Fig. 15 Distribution of volatilities (deﬁned as standard deviations of price normalised to price itself σ/P (t)) computed over lags of two weeks (black), three months (red), and one year (blue) intervals for both real (dashed curves) and simulated (continuous curves) data. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, T = 2875, and S = 20. Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 21 Fig. 16 Distribution of autocorrelations of the logarithmic returns of prices at each time stept between intervals [t−∆,t ] and [t− 2∆,t−∆], over lags∆ of two weeks (black), three months (red), and one year (blue) intervals for both real (dashed curves) and simulated (continuous curves) data. The simulations are generated with parametersI = 500,T = 2875, and S = 20. Fig. 17 Distribution of autocorrelations of two weeks-interval volatilities at each time step t between intervals [t−∆,t ] and [t− 2∆,t−∆] for ∆ = 2Tw, for both real (dashed black curve) and simulated (continuous red curve) data. The simulations are generated with parameters I = 500, T = 2875, and S = 20.