arXiv:2303.09652v4 [econ.GN] 7 Nov 2023 On Using Proportional Representation Methods as Alternati ves to Pro-Rata Based Order Matching Algorithms in Stock Exchange s Sanjay Bhattacherjee1 and Palash Sarkar ∗2 1 Institute of Cyber Security for Society and School of Comput ing Keynes College, University of Kent CT2 7NP, United Kingdom email: s.bhattacherjee@kent.ac.uk ORCID: 0000-0002-3367-6192 2 Indian Statistical Institute 203, B.T. Road, Kolkata India 700108 email: palash@isical.ac.in ORCID: 0000-0002-5346-2650 November 8, 2023 Abstract The ﬁrst observation of the paper is that methods for determi ning proportional representa- tion in electoral systems may be suitable as alternatives to the pro-rata order matching algorithm used in stock exchanges. The main part of our work is to compre hensively consider various well known proportional representation methods and analyse in d etails their suitability for replac- ing the pro-rata algorithm. Our analysis consists of a theor etical study as well as simulation studies based on data sampled from a distribution which has b een suggested in the literature as models of limit orders. Based on our analysis, we put forwa rd the suggestion that the well known Hamilton’s method is a superior alternative to the pro -rata algorithm for order matching applications. Keywords: order matching algorithm, pro-rata algorithm, proportion al representation, Hamil- ton’s method, Jeﬀerson/D’Hondt method, Webster/Saint-La guë method. JEL codes: D49. ∗Corresponding author. 1 1 Introduction Financial instruments, such as shares of a company, are trad ed on stock exchanges. Traders place orders to buy and sell such instruments. An order speciﬁes, a mong other things, the quantity or size, i.e. the number of units to be purchased or sold. Orders can be of diﬀerent types. A common and important type of order is a limit order which speciﬁes bo th the quantity and the price at which the order is to be executed. The quoted price is required to be a multiple of a unit of price called tick. A stock exchange maintains an order book which records for each ﬁnancial instrument the corresponding list of orders. The orders quoting the same bu ying or selling price are placed at the same price level in the order book. Trading in a stock exchange occurs by executing orders. Buy or ders for an instrument are matched with corresponding sell orders. Matching happens i n units of the instrument. The quantity speciﬁed in an order may not be equal to the quantity of the inc oming counter-party order that it is matched with. An order is ﬁlled when all its units have been matched with one or more incoming counter-party matching orders. Unmatched or partially ﬁll ed orders rest in the order book waiting for new orders to be matched with. As a simple example, let us consider possible orders for the s hares of a company. For sim- plicity, we assume that a limit order is speciﬁed by the order number (denoting the chronology of appearance of the orders), the type ( b for buy and s for sell), the size and the price. Sup- pose (1, b, 10, $100), (2, b, 50, $100), (3, s, 90, $100), (4, b, 20, $110), (5, s, 10, $100), (6, s, 40, $100), (7, b, 70, $100) are seven such orders. The ﬁrst two orders are buy orders and a re stored in the order book as resting orders at price level $100. The third order is a sell order at price $100 whose size is 90, while the total size of the two resting buy orders in the or der book at level $100 is 60. So these two buy orders are satisﬁed by 60 units from the sell order. Th e leftover 30 units of the third order is stored as a resting order (3, s, 30, $100) in the order book at price level $100. The fourth order is a buy order at price $110 and is stored in the order book as a resting order at level $110. The ﬁfth and the sixth orders are sell orders at price $100 and are also stored in the order book as resting orders at level $100. The seventh order is a buy order at price $100. At this point, the order book has three resting sell orders at level $100, namely (3, s, 30, $100), (5, s, 10, $100), and (6, s, 40, $100). The total size of the three resting sell orders is 80, while th e incoming buy order has size 70. So all the resting orders cannot be satisﬁed. A method is requir ed to determine how to allocate the 70 units of the incoming buy order to the three resting orders . We come back to this example after discussing the more general setting. Let us assume that at a particular price level there are n resting orders, and the quantities of the orders are given by a vector T = ( T1, . . . , Tn), where Ti is a positive integer which represents the quantity of the i-th order. These n orders are either all buy orders or all sell orders. Let T = T1 + · · · + Tn be the total quantity of these orders. A new incoming counter -party order of quantity S at the same price level will be matched with the resting order s in T. As a result, some or all of the resting orders may be executed. If S ≥ T , the resting orders are all ﬁlled and can be fully executed. However, if S < T , not all resting orders can be completely ﬁlled. In this case , an order matching algorithm is required to allocate portions o f the incoming counter-party order to the n resting orders. Henceforth, we will assume that the conditi on S < T holds. Formally, an order matching algorithm M(n, T, S) takes as input the number n of resting orders, the vector T = (T1, . . . , Tn) of the resting order quantities, and an incoming counter-pa rty order of quantity S with 0 < S < T . It outputs S = (S1, . . . , Sn) so that Si quantity of Ti may be executed. In other words, 0 ≤ Si ≤ Ti and S = S1 + . . . + Sn. 2 Two of the most common order matching algorithms are the pric e-time priority (also called ﬁrst-come-ﬁrst-served (FCFS) or ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out (FIFO) ) and the pro-rata methods (see for exam- ple [Chi, Pre11, CS20, Her22]). Both methods aim to achieve some kind of fariness in the all ocation of orders. In this work we focus on the pro-rata method. The idea behind the pro-rata method is to distribute S to the n resting orders more or less in proportion to their fractions of the total order. So ideally the i-th resting order would receive STi/T portion of the incoming counter-party order. This, however , has a problem. Financial instruments are traded in indivisible atomic units. So if STi/T is not an integer, then this amount of the order cannot be executed. The pro-rata order matching algorithm adopts a two-step app roach to this problem. In the ﬁrst step, the algorithm assigns an amount S′ i = ⌊STi/T ⌋ of the incoming counter-party order to the i-th resting order 1,2. This strategy consumes S′ = S′ 1 + · · ·+ S′ n units of the incoming counter-party order. In the second step, the remaining S − S′ units are distributed to the resting orders based upon some strategy. The CME adopts the FIFO strategy for the s econd step [ Chi]. Accordingly, we will also assume the FIFO strategy in the second step for th e purpose of this work. Going back to the previous example, it is required to allocat e 70 units of the incoming buy order among the three resting orders of sizes 30, 10 and 40. Fo llowing the pro-rata algorithm, in the ﬁrst step, 26, 8 and 35 units are allocated to the three res ting orders. This consumes 69 units. The remaining unit is allocated on the FIFO basis to the ﬁrst r esting order. So the ﬁnal allocation consists of 27, 8 and 35 units to the three resting orders. Aft er the matching, the order book is updated to store (3, s, 3, $100), (5, s, 2, $100), and (6, s, 5, $100) as resting orders at price level $100. In this paper, we raise two questions. 1. How well does the pro-rata order matching algorithm achie ve its goal of distributing the incoming order to the resting orders in proportion to their f ractions of the total order? 2. Are there other algorithms which perform better than the p ro-rata algorithm in achieving proportionality? To answer the above questions, we need a measure to assess the performance of an order matching algorithm in achieving proportionality. For n resting orders, with T = ( T1, . . . , Tn) the vector of quantities of the resting orders, and S the size of the incoming order, the ideal allocation, or the ideal proportional distribution is given by the vector I = (ST1/T, ST 2/T, . . . , STn/T ). (1) Suppose A is an order matching algorithm which on input n, T and S produces the allocation vector SA = ( S1, . . . , Sn) as output, where Si ≤ Ti for i = 1 , . . . , n, and S1 + · · · + Sn = S. The distance between the vectors I and SA is a measure of the performance of the algorithm A in achieving proportionality. The closer SA is to I, the better is the performance of A in achieving proportionality. 1For a real number x, ⌊x⌋ denotes the greatest integer not greater than x, and ⌈x⌉ denotes the least integer not less than x. 2Sometimes a simple modiﬁcation to the ﬁrst step is used. For e xample, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) [ Chi] adopts the strategy in which if some S′ i turns out to be 1, then it is instead set to 0. 3 We consider two standard measures of distance between two ve ctors, namely the L1 and the L2 metrics deﬁned as follows. L1(SA, I) = n∑ i=1 | Si − STi/T |, L 2(SA, I) = ( n∑ i=1 (Si − STi/T )2 )1/2 . Using these two metrics, we can quantiﬁably answer the ﬁrst q uestion posed above. The metrics also provide a method to address the second question. For an o rder matching algorithm A, let ℓ1,A and ℓ2,A denote L1(SA, I) and L2(SA, I) respectively. For two order matching algorithms A1 and A2, we say that A1 is L1-better (resp. L2-better) than A2 if ℓ1,A1 < ℓ 1,A2 (resp. ℓ2,A1 < ℓ 2,A2). In other words, A1 is L1-better (resp. L2-better) than A2, if its output is closer to the ideal allocation with respect to the L1 (resp. L2) metric. Using the above terminology, we can rephrase the se cond question as follows. Is there an order matching algorithm A which is better than the pro-rata order matching algorithm with respect to either or both of the L1 and L2 metrics? 1.1 Seat Distribution in Electoral Systems To answer the above question, we visit the literature on prop ortional representation in electoral systems which is far removed from stock exchanges and more ge nerally the ﬁnancial world. Propor- tional representation is the most common kind of electoral s ystem where the seats are not contested individually. Instead, the total number of seats is allocat ed to the contesting parties in proportion to the number of votes they have won in the election. Let us con sider an election contested by n parties over K seats that are distributed using a proportional representa tion method. Let Vj denote the number of votes won by party j ∈ {1, . . . , n} in the election. The electoral output is denoted by the vector V = (V1, . . . , Vn), and the total number of votes cast in the election is V = V1 + · · ·+ Vn. Suppose the total number of seats to be distributed among the parties is K. A proportional repre- sentation method determines the seat allocation vector K = (K1, . . . , Kn) where Ki is the number of seats allocated to the i-th party, and K1 + · · · + Kn = K. Typically, the total number of seats K is much smaller than the total number of votes V , i.e. K < V . Further, it is reasonable to assume that in practice the number of seats allocated to the i-th party is at most the number of votes received by the party, i.e. Ki ≤ Vi. Formally, a proportional representation method is an algor ithm A(n, V, K) which takes as input the number n of parties, the vote count vector V = (V1, . . . , Vn), and the number K of seats to be distributed, where 0 < K < V . It outputs the seat allocation vector K = ( K1, . . . , Kn) such that 0 ≤ Ki ≤ Vi and K1 + · · · + Kn = K. There is a large literature on electoral systems in general a nd proportional representation meth- ods in particular. We refer the reader to [ BY01, Nor04, HPS18] for elaborate discussions on these topics. A number of proportional representation methods ha ve been proposed in the context of electoral systems. These can be divided into two types, the h ighest averages method and the largest remainder method. Detailed descriptions of these t ypes of methods are given in Section 2. The most well known of the highest averages method are the Jeﬀ erson/D’Hondt (JD) and the Webster/Sainte-Laguë (WS) methods. Both of these methods co ntinue to be of active interest. See for example [ HM08, GF17, Med19, FSS20]. Among the largest remainder method, the two well known methods are the Hare and the Droop methods. The version of the largest remainder method as proposed by Hare was earlier described by Hamilton and is a lso called Hamilton’s method. 4 A basic requirement that may be expected from a proportional representation method is that it satisﬁes the quota rule. The quota rule requires that for e ach party i, the number of seats Ki allocated to the i-th party is equal to either ⌊(KV i)/V ⌋ or ⌈(KV i)/V ⌋. Since KV i/V is the ideal allocation to the i-th party, the quota rule stipulates that for each party the d eviation from the ideal is less than 1. The pro-rata method as well as Hamilton’ s and Droop’s methods satisfy the quota rule. Balinski and Young [ BY01] identiﬁed certain paradoxes of proportional representat ion methods. A celebrated result by them states that if the number of parti es n is at least 4 and the number of seats is at least n + 3, then any proportional representation method which satisﬁ es the quota rule must suﬀer from the paradoxes. Since Hamilton’s method sati sﬁes the quota rule, it exhibits the paradoxes. Note that the pro-rata method also satisﬁes the q uota rule and hence must also exhibit the paradoxes, though this has not been reported earlier. Th e JD and the WS methods, on the other hand, are free of the paradoxes, and so by the Balinski-Y oung theorem, must violate the quota rule. 1.2 Order Matching from Proportional Representation From the above description, it becomes clear that the goal of allocating an incoming counter-party order to resting orders in proportion to the sizes of the rest ing orders is the same as the task of assigning a ﬁxed number of seats to several contesting parti es in proportion to the number of votes obtained by these parties. The following correspondence ma kes this observation precise. n: number of resting orders ↦→ n: number of parties, S: size of the counter-party order ↦→ K: total number of seats, Ti: size of the i-th resting order ↦→ Vi: number of votes polled by a party, Si: allocation to the i-th resting order ↦→ Ki: number of seats allocated to the i-th party. With the above correspondence in mind, any algorithm for pro portional representation of seats in an electoral system becomes a potential candidate for use as an order matching algorithm by a stock exchange for proportional fulﬁllment of orders. The identi ﬁcation of proportional representation methods as possible substitutes for the pro-rata order matc hing algorithm is a key observation of the present work. Not all proportional representation meth ods, however, are suitable for use as order matching algorithms. The main part of the present work is to make a comprehensive study of the important proportional representation methods availa ble in the literature and determine their eﬃcacies to the order matching problem. The notions of ideal allocation and L1 and L2-distances to the ideal allocation were introduced in Section 1 in the context of order matching. Using the above mentioned c orrespondence between order matching and proportional representation, these not ions carry over directly to the context of proportional representation. Hamilton’s method has the attractive property that allocations produced by this method minimise the L1 and L2-distances to the ideal allocation, where the minimum is over all possible allocation methods, i.e. alloc ations produced by Hamilton’s method enjoy optimality with respect to minimising the L1 and L2-distances to the ideal allocation. As discussed above, there are several well known proportion al representation methods which need to be compared in the context of order matching. There ar e several aspects to the comparison. 1. What are the time complexities of the diﬀerent proportion al representation methods, and how do these compare to the pro-rata method? 5 2. Some of the proportional representation methods have a po sitivity constraint, i.e. they ensure that each party gets at least one seat. What is the relevance o f such a positivity property in the context of order matching? 3. What is the relevance of the paradoxes identiﬁed by Balinsk i and Young to the order matching scenario? 4. How do the L1 and L2-distances between the ideal allocation and the allocation s produced by the pro-rata and other proportional representation meth ods compare to the correspond- ing optimal distances (i.e. the corresponding distances be tween the ideal allocation and the allocations produced by Hamilton’s method)? 5. How often and by how much do the JD and the WS methods violate the quota rule? We systematically answer the above questions. For the ﬁrst q uestion, we show that the pro-rata method is the fastest among the four methods, Hamilton’s met hod is only marginally slower than the pro-rata method, while the JD and the WS methods can requi re substantially more time. We argue that the second issue implies a constraint which is har d to enforce in the context of order matching and more generally is not relevant in the ﬁnancial w orld. For the third issue, we argue that the paradoxes described by Balinski and Young are not rel evant to the order matching scenario. This is because while in principle they do apply to the order m atching scenario, in practice they are very unlikely to be actually encountered. We tackle the four th and the ﬁfth questions by obtaining results from simulation experiments. For the experiments, we followed the suggestion in [ ACJT16] to model the generation of order book data. From the results o f the simulations, it turns out that the L1-distances between the ideal allocation and the allocation s produced by the pro-rata, the JD and the WS methods are respectively about 1.6, 2.3 and 1.1 tim es the L1-distance between the ideal allocation and the allocations produced by Hamilton’s meth od. Similar ﬁgures are obtained for the L2-distance. Since the WS method is closer to the optimal (i.e. Hamilton’s method) than the JD method, we investigated quota rule violation for only the WS method. It has been mentioned in the inﬂuential work by Balinski and Young [ BY01] that the WS method violates the quota rule very rarely. Our experiments, however, show a diﬀerent resu lt. We ﬁnd that quota rule violation by the WS method is quite frequent and further the extent of vi olation is also non-negligible. A possible explanation for the diﬀerence of our experiments w ith what is reported in the literature is that we have run the WS method on data which follows a distribu tion of resting orders that has been suggested in the order matching literature, while prev ious work [ BY01] on quota violation by the WS method considered data that arose in the context of ele ctoral systems. In view of our analysis and experimental results, we ﬁnd that Hamilton’s method is a better alternative to the pro-rata method in the context of order ma tching. While both the pro-rata and Hamilton’s method satisfy the quota rule, allocations prod uced by Hamilton’s method minimise the L1 and L2-distances to the ideal allocation. So in terms of achieving best possible proportionality, Hamilton’s method achieves optimality among all possible o rder matching algorithms. In terms of eﬃciency, Hamilton’s method is only marginally slower than the pro-rata method. In theory, Hamil- ton’s method (and also the pro-rata method) suﬀers from cert ain paradoxex, but such paradoxes are extremely unlikely to occur in the practical context of o rder matching. 6 1.3 Procedural Fairness A recent paper by Hersch [ Her22] investigated the issue of procedural fairness of order all ocation methods. In the paper, it was argued that both the FIFO and the pro-rata are fair in principle, but not in practice. It was pointed out that the main disadvan tage of pro-rata is the requirement of the second step “requiring exchanges to introduce second ary matching rules that can be gamed”. An alternative method called the random selection for servi ce (RSS) method was proposed. Given the vector T = ( T1, . . . , Tn) of resting orders, the RSS method deﬁnes a probability distr i- bution π over {1, . . . , n}, where π associates probability Ti/T to i, for i = 1 , . . . , n, Suppose the incoming counter-party order consists of S units. Allocation is done by repeating the following procedure S times: an independent random i is drawn from {1, . . . , n} following the probability dis- tribution π and one unit is allocated to the i-th resting order. At the end of the procedure, let Si be the number of units allocated to the i-th resting order so that the ﬁnal allotment is S = (S1, . . . , Sn) satisfying S = S1 + · · · + Sn. It was argued by Hersch [ Her22] that the RSS method is fair in both principle and practice. Below we revisit this method and poin t out a crucial diﬀerence between principle and practice. Given T = (T1, . . . , Tn) and S, suppose the RSS method is executed Γ times and for γ = 1, . . . ,Γ , let the allotment of γ-th execution be Sγ = (Sγ,1, . . . , Sγ,n). For i = 1, . . . , n, let ˆSi = (S1,i + · · · + SΓ ,i)/Γ , i.e. ˆSi is the average allotment to the i-th resting order computed over all the Γ trials. The law of large numbers assures us that asymptotically, i.e . as Γ goes to inﬁnity, the average allotment ˆSi tends to STi/T which is equal to the i-th component of the ideal allocation vector I (see ( 1)). So in principle, Hersch [ Her22] implicitly considers achieving allocation close to the id eal allocation vector I to be procedurally fair. To this extent, Hersch’s objective and ours coincide. Additionally, our use of the L1 and L2 metrics to measure deviation from the ideal allocation vect or can be considered to be a quantiﬁcation of procedural fairne ss. As such it expands the theoretical framework for studying procedural fairness of the order all ocation methods. From a practical point of view, however, the RSS method has a s igniﬁcant shortcoming. The law of large numbers applies in an asymptotic context, i.e. a s Γ goes to inﬁnity. In practice, given T = ( T1, . . . , Tn) and S, a stock exchange will execute the RSS method exactly once to obtain a single allocation vector S = ( S1, . . . , Sn). In other words, in practice the value of Γ will be 1. The law of large numbers does not say anything about the value obtained in a single execution. As a result, the allocation obtained from a single execution may not turn out to be fair. The Si’s obtained after a single execution of RSS can be any value in th e set {0, . . . , S}. In particular, there is a positive probability that for some i, Si turns out to be greater than Ti. Considering a particular example with n = 2 , T = (10 , 90) and S = 10 , Hersch [ Her22] provides probabilities that the Si’s can take certain values: the probability that S1 ≥ 1 (resp. S1 = 10) is about 0.88 (resp. 7 × 10−6); the probability that S2 = 20 (resp. S2 ≥ 10) is about 0.12 (resp. approaches 1). These probabilities, however, do not enlighten us about the concrete values of the Si’s after a single execution. In particular, the probability that S2 ≥ 10 approaches 1 suggests an asymptotic context, where the frequentist view of probability is taken. To interpret such probabilities, one again needs to consider a large number Γ of trials of the RSS method and consider the average allocati on over all the Γ trials. To test the practical eﬃcacy of the RSS method, we have run exp eriments with the method. It turns out that the allocation vector obtained by the RSS meth od has a very large deviation from the ideal allocation vector in terms of both the L1 and the L2 metrics. Particular examples are provided in Section 4. By the above explanation, this observation is not surprisin g. 7 As mentioned earlier, according to Hersch, the main disadva ntage of the pro-rata method is the use of secondary matching rules in the second step of the meth od which leads to the possibility of gaming. The second step of Hamilton’s method is completely d etermined and cannot be gamed. So our proposal of using Hamilton’s method overcomes the disad vantage of the pro-rata method pointed out by Hersch. In terms of procedural fairness as measured by distance to the ideal allocation vector, Hamilton’s method achieves the optimal distance. 1.4 Contribution to Proportional Representation Apart from the investigation of the applicability of propor tional representation methods to the order matching problem, our work provides new insights into metho ds for proportional representation which are of independent interest. The ﬁrst such insight is to suggest the use of priority queue d ata structures to eﬃciently imple- ment various proportional representation algorithms and a nalyse their time complexities. To the best of our knowledge, such an exercise has not been done earl ier in the literature and would be of interest to various applications of proportional represen tation methods. The second insight is that the WS method violates quota quite often for the data generated from the distributions which model the manner in which order s appear in a stock exchange. This contradicts the prior reported observation that the WS meth od rarely violates quota. As mentioned earlier, the previous observation is based on data generate d from distributions which model voting patterns. By showing an example of a distribution for which th e WS method violates quota often, we open up the possibility of investigating whether there ar e other distributions for which the WS method also frequently violates quota. Understanding and i dentifying such distributions will be important for suggesting the use of the WS method for applica tions beyond determining seats in electoral systems. 2 Proportional Representation Methods There are several diﬀerent proportional representation me thods (see [ BY01, Nor04, HPS18]). Such methods are also called apportionment methods. Below we desc ribe two well known families of proportional representation methods, namely the highest a verages or the divisor method, and the highest remainder method. Recall the setting described in Section 1.1, where Vi is the number of votes received by the i-th party and K is the total number of available seats. The goal is to determi ne Ki which is the number of seats allocated to the i-th party. Highest averages method. Let f : Z+ ∪ {0} → R be a function from the non-negative integers to the reals. Let V = V1 + · · · + Vn and vi = Vi/V . In the highest averages method (also called divisor method), seats are allocated iteratively. The seat distribution algorithm goes through K iterations and in each iteration exactly one seat is allocat ed to one of the parties. Initially, the algorithm sets K1 = K2 = · · · = Kn = 0 . For k from 1 to K, in the k-th iteration the algorithm determines j = arg max {Vi/f (Ki) : i = 1 , . . . , n} and increments Kj by one. After K iterations, the ﬁnal values of K1, . . . , Kn are the numbers of seats allocated to the various parties. Va rious diﬀerent methods arise from the diﬀerent deﬁnitions of f . The deﬁnitions of f for several well 8 known methods including the popular Jeﬀerson/D’Hondt and t he Webster/Sainte-Laguë methods are shown in Table 1. Method name f (t) Jeﬀerson/D’Hondt (JD) (t + 1) Webster/Sainte-Laguë (WS) (t + 0.5) Adam (Ad) ⌈t⌉ Danish (Da) t/(t + (1/3)) Dean (De) t(t + 1)/(t + 0.5) Huntington/Hill (HH) √ t(t + 1) Table 1: Expressions for the function f corresponding to some well known highest averages method. Largest remainder method. The method uses a parameter Q. The seat allocation is done in two phases. In the ﬁrst phase, the i-th party is allocated ⌊Vi/Q⌋ seats. Let Ri = Vi/Q − ⌊Vi/Q⌋ be the remainder corresponding to the i-th party. Suppose after the ﬁrst phase k seats remain unallocated. In the second phase, the parties with the k largest remainders are each allocated one seat. Let Ki be the number of seats allocated to the i-th party at the end of the second round. The method ensures that K1 + · · ·+ Kn = K. Table 2 shows the expressions for Q corresponding to two well known methods. Method name Q Hare (Ha) V /K Droop (Dr) 1 + ⌊V /(1 + K)⌋ Table 2: Expressions for the parameter Q corresponding to two well known largest remainder method. The largest remainder method with Hare’s value for Q was originally described by Hamilton and is also called Hamilton’s method. The abbreviation Ha st ands for both Hamilton and Hare. The largest remainder method satisﬁes the quota rule, i.e. t he condition that Ki is equal to either ⌊KV i/V ⌋ or ⌈KV i/V ⌉ is achieved by allocations produced by the largest remainde r method. It is known that the allocations produced by Hamilton’s method mi nimise the L1 and L2-distances to the ideal proportional seat allocation (KV 1/V, KV 2/V, . . . , KVn/V ), where the minimum is over all possible apportionment methods. In fact, the allocations p roduced by Hamilton’s method minimise Lp-distance to the ideal allocation for any ﬁnite p ≥ 1. See [ Bir76] and also Proposition 3.7 on Page 117 of [ BY01]. Paradoxes. Balinski and Young [ BY01] identiﬁed certain paradoxes of apportionment methods. A scenario (or setting) of the proportional representation problem is described by the vector of obtained votes and the total number of seats. Consider two po ssible scenarios, where (V1, . . . , Vn) and K represents the ﬁrst scenario and (V ′ 1, . . . , V′ n) and K ′ represents the second. Let (K1, . . . , Kn) and (K ′ 1, . . . , K′ n) be the seat allocation vectors corresponding to the two scen arios. 9 • The Alabama paradox is the following: Vi = V ′ i for i = 1 , . . . , n and K ′ > K , but there is a j ∈ { 1, . . . , n} such that K ′ j < K j. In other words, the votes polled remain the same and the total number of seats has gone up, but the number of seats a llocated to a party has gone down. • The population paradox is the following: K = K ′ and for distinct i, j ∈ { 1, . . . , n}, V ′ i /V ′ j > Vi/Vj, but K ′ i < K i and K ′ j > K j. In other words, the number of seats remains the same while the ratio of the number of votes polled by the i-th party to the number of votes polled by the j-th party increases, yet the seat allocation to the i-th party decreases, and the seat allocation to the j-th party increases. Balinski and Young [ BY01] deﬁned a property, called population monotone, which states that if the i-th party’s vote increases relative to the j-th party, then the i-th party should not get fewer seats and the j-th party more. They showed that if any apportionment method satisﬁes this property, then it does not exhibit either the Alabama or the population paradox. They further showed that an apportionment method is population monotone if and only i f it is a divisor method. A famous impossibility result due to Balinski and Young is that for n ≥ 4 and K ≥ n + 3 , there is no apportionment method which is both population monotone and satisﬁes the quota rule. Since the JD and the WS methods are divisor methods, it follow s from the above mentioned results that they are population monotone. As a consequence , on the positive side, these two methods do not exhibit either the Alabama or the population p aradoxes, while on the negative side they do not satisfy the quota rule. Balinski and Young’s resul ts also show that since the pro-rata and Hamilton’s methods satisfy the quota rule, they are not p opulation monotone and consequently must exhibit the paradoxes. There are known examples of the p aradoxes for Hamilton’s method and it is easy to get similar examples for the pro-rata method . The largest remainder method with the Droop’s choice for Q satisﬁes the quota rule and consequently exhibits the above paradoxes. Further, unlike Hamilton’s method, allocations produced b y Droop’s method do not achieve optimal distance to the ideal allocation. So in the context of order m atching, there is no reason to consider Droop’s method in comparison to Hamilton’s method. 3 Alternatives to Pro-Rata We consider in detail the various aspects of the comparison b etween the various methods which were identiﬁed in Section 1.2. Three of these are theoretical and are discussed in this sec tion, while the other two are based on experimental results and are discu ssed in the next section. In this section and the next, let n be the number of resting orders, T = (T1, . . . , Tn) be the vector of resting orders and S be the size of the incoming counter-party order. The allocat ion vector is S = (S1, . . . , Sn). 3.1 Computational Eﬃciency The ﬁrst step of the pro-rata method computes S′ i = ⌊STi/T ⌋ for i = 1, . . . , n. So this step requires O(n) time. Suppose that the vector S′ = (S′ 1, S′ 2, . . . , S′ n) = ( ⌊ST1/T ⌋, ⌊ST2/T ⌋, . . . ,⌊STn/T ⌋) is obtained after the ﬁrst step and let S′ = S′ 1 + S′ 2 + · · · + S′ n. Let r = S − S′. Then in the second step r units need to be allocated using FIFO. Note that r ≤ n. So the FIFO strategy of the second 10 step requires O(r) = O(n) time. Consequently, the overall complexity of the pro-rata method is O(n + r) = O(n) time. The computation of the JD and the WS methods (and more general ly of the highest averages methods) diﬀer only in the choice of the function f . This choice does not aﬀect the complexity of the algorithm. The algorithm performs S iterations. In each iteration it needs to ﬁnd a maximum among n numbers. So if the algorithm is implemented in a straighforw ard manner, then the time complexity is O(Sn). This can be improved to O(n+S log n) by using an appropriate data structure as we discuss next. A priority queue or a max-heap [ AHU78] is a data structure satisfying the following properties. For n numbers, a max-heap can be built in O(n) time such that the maximum of these numbers is at the top of the heap. Further, if any one of the n numbers is changed, then using only O(log n) operations, the new maximum can be placed on the top of the hea p. The JD and the WS methods start with an initial allocation U = ( U1, . . . , Un), with Ui = 0 for i = 1 , . . . , n. In each of the S iterations, the vector U is updated by incrementing exactly one component. The j-th component of U is updated where j = arg max {Ti/f (Ui) : i = 1 , . . . , n} (ties can be broken arbitrarily, or in a FIFO manner). At the e nd of S iterations, the value of U provides the ﬁnal allocation vector S = ( S1, . . . , Sn). The implementation of these methods can beneﬁt from the use of a max-heap. The pairs (i, Ti/f (Ui)), i = 1 , . . . , n are stored such that the numbers Ti/f (Ui), i = 1 , . . . , n constitute a max-heap. Initially building this max-heap requires O(n) time. In any iteration, the top of the heap provides the pair (j, Tj /f (Uj)) such that j = arg max{Ti/f (Ui) : i = 1, . . . , n}. The j-th component of U is incremented. As a result, of the n numbers (i, Ti/f (Ui)), i = 1 , . . . , n only the j-th number changes, while all the other numbers remain unchanged. Next, heap operations are done to ensure t hat maximum of the updated numbers is on the top of the heap. This requires O(log n) time. So building the heap requires O(n) time while each of the S iterations requires O(log n) time. So the total time required is O(n + S log n). In Adam’s, Dean’s and Huntington/Hill’s methods as well as t he Danish method, it is required to start by allocating one unit to each of the n resting orders (see Section 3.2 for an explanation). So a total of S − n iterations are required to allocate the remaining S − n units of the incoming counter-party order. Consequently, the time complexity of these four methods is O(n+(S −n) log n). For Hamilton’s method (and more generally for the largest re mainder method), the ﬁrst step is the same as the ﬁrst step of the pro-rata method and consequ ently requires O(n) time. In the second step, the leftover r = S − S′ ≤ n units are to be allocated to the resting orders having the r largest remainders. This requires determining the r largest remainders. A simple way to perform the second step is to compute all the n remainders, i.e. Ri = STi/T −⌊STi/T ⌋, i = 1, . . . , n and then sort the Ri’s in descending order. Next assign one unit to each of the res ting orders corresponding to the ﬁrst r entries in the sorted list of remainders. Sorting requires O(n log n) time and so the time complexity of Hamilton’s method is dominated by the sorting step and the overall time complexity of the method is O(n + n log n) = O(n log n). The idea of using a max-heap can be used to improve the eﬃcienc y of Hamilton’s method. After the ﬁrst step, the pairs (i, Ri), i = 1 , . . . , n are stored such that the numbers R1, . . . , Rn form a max heap. This requires O(n) time. Suppose (j, Rj ) is the entry on the top of the heap. Then Rj is the largest remainder. So S′ j is incremented and the remainder Rj is updated to the value obtained by subtracting the new value of S′ j from STj/T . All other remainders remain unchanged. Next, heap operations are done to ensure that the maximum get s on the top. This requires O(log n) time. Since r leftover units have to be allocated, and the allocation of ea ch of these r units requires 11 pro-rata Ha or Dr JD or WS Ad, Da, De, or HH O(n + r) O(n + r log n) O(n + S log n) O(n + (S − n) log n) Table 3: Time complexities of the diﬀerent methods. In the ta ble, r ≤ n is the number of leftover units after the ﬁrst step of the pro-rata algorithm. O(log n) time, the second step requires a total of O(r log n) time. So using a max-heap, the two steps of Hamilton’s method can be implemented in O(n + r log n) time. Table 3 compares the time complexities of the above methods. Clearl y pro-rata is the fastest. Since r is at most n, Hamilton’s method (and also Droop’s method) requires at mo st O(n log n) time. This is more than the time required by the pro-rata meth od by a factor of log n. So Hamilton’s method is slower than pro-rata by only a logarithmic factor. The JD and the WS methods require time O(n + S log n). Here S is the size of the incoming counter-party order. Note that th e size of the incoming counter-party order has no relation to the numb er of resting orders, i.e. n. For typical order matching applications, S may be several orders of magnitude larger than n. In such situations, the JD and the WS methods will require much more time than the p ro-rata method. So from the viewpoint of eﬃciency, Hamilton’s method will be marginall y slower than pro-rata, while both the JD and the WS methods may turn out to be signiﬁcantly slower. I n electronic stock exchanges where orders are executed extremely fast, the slowdown due t o the JD and the WS methods may not be acceptable. 3.2 Relevance of Positivity Requirement Apart from the JD and the WS methods, Table 1 lists several other methods which fall within the class of the highest averages method, namely Adam, Danish, D ean and Huntington/Hill. Note that f (t) for these methods satisfy the condition f (0) = 0 . Suppose we start the procedure with initial seat allocations to be 0, i.e. Ki = 0 for i = 1, . . . , n. Then in the ﬁrst iteration, each f (Ki) is 0 and so the computation for determining j = arg max {Vi/f (Ki) : i = 1 , . . . , n} will encounter divisions by zero and the method will fail. This problem is bypassed by s tarting the procedure with an initial allocation of one seat to each party. So at the end of the proce dure, each party is ensured to have at least one seat. Note that the constraint of allocating at l east one seat to each party requires the number of seats to be at least as large as the number of parties . In the context of order matching, the feature of assigning at least one seat to each party translates to assiging at least one unit of the incoming counter-party o rder to each of the resting orders. This requires the size of the incoming counter-party order to be a t least the number of resting orders, i.e. S ≥ n. While this condition is likely to hold, it cannot be imposed in general, since there is no control over the size S of the incoming counter-party order. More generally, the pr inciple of assigning at least one unit of the incoming order to each of the resting o rders does not have any justiﬁcation in the context of stock exchanges. On the contrary, some stoc k exchanges follow the rule that if the order unit determined by the ﬁrst step of the pro-rata method is 1, then this is instead set to 0 [ Chi]. The principle of at least one unit for each resting order may n ot be welcome by such exchanges. Due to this reason as well as the unimplementable constraint of S ≥ n, the methods due to Adam, Danish, Dean and Huntington/Hill are not appropriate for th e order matching application. 12 3.3 Relevance of the Paradoxes Let us consider the relevance of the the Alabama and the popul ation paradoxes in the context of order matching. The paradoxes refer to two scenarios involv ing the sizes of the resting orders and the size of the incoming counter-party order. The Alabama paradox translates to the following. The sizes o f the resting orders remain the same in both the ﬁrst and the second scenarios, while an increase o ccurs in the incoming counter-party order of the second scenario in comparison to the ﬁrst scenar io. Yet the allocation to a particular resting order goes down in the second scenario compared to th e ﬁrst. The population paradox translates to the following. The siz e of the incoming counter-party order remains the same in both the scenarios, and there are tw o resting orders i and j such that the size of the i-th order relative to the size of the j-th order increases in the second scenario compared to the ﬁrst. Yet the allocation to the i-th order decreases while the allocation to the j-th order increases. From the point of view of practical order matching scenarios , the above paradoxes are unlikely to arise. For the paradoxes to occur, some quantity must rema in the same in the two scenarios. For the Alabama paradox, the sizes of the resting orders rema in the same in the two scenarios, while for the population paradox, the size of the incoming co unter-party order is the same in the two scenarios. Since both the resting orders and the incomin g counter-party order are generated by random processes, it is very unlikely that in any two real-li fe scenarios, either of these will remain the same. So even though the paradoxes apply in theory to the p ro-rata and the Hamilton methods, they are very unlikely to be encountered in practice. 4 Simulation and Empirical Results In Table 4, we provide some examples of the order allocation vector SA, where A is one of P (denoting the pro-rata method), RSS, Hamilton (Ha), JD, or W S methods. The ideal allocation vector is I = ( ST1/T, . . . , STn/T ). From the examples, we observe that for the RSS method, the L1 and L2 distances from the ideal allocation vector I are much larger than these distances from the other methods. This is as expected (see Section 1.3) and highlights the impracticability of the RSS method. While the table provides only three examples, we have obtained many other examples where the observation that the order allocation vector prod uced by the RSS method is much farther away from the ideal allocation vector compared to the other m ethods holds. In view of this, we do not consider the RSS method any further in our simulation stu dies. We have run more extensive simulation results to compare the four methods, namely pro-rata, Hamilton, JD and WS. It would have been more appropriate to ru n the simulations on actual order book data obtained from some stock market. Unfortunately, w e do not have access to such data. So instead we generated order book data following recommend ations available in the literature. Section 2.3 of the book [ ACJT16] entitled “Limit Order Book” mentions that empirical studie s show that the distribution of order sizes is complex to character ize and that a power-law distribution has been suggeted in the literature. For limit orders, the de cay rate was suggested to be equal to approximately 2.0. Further, orders tend to have a “round” size with clusters ar ound 100 and 1000 being observed. Based on this description, we used the power l aw distribution with decay rate 2.0 to generate the orders. A sample obtained from the power law i s a real number not less than 1. We rounded this sample to the nearest integer and multiplied this integer by the quantum size q. This provided a particular resting order. To obtain a vector of n resting orders, we independently 13 ℓ1,A ℓ2,A Ex 1 T 209 727 746 808 995 204 598 773 979 899 - - I 3.01 10.48 10.75 11.65 14.34 2.94 8.62 11.14 14.11 12.96 - - SP 4 11 11 12 15 2 8 11 14 12 5.54 2.02 SRSS 4 7 17 11 18 3 5 10 15 10 23.69 9.48 SHa 3 10 11 12 14 3 9 11 14 13 2.17 0.85 SJD 3 10 11 12 14 3 9 11 14 13 2.17 0.85 SWS 3 10 11 12 14 3 9 11 14 13 2.17 0.85 Ex 2 T 1 655 307 138 647 48 625 382 95 424 - - I 0.03 19.72 9.24 4.15 19.48 1.44 18.81 11.50 2.86 12.76 - - SP 0 20 10 5 20 0 18 11 2 12 6.82 2.44 SRSS 0 21 15 2 21 1 17 8 4 11 19.41 7.87 SHa 0 20 9 4 19 1 19 12 3 13 2.69 0.97 SJD 0 20 9 4 20 1 19 12 2 13 3.46 1.31 SWS 0 20 9 4 19 1 19 12 3 13 2.69 0.97 Ex 3 T 268 806 409 420 869 659 189 317 286 721 - - I 5.42 16.30 8.27 8.50 17.58 13.33 3.82 6.41 5.78 14.58 - - SP 6 17 9 9 18 13 3 6 5 14 5.86 1.92 SRSS 2 15 8 4 12 17 2 6 9 25 34.61 14.16 SHa 5 16 8 9 18 13 4 6 6 15 3.47 1.14 SJD 5 17 8 8 18 13 4 6 6 15 3.86 1.30 SWS 5 16 8 9 18 13 4 6 6 15 3.47 1.14 Table 4: Examples of simulation runs with n = 10 and S = 100. repeated the procedure n times. We used two values of the quantum size, namely q = 100 and q = 1000 to incorporate the “rounding” eﬀect mentioned in [ ACJT16]. For each value of n and q, we obtained N vectors of resting orders. Suppose T = (T1, . . . , Tn) is a vector of resting orders and let T = T1 + · · · + Tn. To apply the order matching algorithms, we need the value S of the size of the incoming counter-party order. We wish to have S < T so that trivial allocation does not hold. The value of S was chosen to be a random integer in the interval [0, T − 1]. In our experiments, we have taken N = 1000. The simulation parameters are given in Table 5a. 4.1 Distance to the Ideal Allocation Given T and S, let as before ℓ1,A and ℓ2,A be the L1 and L2-distances respectively of the output of algorithm A to the ideal allocation, where A is one of pro-rata, Hamilton, JD or WS methods. From the discussion in Section 2, we know that ℓ1,Ha is the minimum L1-distance to the ideal allocation and ℓ2,Ha is the minimum L2-distance to the ideal allocation, where the minimum is take n over all algorithms A. So for the other algorithms, it makes sense to compare the L1-distance to ℓ1,Ha and the L2-distance to ℓ2,Ha. For A in {P, JD, WS}, and for ℓ1,A ⁄= 0 ⁄= ℓ2,A we deﬁne ρ1,A = ℓ1,A ℓ1,Ha and ρ2,A = ℓ2,A ℓ2,Ha . (2) To measure the eﬃcacy of algorithm A with respect to Hamilton’s method, we decided to study the distributions of ρ1,A and ρ2,A using simulations. In each simulation, there were N iterations and in each of these iterations a vector T = (T1, . . . , Tn) of resting orders and a incoming counter-party order S were obtained as described above. For each pair T and S, we computed ℓ1,Ha and ℓ2,Ha and then ρ1,A and ρ2,A for A in {P, JD, WS}. At the end of N iterations of the simulation, we computed the mean µ1,A and standard deviation σ1,A of the obtained values of ρ1,A and similarly, the mean µ2,A and standard deviation σ2,A of the obtained values of ρ2,A. The obtained values of the means and the standard 14 n q Sim 1 50 100 Sim 2 50 1000 Sim 3 100 100 Sim 4 100 1000 Sim 5 150 1000 Sim 6 200 1000 (a) Parameters of the various simulation runs. pro-rata JD WS Sim 1 L1 (1.63,0.19) (2.23,1.08) (1.12,0.12) L2 (1.64,0.18) (2.23,1.08) (1.12,0.12) Sim 2 L1 (1.62,0.19) (2.22,0.94) (1.12,0.12) L2 (1.63,0.19) (2.22,0.94) (1.12,0.12) Sim 3 L1 (1.64,0.14) (2.41,1.19) (1.15,0.13) L2 (1.65,0.14) (2.41,1.19) (1.15,0.13) Sim 4 L1 (1.64,0.13) (2.34,1.14) (1.14,0.12) L2 (1.65,0.13) (2.34,1.14) (1.14,0.12) Sim 5 L1 (1.64,0.12) (2.44,1.09) (1.16,0.12) L2 (1.66,0.12) (2.44,1.09) (1.16,0.12) Sim 6 L1 (1.64,0.10) (2.54,1.65) (1.15,0.11) L2 (1.65,0.11) (2.54,1.65) (1.15,0.11) (b) Summary of simulation results. Table 5: Simulation parameters and summary. deviations are shown in Table 5b. Each entry in the table is of the form (µ, σ) which provides the mean and the standard deviation of ρ corresponding to the case identiﬁed by the row and column labels. We have the following observations from the results . 1. For each A in {P, JD, WS}, the values of µ1,A and µ2,A are almost the same, as are the values of σ1,A and σ2,A. Further, across simulations the means and the standard dev iations are also very close. This suggests the stability of the results. 2. The distance to the ideal for pro-rata is about 1.6 times th e distance to the ideal for Hamilton’s method. For the JD and the WS methods, these numbers are about 2.2 and 1.1 respectively. We may conclude that among pro-rata, JD and the WS methods, th e WS method produces allocations which are closest to the optimal (i.e. allocati ons produced by Hamilton’s method), while the JD method produces allocations which are farthest from the optimal. Importantly, the allocations produced by the pro-rata method are signiﬁc antly far from the optimal allo- cations. In view of the above observations, between the JD and the WS me thods, we ﬁnd no reason to consider the JD method. 4.2 Quota Violation Statistics for the WS Method For the simulation parameters in Table 5a, we obtained statistics of quota violation by the WS method. A similar study can also be carried out for the JD meth od. We chose to focus only on the WS method since from Section 4.1 we see that the allocations obtained from the WS method are closer to the optimal than the allocations obtained from the JD method. Each simulation consists of N = 1000 iterations. Let T = ( T1, . . . , Tn) be the vector of resting orders and S be the size of the incoming counter-party order in a particul ar iteration. Let T = T1 + · · · + Tn. Further, suppose the corresponding order allocation vect or obtained from the WS method is S = ( S1, . . . , Sn). We say that S violates lower quota if there is an i ∈ { 1, . . . , n} such that Si < ⌊STi/T ⌋ and S violates upper quota if there is an i ∈ {1, . . . , n} such that Si > ⌈STi/T ⌉; S is said to violate quota if it violates either lower quota or u pper quota. A basic statistic to determine quota violation is the ratio o f the number of iterations in which quota violation occurs to the total number of iterations. Le t λ denote the percentage of iterations 15 λ u v Sim 1 62.7% −10 10 Sim 2 59.9% −9 9 Sim 3 78.8% −20 21 Sim 4 78.6% −16 28 Sim 5 86.8% −30 42 Sim 6 88.7% −35 34 Table 6: Statistics of quota violation by the WS method. In th e table λ is the frequency of quota violation, u is the minimum value of the extent of lower quota violation, a nd v is the maximum value of the extent of upper quota violation. in which quota violation occurs. While λ indicates the frequency of quota violation, it does not provide information regarding the extent of quota violatio n. The extent of lower quota violation is Si − ⌊STi/T ⌋ and the extent of upper quota violation is Si − ⌈STi/T ⌉. Note that the extent of lower quota violation is negative while the extent of the u pper quota violation is positive. The extent of lower quota violation takes values in the set {−S, . . . ,−1} while the extent of upper quota violation takes values in the set {1, . . . , S}. In a simulation consisting of N iterations, let u be the minimum value of the extent of lower quota violations and v be the maximum value of the upper quota violations. Then the pair (u, v) provides information about the total extent of quota violat ion. The values of λ, u and v for the diﬀerent simulations are provided in Table 6. From the table, we see that quota violation is quite frequent and the frequency increases with increase in the value of n. Further, quota violation is spread on both the lower and the upper sides and the magnitude of the extent of both lower and upper quota violations increase s with increase in the value of n. So we see that for the data which models order matching applicat ion, the WS method violates quota quite frequently and also to a considerable extent. This mak es the WS method unsuitable for use as an order matching algorithm. 5 Summary In Table 3 we compared the time complexities of the various methods. Th is showed that while the Ha and the Dr methods are marginally slower than the pro-rata algorithm, the highest averages methods are substantially slower than the pro-rata method. In Table 7, we summarise the comparison between the diﬀerent algorith ms with respect to the other aspects that are relevant to the order matching applic ation. Due to the positivity requirement, the Ad, Da, De, HH methods are not suitable (see Section 3.2). The pro-rata, and the Ha and the Dr methods exhibit certain paradoxes, but this is not releva nt to the order matching scenario (see Section 3.3). Among all possible order matching methods, the Ha method is d istance optimal in the sense that allocations produced by this method have the minimum L1 and L2 distances to the ideal allocation. So in a precise sense, the Ha method achieves the best possibl e proportionality. From the table, it may be observed that the Dr method possesses all the properti es of the Ha method other than being distance optimal. So for the order matching problem, there i s no reason to prefer the Dr method over the Ha method. Both the JD and the WS methods are not distance optimal and neit her do they respect the 16 pro-rata Ha Dr JD WS Ad Da De HH positivity? no no no no no yes yes yes yes paradox? yes yes yes no no no no no no distance optimal? no yes no no no no no no no quota violation? no no no yes yes yes yes yes yes Table 7: Comparison of various aspects of the diﬀerent metho ds. quota rule. Simulation results in Section 4.1 show that allocations produced by the WS method is closer to the ideal than those produced by the JD method. The s imulation results of quota violation for the WS method in Section 4.2 show that the WS method violates quota quite frequently (for data generated for order matching applications). The quota violation, not being distance optimal to the ideal allocation, and the substantial slowdown compa red to the pro-rata method make both the JD and the WS methods unsuitable for order matching appli cations. 6 Conclusion We have comprehensively investigated the possible application of various proportional representation methods as substitutes for the pro-rata order matching algo rithm in stock exchanges. From our analysis, it follows that the method due to Hamilton is the mo st suitable candidate for the purpose. Stock exchanges may seriously consider adopting Hamilton’ s method as a superior alternative to the pro-rata order matching algorithm. Acknowledgement We are grateful to the editor and the reviewers for providing comments which have helped in improving the paper. References [ACJT16] Frédéric Abergel, Anirban Chakraborti, Aymen Jed idi, and Ioane Muni Toke. Limit Order Book. Cambridge University Press, 2016. [AHU78] Alfred Aho, John E. Hopcroft, and Jeﬀrey D. Ullman. Design and analysis of computer algorithms, ﬁrst edition . Addison-Wesley, 1978. [Bir76] G. Birkhoﬀ. House monotone apportionment schemes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. , 73:684–86, 1976. [BY01] Michel L. Balinski and Peyton H. Young. Fair Representation: Meeting the Ideal of One Man, One Vote (2nd ed.) . Brookings Institution Press, 2001. [Chi] Chicago Mercantile Exchange. Supported Matching Alg orithms, Clients Systems Wiki. https://www.cmegroup.com/confluence/display/EPICSANDBOX/Supported+Matching+Algorithms, accessed on 23 February, 2023. 17 [CS20] Satya R. Chakravarty and Palash Sarkar. An introduction to algorithmic ﬁnance, algo- rithmic trading and blockchain . Emerald Group Publishing, 2020. [FSS20] Jarosław Flis, Wojciech Słomczyński, and Dariusz S tolicki. Pot and ladle: a formula for estimating the distribution of seats under the Jeﬀerson–D’ hondt method. Public Choice, 182:201–227, 2020. [GF17] Josh Goldenberg and Stephen D Fisher. The Sainte-Lag uë index of dispro- portionality and Dalton’s principle of transfers. Party Politics , 25(2), 2017. https://doi.org/10.1177/1354068817703020. [Her22] Gil Hersch. Procedural fairness in exchange matchi ng systems. Journal of Business Ethics, 2022. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-022-05315-7 . [HM08] Carmen Herrero and Ricardo Martínez. Balanced alloca tion methods for claims problems with indivisibilities. Social Choice and Welfare , 30:603–617, 2008. [HPS18] Erik S. Herron, Robert J. Pekkanen, and Matthew S. Sh ugart. The Oxford handbook of electoral systems. Oxford University Press, 2018. [Med19] Juraj Medzihorsky. Rethinking the D’Hondt method. Political Research Exchange, 1:1:1– 15, 2019. DOI:10.1080/2474736X.2019.1625712. [Nor04] Pippa Norris. Electoral Engineering: Voting Rules and Political Behavio r. Cambridge University Press, Mar 1, 2004 2004. [Pre11] Tobias Preis. Price-Time Priority and Pro Rata Matching in an Or- der Book Model of Financial Markets , pages 65–72. Springer, 2011. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-88-470-1766-5_5 . 18