An Adaptive Dual-level Reinforcement Learning Approach for Optimal Trade Execution Soohan Kimb (zeanvszed@g.skku.edu), Jimyeong Kimb(jimkim@g.skku.edu), Hong Kee Sula (hksul@cau.ac.kr), Youngjoon Hongb (hongyj@g.skku.edu) a Department of Finance, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. b Department of Mathematics, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Republic of Korea Corresponding Author: Youngjoon Hong Department of Mathematics, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Republic of Korea Email: hongyj@g.skku.edu Hong Kee Sul Department of Finance, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Email: hongyj@g.skku.edu arXiv:2307.10649v1 [q-fin.CP] 20 Jul 2023 An Adaptive Dual-level Reinforcement Learning Approach for Optimal Trade Execution Soohan Kimb,∗, Jimyeong Kimb,∗, Hong Kee Sula,∗∗, Youngjoon Hongb,∗∗ aDepartment of Finance, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea bDepartment of Mathematics, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Republic of Korea Abstract The purpose of this research is to devise a tactic that can closely track the daily cumulative volume-weighted average price (VW AP) using reinforcement learning. Previous studies often choose a relatively short trading horizon to imple- ment their models, making it difficult to accurately track the daily cumulative VW AP since the variations of financial data are often insignificant within the short trading horizon. In this paper, we aim to develop a strategy that can accurately track the daily cumulative VW AP while minimizing the deviation from the VW AP. We propose a method that leverages the U-shaped pattern of intraday stock trade volumes and use Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) as the learning algorithm. Our method follows a dual-level approach: a Transformer model that captures the over- all(global) distribution of daily volumes in a U-shape, and a LSTM model that handles the distribution of orders within smaller(local) time intervals. The results from our experiments suggest that this dual-level architecture improves the accuracy of approximating the cumulative VW AP, when compared to previous reinforcement learning-based models. Keywords: V olume-Weighted Average Price, Reinforcement Learning, Optimal Trading Execution, Proximal Policy Optimization, Markov Decision Process 1. Introduction The optimal trade execution problem aims to find a strategy to optimally trade large orders within a given period of time. One of the most common and practi- cal methods that practitioners frequently use is known as V olume Weighted Average Price (VW AP) trading. VW AP is calculated by adding up the dollars traded for every transaction (price multiplied by the number of shares traded) and then dividing by the total shares traded for the day. This gives an average price that takes into account both the price and the volume of shares traded. Funds and traders often use VW AP as a bench- mark to compare the price at which they executed trades to the overall market price for the security, in order to evaluate the performance of their trades. Recently, the use of Reinforcement Learning (RL) in optimal trade execution has become popular as it is a ∗these authors contributed equally to this work. ∗∗these authors contributed equally to this work, corresponding au- thor Email addresses: zeanvszed@g.skku.edu (Soohan Kim ), jimkim@g.skku.edu (Jimyeong Kim ), hksul@cau.ac.kr (Hong Kee Sul ), hongyj@g.skku.edu (Youngjoon Hong ) type of stochastic decision-making process that auto- mates the practitioner’s task of using past data to make decisions on when to execute orders. Since RL ap- proaches have many advantages, e.g. capable of cap- turing the market’s microstructure, the trading results conducted by RL solutions often outperform traditional VW AP tracking approaches such as Bialkowski et al. (2008) and Podobnik et al. (2009). This paper aims to develop a strategy that can con- sistently track the daily cumulative VW AP. To achieve this goal, we start with the observation of an important stock trading characteristic, the U-shaped intraday trad- ing pattern, documented in Jain & Joh (1988) and Good- hart & O’Hara (1997). This is a well-known stylized fact stating that a stock’s trading volume often follows a U-shaped pattern throughout the day. This means that volume is highest at the opening, falls rapidly to lower levels, and then rises again towards the close of the mar- ket, but is relatively low in the afternoon. (See Figure 1). In view of this observation, we propose a novel dual- level approach to minimize the market impact and track the daily cumulative VW AP accurately and consistently. As the name suggests, our model consists of two stages. In the first stage, the model decides how much trade vol- Preprint submitted to Expert Systems with Applications July 21, 2023 Figure 1: Trade volume ratio over each 20-minute pe- riod throughout the day. The lines represent the 1-year averages of the ratios and the shaded regions are drawn from daily deviations from the averages. ume will be executed in each interval, using the U-shape property as a guideline. In the second stage, the RL model decides how the orders will be executed in each interval. We propose two methods for the first stage, the statistical U-shape method and the U-shape Trans- former method. The statistical U-shape method allo- cates the volume based on the historical average trade volumes. However, this approach cannot fully capture the day-to-day variations (See Figure 1). Alternatively, we propose the U-shape Transformer for figuring out these variations. In the next stage, we apply LSTMs and PPO to distribute orders efficiently within each interval. We expect that this dual-level approach improves the accuracy of approximating the cumulative VW AP by properly distributing the total order. Our contributions are as follows: 1. We propose a novel approach for optimal trade ex- ecution that utilizes a dual-level strategy. Orders are allocated through two stages: in the first stage we utilize the U-shaped pattern of intraday vol- umes and in the second stage we implement deep reinforcement learning. 2. We further propose the U-shape Transformer model to capture the day-to-day oscillations of the intraday U-shape distribution. 3. We conduct ablation studies to show the strengths of our methods in approximating the daily cumula- tive VW AP and reveal that utilizing deep reinforce- ment learning for short trading horizons is ineffec- tive. 2. Backgrounds In this section, we discuss the basics of the limit or- der book (LOB) and the optimal trade execution pro- cess. Most modern financial exchanges, including the Korea Stock Exchange(KRX), o ffer electronic trading platforms with access to limit order books. Traders of- ten rely on the information provided by the limit order book to develop successful trading strategies. 2.1. Limit Order Book In financial markets, a limit order is an order to buy or sell a fixed number of shares at a specified price. This order becomes part of the limit order book, which records all limit orders for a specific stock. The bid price is the highest price a buyer is willing to pay for the se- curity, and the ask price is the lowest price in which the seller is willing to sell. A market order, by contrast, is an order to buy or sell a fixed number of shares at the current market price without stating the price. When a market order is placed, it is matched by the best avail- able limit orders in the LOB. The LOB is important for optimal trade execution and helps traders track supply and demand for a stock, making it easier to identify the best time and price to buy or sell shares. 2.2. Optimal Trade Execution Optimal trade execution refers to the process of buy- ing or selling a financial asset while achieving the desired objective. Generally, this problem formu- lates as follows: Within a timeframe of T timesteps, 0, 1,··· , T− 1, a trader who possesses an inventory of O shares must buy or sell the entirety of the inventory. For each timestep t∈{ 0, 1,··· , T− 1}, the trader de- termines the number of shares to order Ot based on the information from LOB, and carries out the trade at an execution price pt. For the group of traders seeking to maximize trading profit, their objective is to find a strat- egy that maximizes or minimizes the average execution price ¯P, which is calculated as ¯P = T−1X t=0 Ot O pt. While many financial firms pursue profits through trad- ing, there are also numerous firms within the financial industry that prioritize consistently tracking the VW AP over maximizing trading profit. The focus of our paper is tailored for this second group of traders. The VW AP is calculated as VW AP= PT−1 i=0 ptqt PT−1 i=0 qt , 2 where qt is the execution volume determined by the market. Therefore, the primary objective of this paper is to minimize the difference between the VW AP and¯P, using a dual-level approach. 3. Related Works 3.1. Optimal Execution without RL In Bertsimas & Lo (1998), a fundamental work for optimal trade execution is proposed, where the authors assume that market prices follow an arithmetic ran- dom walk. They use a dynamic programming princi- ple to find an explicit closed-form solution. Building on this work, Huberman & Stanzl (2005) and Almgren & Chriss (2001) extended the result in Bertsimas & Lo (1998) by incorporating transaction costs, more com- plex price impact functions, and risk aversion parame- ters, under the assumption that market prices follow a Brownian motion. These dynamical approaches, how- ever, are difficult to apply directly in the real world due to the discrepancy between their strong market assump- tions and the complexity of actual market conditions. On the other hand, both practitioners and researchers have widely used the time-weighted average price (TW AP) strategy and the volume-weighted average price (VW AP) strategy (Berkowitz et al. (1988); Kakade et al. (2004)), which are based on either pure rules or statistical rules. Especially in Kakade et al. (2004), the authors used historical data to estimate the average vol- ume traded for each time interval and split the order ac- cordingly. However, this strategy is not well-suited for capturing unexpected volatility. 3.2. Optimal Execution with RL From the perspective that optimal execution problems are a type of sequential decision-making task, Rein- forcement Learning (RL) has been commonly applied in this field. To the best of our knowledge, Nevmyvaka et al. (2006) is the first work to leverage RL frameworks such as Q-learning Watkins & Dayan (1992) to optimal trade execution problems. It is important to note that the curse of dimensionality in Q-learning makes it chal- lenging to handle high-dimensional data. While Hen- dricks & Wilcox (2014) attempts to combine RL with the Almgren-Chriss model, it is a challenging task as the model depends on certain assumptions about the market dynamics. Thanks to the advancements in deep RL, recent stud- ies such as Ning et al. (2021) and Lin & Beling (2019) have utilized Deep Q-Networks (DQNs) Mnih et al. (2013) for optimal trade execution, addressing the chal- lenges of high-dimensional data and the complexity of the financial market without relying on any market as- sumptions. However, these methods require the design of specific attributes, which can be labor-intensive. Re- cently, several studies have investigated the use of prox- imal policy optimization (PPO) Schulman et al. (2017) based optimal execution frameworks, which do not re- quire manually designed feature engineering. For in- stance, Lin & Beling (2020), Fang et al. (2021) and Pan et al. (2022) have explored this approach in di fferent scenarios. Specifically, Pan et al. (2022) focused on op- timal execution with limit orders, while Lin & Beling (2020) and Fang et al. (2021) used market orders. Prior literature often considers a relatively short trad- ing horizon or the entire day for RL implementation. However, VW AP approximation becomes challenging when a short time frame is used since the variations of financial data are often insignificant within short time intervals. Moreover, the naive approach of considering the entire day can put a strain on the network architec- ture due to the long sequence length. To address these issues, we propose a dual-level approach method to en- hance the accuracy of approximating the daily cumula- tive VW AP. In our approach, we make use of the fact that practitioners usually utilize the statistical U-shape property to divide the total order for the day in order to track the daily cumulative VW AP. 4. Method Description In this section, we describe our dual-level approach and formulation of the optimal trade execution problem under the lens of reinforcement learning. We also pro- vide details on the architecture of the Transformer and LSTM neural networks and how they are integrated into our proposed method. 4.1. Dual-level Approach Our approach involves two stages of distributing or- ders. In the first stage, we allocate the total daily orders O into L intervals. In the second stage, we further divide the orders from each interval into smaller executable orders using RL. Our approach begins by dividing the market hours of a day into L intervals. For each interval l, we let Ol as the total order to be executed, ensuring that the sum of all interval orders equals the total daily order, orPL−1 l=0 Ol = O. We suggest two methods for im- plementing the first stage. The naive approach is to ad- here to the statistical U-shape trade volume distribution for each interval obtained from past data (e.g. the histor- ical average of the past year). A more advanced method 3 Figure 2: A schematic illustration of our dual-level approach. would be to use the output (predicted U-shape distribu- tion) generated by a U-shape Transformer model. In the latter case, Ol is calculated progressively by referring only to market information from past days and previ- ous intervals within the day. For such an lth interval, which is comprised of T timesteps, the LSTM model outputs Ol t, which is the number of orders to be exe- cuted at timestep t such that PT−1 t=0 Ol t = Ol. Once Ol t is decided, it is averaged over I execution steps in the corresponding tth subinterval. In other words, for each execution step, which is set as every 5 seconds, the final number of orders executed is Ol t/I. The choice of aver- aging is supported by our findings that there is no signif- icant difference in approximating the VW AP, regardless of how orders are distributed within the subintervals, as detailed in Section 5.2. A schematic illustration of this design is provided in Figure 2. 4.2. MDP Formulation for Optimal Execution In this section, we explain our Markov Decision Pro- cess (MDP) formulation of optimal trade execution. A MDP is typically represented using the tuple (S,A,P, r,γ), whereS is the state space,A is the action space,P is the transition probability,r is the reward function, and γ is the discount factor. Our configurations of the state spaceS and action spaceA are similar to that of Lin & Beling (2020). It’s worth noting that the MDP imple- mentation in this paper is applied on a per lth interval basis for a given day. 4.2.1. State The state sl t ∈S consists of both public and private information. The public state is made up of the top 5 bid and ask prices, along with their associated volumes, while the private state includes the elapsed time and the current remaining volume to be executed. The elapsed time ranges from 0 to T− 1 and the current remaining volume at timestep t is equal to Ol− Pt−1 j=0 Ol j. 4.2.2. Action Our LSTM model outputs a policy π(·|sl t) ∈ R21, which is a discrete categorical probability distribution. From this, an action al t ∈ A:= {0, 0.1, 0.2,··· , 2} is sampled to determine the number of orders to execute, with Ol t = al t Ol T . To ensure that the total number of or- ders executed over the entire period is equal to Ol, that is PT−1 t=0 Ol t = Ol, we impose the following two restric- tions. • If P j t=0 Ol t > Ol for some j∈{ 0, 1, 2,··· , T− 1}, then Ol j = Ol− P j−1 t=0 Ol t • Ol T−1 is equal to the remaining volume to be ex- ecuted at the last timestep for each interval (i.e. 0≤ l≤ L− 1) These restrictions are in line with the fact that it is es- sential for brokers to promptly acquire or liquidate all shares requested by their customers. 4.2.3. Reward The reward function is designed to encourage the agent (LSTM model) to generate actions that result in orders that are close to the target volumeOl∗ t , in order to track the VW AP. This is achieved by using the price cal- culated from the executed orders. Here, Ol∗ t denotes the desired VW AP order at timestept in the lth interval such that Ol = PT−1 t=0 Ol∗ t . The daily VW AP can be obtained by VWAP day = L−1X l=0 T−1X t=0 Ol∗ t O pl t, (1) 4 where pl t is the associated average market traded price of the corresponding tth subinterval. Our reward function compares Ol∗ t and Ol t directly for a given al t as follows: r(al t) :=  1 Ml t < 0.01 0 0 .01≤ Ml t < 0.05 −1 otherwise (2) where Ml t := |Ol t−Ol∗ t| Ol∗ t . Once MDP is determined, the goal of policy-based RL is to find an optimal policy parameterθ∗, i.e. θ∗ = arg maxE  TX t=0 γtrt|at∼πθ(·|st), st+1∼P (·|st, at) , (3) where rt = r(at). 4.3. Neural Network Architecture and Training We now turn to the architectural details of the Trans- former and LSTM models and elaborate on how they are used in our dual-level approach. 4.3.1. Level 1: Transformer for Global U-shape Ap- proximation The objective of the Transformer model is to progres- sively predict the U-shape ratio for each interval in a given day. We use the structure of the Transformer En- coder and Decoder as proposed in Vaswani et al. (2017). The overall architecture of the Transformer model that we use is depicted in Figure 3. U-shape Encoder. The U-shape Encoder E is com- posed of a Transformer Encoder and L linear layers, all of which map to the same dimension. This module is responsible for learning the general dynamics of the U- shape distribution. The input Ein is a sequence of length L of vectors each containing N historical daily volume ratios of the corresponding interval in the sequence. The days from which these ratios are drawn are randomly selected. Each vector in the sequence is processed by a different linear layer that serves as an embedding to learn the unique features of each interval. After passing through the embedding layer, the input sequence is then processed by the Transformer Encoder, resulting in the output Eout. U-shape Decoder. WhileE learns the general dynam- ics of the U-shape distribution, the U-shape DecoderD focuses on handling the day-to-day variations of the dis- tribution. The U-shape Decoder is composed of a Trans- former Decoder and L linear layers, each mapping to different dimensions. In contrast to E, these linear lay- ers are applied to the output of the Transformer Decoder. Figure 3: The architecture of the U-shape Transformer. The U-shape Decoder in this figure represents thelth de- coding step. For every lth (l > 0) decoding step, both Eout and the cumulative input sequence are fed as input to the Transformer Decoder, D. We denote the cumulative input sequence as Dl in = (Dl in, j)0≤ j≤l−1, where Dl in, j := CONCAT(D j out, h j T−1). Here, D j out represents the output ofD at the jth step, and h j T−1 is the last LSTM hid- den vector from the jth interval. The output from the Transformer Decoder at the lth decoding step is a vec- tor of dimension L + H, which is then passed through a linear layer that reduces its dimension to L− l. The softmax function is applied to predict the ratios of the remaining L− l intervals, and the first l components are zero-padded. Note that we use h j T−1 to capture the day- to-day variations in the U-shape distribution, as it holds interval-specific information for that particular day. To ensure PL−1 l=0 ul pred = 1, the final lth interval volume ratio prediction is calculated as ul pred = 1− l−1X j=0 u j pred · Dl out[l]. (4) It’s worth noting that D0 in is constructed by applying an additional linear layer that transforms the dimension of the vector holding the top 5 bid/ask volume averages of pre-market data to L + H. 4.3.2. Level 2: LSTM for Local Order Distribution The objective of the LSTM model is to optimally al- locate orders within the intervals of a given day. The structure of our LSTM model, which is outlined in Fig- ure 4, is similar to that of Lin & Beling (2020). Givensl t as input, it first passes through two linear layers with 5 Figure 4: The architecture of the LSTM model. hidden dimension 128 and is then concatenated with al t−1 and rl t−1 := r(al t−1). The resulting vector is then processed by an LSTM Cell with hidden dimension H to obtain hl t, which is then passed separately through two linear layers to produce the policy π(·|sl t) and the value V(sl t) respectively. We note that the vector hl T−1 which is obtained at the last timestep is used as input to the Transformer Decoder. The action al t, reward rl t, and the number of orders to execute Ol t is calculated as is de- scribed in Section 4.2. The LSTM Cell also receives hl t−1 and cl t−1 as input and its output includes cl t as well. 4.3.3. Training Procedure U-shape Transformer . Since the goal of the first level of order allocation is to approximate the U-shape distribution while also tracking the daily cumulative VW AP, the training objective of the Transformer model is to minimize JT F := Edays  c1 L L−1X l=0  ul true− ul pred 2 + c2VAA  (5) where c1 and c2 are coefficients and V AA := MPday− VWAP day VWAP day denotes the VW AP Approximation Accuracy (V AA), which we will further use as a general metric for per- formance evaluation in experiments, and MPday := L−1X l=0 T−1X t=0 Ol t O pl t is the price yielded by our model. This is one of the measures used in practice to gauge how close a trader has traded closer to their benchmark, the VW AP. If a trader has traded at a price that is exactly equal to the VW AP, thenVAA = 0. Thus lower V AA would be bet- ter. The first term inside the expectation of (5) learns to make ratio predictions closer to ground-truth values. The second term penalizes the Transformer model if the final daily acquisition price generated by the com- bination of the Transformer and LSTM models devi- ates from the daily VW AP. The primary objective of the U-shaped transformer in the first level is to distribute the daily total order with precision. However, relying solely on the first term of the loss function may not be enough to accomplish this objective. This is because ul true does not consider the local information, such as the LOB, which can pose di fficulties in tracking the daily VW AP accurately. Furthermore, if only the first term in (5) is taken into account, the reinforcement learning framework would not influence the first level, leading to independent operation of the first and second levels. To ensure that the micro information has an appropriate impact on the first level, we incorporate the second term into the loss function. LSTM. To find the optimal parameterθ for the LSTM model, we use an actor-critic style PPO algorithm Schulman et al. (2017), which is one of the most popu- lar on-policy RL algorithms, as our base learner. One of the major advantages of the PPO in this task is its ability to adapt to changing market conditions and e ffectively learn from noisy and high-dimensional data. This al- gorithm uses the actor loss JCLIP PPO (θ) and the critic loss function JVF PPO(θ), which are defined as follows: JCLIP PPO (θ) := Et h min  qt(θ) ˆAt, clip(qt(θ), 1−ε, 1 +ε) ˆAt i , (6) and JVF PPO(θ) = Et h (Vtarg t − Vθ(st))2i , (7) 6 where qt(θ) = πθ(at|st) πθold (at|st), Vtarg t = T−1X k=t γk−trk and ˆAt = Vtarg t − Vθ(st). (8) PPO’s goal is to find a parameter θ that maximizes the main objective function JPPO(θ), which is defined by JPPO(θ) = JCLIP PPO (θ)− c3JVF PPO(θ) + c4Et[S [πθ](st)], (9) where c3, c4 are coefficients, and Et[S [πθ](st)] denotes an entropy loss term, where S [πθ](st) is defined by S [πθ](st) :=− X a∈A πθ(a|st) logπθ(a|st). (10) By incorporating an entropy term, PPO can incentivize the agent to explore alternative actions, prevent get- ting trapped in suboptimal policies, and mitigate over- fitting to the training data (Williams, 1992; Mnih et al., 2016). To find the parameter θ, PPO iteratively gathers episodes and updates the parameter θ using the follow- ing scheme: θk+1 = arg max θ EsEa∼πθk (·|s)[JPPO(θ)], (11) where k stands for the kth step. The “clip” operator in (6) allows PPO to learn from previous experiences with- out becoming overly dependent on them. Moreover, PPO can e ffectively retain knowledge from past expe- riences while also acquiring insights from new experi- ences. This key attribute of PPO is one of its significant advantages. 5. Experiments Our dual-level approach significantly enhances the accuracy and consistency of tracking the daily cumu- lative VW AP, despite the challenges in improving the performance of RL frameworks for optimal trade exe- cution in relatively short trading horizons. Furthermore, the U-shape Transformer proves e fficient in capturing the daily variations of the U-shape distribution. In the following section, we conduct a series of experiments to verify these assertions. 5.1. Experiment Settings 5.1.1. Implementation In all of our experiments, the hyperparameters for the loss functions, the length of the intervals, the number of total orders, and the trading horizon are fixed and set according to the following specifications: - The coe fficients for JTF: c1 = 0.5, c2 = 0.5 - The coe fficients for JPPO: c3 = 1, c4 = 0.01 - The length of the intervals: L = 19, T = 20 - The number of total orders: O ∼ N(2.5 × 10−3µ, 6.25× 10−6σ2), where µ andσ is the aver- age and standard deviation of the day total volume for the previous sixty days, respectively. - Trading horizon of a day: 380 minutes (From when the market opens at 09:00:00 to when it closes at 15:20:00). Since a typical day allows for 380 minutes of trad- ing, our model first takes the daily total order, O, and breaks it down to Ol, 19 intervals of 20 minutes each. (l ∈ [0, 18]) We either apply the statistical U-shape method or the Transformer model for this first stage al- location process. Then, within each interval, the LSTM model further subdivides Ol into 20 sets of 1-minute subintervals, Ol t. (t∈ [0, 19]) In each of these subintervals, Ol t is divided into equal portions and executed over a span of 12 steps, assuming that orders are executed every 5 seconds. The method and hyperparameters used to train our agents for the ex- periment are summarized in Algorithms 1, 2 and Table 3, which are located at the end of the paper. To conduct realistic simulations, we determine O in a way that takes into account the volatility of daily vol- ume, which differs from most previous works where it is fixed to a certain value. This choice aims to simulate the fluctuations of total orders that financial firms have to execute in a day, taking into consideration recent trade volume statistics for each stock. By considering the vol- ume statistics for each stock, we account for the di ffer- ences in total orders for various stocks, which is often encountered in real-world scenarios. Additionally, dur- ing testing, we only use the daily ground truth U-shape volume ratios of dates in the training data for our Trans- former Encoder to prevent looking ahead into the future. As in previous works Nevmyvaka et al. (2006), Hen- dricks & Wilcox (2014), Ning et al. (2021), and Lin & Beling (2020), we make the following assumptions in our experiments. 1. We assume that the actions taken by our model only affect a temporary market, and that the mar- ket will recover to the equilibrium level at the next time step. 2. Commissions and exchange fees are ignored. 3. Our model’s orders are traded immediately without order arrival delays. We believe that the above assumptions are reasonable as we consider relatively small total orders in comparison to the daily total market volumes of the stocks. 7 5.1.2. Datasets Our millisecond trade and limit order book (LOB) tick data is from the Korea Exchange (KRX). We use the daily trade and LOB data of Samsung Electronics (SE), SK Hynix (SH), Kia Corporation (KC) and POSCO Holdings Inc (PH) from January 1st, 2021 to December 31st, 2021. Our choice of the four firms in the KOSPI index is based on their liquidity and trade volume and variety in market capitalization and industry. In order to evaluate the effectiveness of our approach in relation to trading volume, we have opted to select stocks with a range of trade volumes (see Table 1). We divide the Stocks SE SH KC PH V olume 17,000K 3,800K 3,900K 430K Table 1: Average volume for each stock. data into two sets, using January 1st to September 30th as training data and October 1st to December 31st as test data. The millisecond raw data is preprocessed by first di- viding them into groups of 5 seconds, and extracting data that represents each 5-second interval. We take the last LOB data of the 5-second interval to construct the MDP state and the 5-second VW AP and total traded volume for calculating the daily VW AP. The statistical U-shape statistics are constructed by taking the year av- erage of the U-shape ratios of the 20-minute intervals in the day. The data utilized in generating D0 in shown in Section 4.3 are the top 5 bid/ask volume averages of the raw pre-market data (from 08:30:00 to 09:00:00). 5.1.3. Ablation Study We provide a brief explanation of all methods used for performance comparison during our experiments here. The hyperparameters for each method can be found in Table 3. - DQN is the method proposed in Ning et al. (2021). To apply this model, we begin by dividing a given day into six 1-hour intervals, excluding the final 20 minutes of market hours to replicate the exper- imental setup in Ning et al. (2021). The total or- der for the day is then equally distributed amongst each hour, and DQN further allocates the order for five sub-intervals of 12 minutes each. The orders are executed equally for each 5-second time step within the 12-minute sub-intervals. To ensure fair comparisons, we evaluate the daily price generated by DQN against the daily cumulative VW AP cal- culated by excluding the final 20 minutes. - OPD is the method proposed in Fang et al. (2021). To implement this model, we first divide a given day into ten intervals, each spanning 38 minutes, and then use OPD to allocate orders for each in- terval. Within each interval, the allocated order is equally distributed amongst each minute. - PPO is the method proposed in Lin & Beling (2020). To apply this model, we equally distribute the day total order to each minute in the day, i.e. O j = O/380 for all j∈{ 1,··· , 380} as in Lin & Beling (2020). - (HU-)PPO utilizes the statistical U-shape to de- termine Ol, and within each interval, the allocated order is equally divided among every minute, i.e. Ol t = Ol/20 for all t∈{ 0,··· , 19}, where PPO is finally used to distribute orders within the minute. - HUL is our proposed dual-level approach which uses the statistical U-shape to determine Ol. - TUL is our proposed dual-level approach that em- ploys the Transformer model to determine Ol. Figure 5: V AA’s of HU-PPO LSTM, PPO LSTM (in dark blue), and their alternative versions (in brown). In these alternative versions, orders are executed in the first step for every 1-minute trading horizon rather than using deep reinforcement learning. 5.2. Experiment Results We test our models, which are trained for 100,000 it- erations, by conducting trading simulations in the buy- ing direction. We first verify that using a short trading horizon for allocating orders degrades performance in approximating the daily cumulative VW AP. To do this, we investigate whether the decisions made by deep RL for the PPO and (HU-)PPO models actually contribute to lowering the V AA’s produced during testing. Note that for both models, deep RL is using a 1-minute trad- ing horizon. Thus, we intentionally construct a naive 8 Stocks Metric OPD DQN PPO HUL TUL SE Mean 26.27 11.53 12.00 8.77 7.13 Standard Deviation 18.50 8.84 8.88 7.17 2.44 % in 10bps 25.00 57.38 49.18 65.57 88.52 SH Mean 38.55 21.62 22.57 7.13 7.65 Standard Deviation 24.90 17.71 16.92 2.81 3.63 % in 10bps 10.42 30.00 25.00 91.67 88.33 KA Mean 27.79 13.16 12.47 6.59 6.03 Standard Deviation 18.76 10.25 11.55 8.36 3.30 % in 10bps 18.75 46.67 56.67 90.00 86.67 PH Mean 32.44 14.84 14.64 22.52 12.27 Standard Deviation 20.89 13.47 12.63 47.11 7.90 % in 10bps 18.75 40.98 40.98 32.79 44.26 Table 2: Table 2 summarizes the mean, standard deviation, and percentage of V AAs within the range [0, 10bps]. The Mean and Standard Deviation are represented in units of basis points (bps), and the % in 10 bps are represented in units of percentages. For OPD, we excluded V AAs above the 80th percentile for fair comparisons since our training dataset was smaller than that used in Fang et al. (2021). Figure 6: V AAs for the three best-performing models on the test data for each stock. alternative version, in which the orders are simply exe- cuted in the first 5 seconds in the 1 minute trading hori- zon. The procedures taken to obtain the total order for the 1-minute interval for these versions are the same as their original counterparts. Figure 5 displays the com- parison of the V AA’s on the test dates given by (HU- )PPO, PPO, and their alternative versions. Both (HU-)PPO and PPO exhibit almost identical performance compared to their alternative versions, which suggests that in the context of VW AP the use of deep reinforcement learning does not significantly im- prove the approximation capability if the trading hori- zon is too short. This implies that in order to effectively leverage the benefits of deep RL in sequential decision- 9 SE SH KC PH Figure 7: The histograms of the V AA distributions for each model and stock on the test dates. Figure 8: U-shape averages on test days for ground truths and Transformer-predicted values. 10 Figure 9: The ground truth and Transformer-predicted U-shape plots for two selected test dates for PH. making, it should be implemented on a longer trading horizon. Secondly, we present Table 2 and Figure 6 to demon- strate how our dual-level approach significantly im- proves performance. Table 2 reports the mean and standard deviation values of V AA’s produced by DQN, OPD, PPO, HUL and TUL across the test dates, and the percentage of them that fall under 10 bps. These methods are used by practitioners, to measure how the traders were performing relative to the VW AP. Our pro- posed dual-level approach demonstrates significant im- provements compared to using short trading horizons and single-level neural networks. Although HUL occa- sionally yields better accuracy, TUL generally has much less deviation from the daily cumulative VW AP than all other methods. Especially for the stock PH, which is relatively less liquid compared to the other stocks, DQN and PPO show better mean and standard deviation val- ues than HUL. However, TUL outperforms both models and demonstrates the best mean and standard deviation values. The histograms for V AA distributions given by DQN, OPD, PPO, HUL and TUL on each stock test data are drawn in Figure 7, which depicts the clustering ten- dency of accuracies produced by TUL. Lastly, we demonstrate the e ffectiveness of the pro- posed U-shape Transformer using Figures 8 and 9. Fig- ure 8 shows the plots of the ground truth U-shape and Transformer-predicted U-shape values, where the U- shape ratio values for each 20-minute interval were av- eraged across all test dates. We observe that our U- shape Transformer is able to follow the U-shape pattern for the test dates on average for all stocks, which is in line with the comparable (and sometimes better) perfor- mance of TUL against HUL. This is further supported by the fact that HUL only utilizes the average U-shape ratio values of the past, while TUL approximates the U- shape distribution for the test dates accurately and uses predicted values for order allocation. Thus, TUL be- comes more adaptive in tracking the daily cumulative VW AP as it incorporates predictions of fluctuations that may appear in the U-shape distribution in the future. We also validate the performance improvements of TUL compared to other models, particularly HUL, by examining TUL’s ability to capture daily fluctuations in the U-shape. Figure 9 displays the ground truth U-shape and Transformer-predicted distributions for two sam- pled test dates for the stock PH. We deliberately choose PH since the performance gains of TUL when compared to HUL were the largest for this particular stock, which has daily volume distributions that deviates the most from the average due to relatively low liquidity. While the U-shape Transformer may occasionally make erro- neous predictions, it quickly corrects itself and adapts to changes in the daily volume distribution, attempting to accurately follow ratio changes throughout the day. 6. Conclusion In this study, we propose a dual-level approach to ad- dress the problem of tracking the VW AP with accuracy and consistency. Our model is unique in that it takes into account the well-known U-shaped intraday trading pat- tern. In the first stage, we allocate the number of orders to execute in each interval, taking the U-shape pattern into account. We consider two methods, statistical U- shape and U-shape Transformer, for implementing the first stage. The naive approach of using the statistical U- shape distribution improves performance. However, our experiments demonstrate that the U-shape Transformer performs even better. After the total daily orders are allocated to each interval in the first stage, the LSTM model is used in the second stage to determine how the orders in each interval should be executed Our simu- lation results show that the dual-level approach consis- tently and accurately tracks the daily cumulative VW AP. 11 Hyperparameter DQN OPD PPO HUL TUL Outer iterations 10000 10000 10000 10000 10000 Inner iterations 20 10 10 10 10 Batch size 50 10 20 10 10 PPO CLIPε - 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 Discount factorγ - 1 1 1 1 Number of trajectories per each outer iteration 1000 160 200 152 228 LSTM hidden dimension H - - 128 128 129 LSTM model learning rate - - 5e-5↘1e-5 5e-5↘1e-5 5e-5↘1e-5 DQN or OPD model learning rate 1e-4 1e-4 - - - U-shape Encoder input vector dimension N - - - - 20 U-shape Encoder embedding dimension - - - - 148 Transformer Encoder & Decoder number of heads - - - - 4 Transformer Encoder & Decoder number of layers - - - - 1 Transformer Encoder & Decoder PFFN dimension - - - - 128 Transformer model learning rate - - - - 1e-3↘2e-4 Table 3: Hyperparameters for DQN, OPD, PPO, HUL and TUL. Note that ↘ indicates a linearly annealing learning rate schedule. Network configurations of DQN and OPD follow Ning et al. (2021) and Fang et al. (2021), respectively. Algorithm 1 Dual-level Neural Network Require: Number of outer iterations and num days Randomly initialize learnable parametersθE,θD, andθL Initialize trajectory bufferT for j = 1 to outer iterations do for d = 1 to num days do Randomly choose a date in the training set µ← the average of the daily volume for the last 60 days σ← the standard deviation of the daily volume for the last 60 days T←T S Gathering Episodes(date,µ,σ) end for UsingT , updateE,D by optimizing the loss function JT F in (5) with respect toθE andθD Optimize the loss function JPPO in (9) with respect toθL T←∅ end for 12 Algorithm 2 Gathering Episodes Require: The number of intervals in a day L Input: Date, µ,σ Output: Trajectory buffer of ith dayTi InitializeTi O∼N (2.5× 10−3µ, 6.25× 10−6σ2) Eout =E(Ein) for l = 0 to L− 1 do if l = 0 then Construct D0 in from raw pre-market data else Dl in← Dl−1 in S Concat(Dl−1 out, hl−1 T−1) end if Obtain ul pred and Dl out by procedure depicted in Section 4.3.1 Ol← O· ul pred Obtainτl ={sl t, al t, r(al t), V(sl t),π (al t|sl t), Ol t}t∈{0,1,2,···,T−1} and hl T−1 by procedure depicted in Section 4.3.2 Ti←T i Sτl end for Acknowledgments The work of Y . Hong was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foun- dation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Edu- cation (NRF-2021R1A2C1093579) and the Korea gov- ernment (MSIT)(No. 2022R1A4A3033571). References Almgren, R., & Chriss, N. (2001). Optimal execution of portfolio transactions. Journal of Risk, 3, 5–40. Berkowitz, S. A., Logue, D. E., & Noser Jr, E. A. (1988). The total cost of transactions on the nyse. The Journal of Finance, 43, 97–112. Bertsimas, D., & Lo, A. W. (1998). Optimal control of execution costs. Journal of financial markets , 1, 1–50. Bialkowski, J., Darolles, S., & Fol, G. L. (2008). Im- proving vwap strategies: A dynamic volume ap- proach. Journal of Banking & Finance, 32, 1709– 1722. Fang, Y ., Ren, K., Liu, W., Zhou, D., Zhang, W., Bian, J., Yu, Y ., & Liu, T.-Y . (2021). Universal trading for order execution with oracle policy distillation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artifi- cial Intelligence (pp. 107–115). volume 35. Goodhart, C. A., & O’Hara, M. (1997). High frequency data in financial markets: Issues and applications. Journal of Empirical Finance, 4, 73–114. Hendricks, D., & Wilcox, D. (2014). A reinforcement learning extension to the almgren-chriss frame- work for optimal trade execution. In 2014 IEEE Conference on Computational Intelligence for Fi- nancial Engineering & Economics (CIFEr) (pp. 457–464). IEEE. Huberman, G., & Stanzl, W. (2005). Optimal liquidity trading. Review of Finance, (pp. 165–200). Jain, P. C., & Joh, G.-H. (1988). The dependence be- tween hourly prices and trading volume. The Jour- nal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , 23, 269–283. Kakade, S. M., Kearns, M., Mansour, Y ., & Ortiz, L. E. (2004). Competitive algorithms for vwap and limit order trading. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM con- ference on Electronic commerce (pp. 189–198). Lin, S., & Beling, P. A. (2019). Optimal liquidation with deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 33rd Conference on Neural Information Process- ing Systems, Deep Reinforcement Learning Work- shop, Vancouver, Canada. Lin, S., & Beling, P. A. (2020). An end-to-end opti- mal trade execution framework based on proximal policy optimization. In IJCAI (pp. 4548–4554). 13 Mnih, V ., Badia, A. P., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lilli- crap, T., Harley, T., Silver, D., & Kavukcuoglu, K. (2016). Asynchronous methods for deep reinforce- ment learning. In International conference on ma- chine learning (pp. 1928–1937). PMLR. Mnih, V ., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Graves, A., Antonoglou, I., Wierstra, D., & Riedmiller, M. (2013). Playing atari with deep reinforce- ment learning, . URL: http://arxiv.org/ abs/1312.5602. Cite arxiv:1312.5602Comment: NIPS Deep Learning Workshop 2013. Nevmyvaka, Y ., Feng, Y ., & Kearns, M. (2006). Rein- forcement learning for optimized trade execution. In Proceedings of the 23rd international confer- ence on Machine learning (pp. 673–680). Ning, B., Lin, F. H. T., & Jaimungal, S. (2021). Dou- ble deep q-learning for optimal execution. Applied Mathematical Finance, 28, 361–380. Pan, F., Zhang, T., Luo, L., He, J., & Liu, S. (2022). Learn continuously, act discretely: Hybrid action- space reinforcement learning for optimal execu- tion. In IJCAI (pp. 3912–3918). Podobnik, B., Horvatic, D., Petersen, A. M., & Stanley, H. E. (2009). Cross-correlations between volume change and price change. Proceedings of the Na- tional Academy of Sciences, 106, 22079–22084. Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., & Klimov, O. (2017). Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, . Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., & Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30. Watkins, C. J., & Dayan, P. (1992). Q-learning. Ma- chine learning, 8, 279–292. Williams, R. J. (1992). Simple statistical gradient- following algorithms for connectionist reinforce- ment learning. Reinforcement learning, (pp. 5–32). 14