Reinforcement Learning for Optimal Execution when Liquidity is Time-Varying Andrea Macrì 1∗ and Fabrizio Lillo 1,2† 1 Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, Italy 2 Dipartimento di Matematica University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy February 21, 2024 Abstract Optimal execution is an important problem faced by any trader. Most solutions are based on the assumption of constant market impact, while liquidity is known to be dynamic. Moreover, models with time-varying liquidity typically assume that it is observable, despite the fact that, in reality, it is latent and hard to measure in real time. In this paper we show that the use of Double Deep Q-learning, a form of Reinforcement Learning based on neural networks, is able to learn optimal trading policies when liquidity is time-varying. Specifically, we consider an Almgren-Chriss framework with temporary and permanent impact parameters following several deterministic and stochastic dynamics. Using extensive numerical experiments, we show that the trained algorithm learns the optimal policy when the analytical solution is available, and overcomes benchmarks and approximated solutions when the solution is not available. 1 Introduction The problem of optimally executing financial trades has been extensively studied for at least two decades. Building on the seminal papers of Bertsimas and Lo (1998) [5] and Almgren and Chriss (2000) [3], the concept of dividing large sell (buy) orders into smaller trades, considering risks and rewards, has been widely applied and extended through mathematical optimisation. Starting with the seminal, yet simplistic, Almgren-Chriss setting, which assumes an Arithmetic Brownian motion for mid-pricemovementswithlinearpermanentandtemporarypriceimpacts, theliteraturehasprogressed to more complex models, notable examples are [17, 16, 10, 12, 11, 6, 7, 15, 28]. Since these approaches make use of specific market impact models, which might or might not accurately describe real data, the non-parametric approach based on Reinforcement Learning (RL) has increasingly been used to solve optimal liquidation problems. As described by [33], RL models an agent that sequentially learns optimal policies in a generalised environment, optimising a reward function with respect to future discounted cumulative rewards based on actions taken at each time step. Q-learning is one of the most widely used RL algorithms. Q-learning in tabular form, was firstly applied by [26] in the context of optimal execution. In their setting a tabular Q-agent has to decide how many stocks to sell within a certain time window using limit orders. The amount and the execution price at which these stocks are sold depend on the time left for execution, on the inventory left to be executed, and on market prices. Ref. [19] adopts a hybrid approach, both analytical and RL-based, where, starting from the optimal execution à la Almgren-Chriss, a stylised agent, still modelled with a classic tabular Q- Learning algorithm, is able to modify its trade execution schedule to minimise a reward function that corresponds to the Implementation Shortfall. More recently, due to the recent advancements in machine learning methods, the lookup table has been replaced by deep neural nets, thus Deep Q-Learning (DQL) has been widely applied to various financial problems, including market making [1, 24], portfolio optimisation [35], trading [23, 34, 8, 20] and optimal trade execution [27, 13, 22, 21, 31].1 For what concerns optimal execution problems, a major recent contribution is the paper by Ning et al. (2021) [27], where a Double Deep Q-Network ∗andrea.macri@sns.it †fabrizio.lillo@sns.it 1For a more comprehensive overview on the state of the art on RL methods in finance please refer to [32] and [18] 1 arXiv:2402.12049v2 [q-fin.TR] 20 Feb 2024 (DDQN) algorithm for optimal execution is introduced, overcoming the bias in Q-value estimation found in traditional DQL. This technique, incorporating two neural networks (Q-network and target Q-network), improves policy estimation accuracy. Ref. [27] considers a Almgren-Chriss framework without permanent impact and with a constant (across time and stocks) temporary impact. When applied to real data, they found that DDQN outperforms the Time-Weighted Average Price (TWAP) strategy in seven out of nine stocks considered. Other notable contributions include [21], where DQL devises a trading strategy tested on various stock indexes, and [13], comparing DDQN and Proximal Policy Optimisation (PPO) algorithms on artificial data. PPO and DDQN outperform TWAP when it is not optimal and perform similarly to a slice-and-dice strategy when it is. Our paper considers the application of RL for optimal execution to a more realistic environment. In particular, we consider a setting where liquidity, as described by the temporary and permanent impact coefficient, are not constant but time varying. It is well known that liquidity is a dynamic and latent variable. Some papers (for example [4] and [14]) have considered optimal execution with time varying liquidity, but the underlying assumption is that the model’s parameters are known, while their real time estimation is typically very complicated and noisy as shown in for instance in [9] and [25]. Thus estimating the impact parameters and simultaneously adjusting the trading strategy is very challenging and here, in a simulated environment, we test if RL can be successfully used. To this end, we consider an Almgren-Chriss market where the permanent and temporary coefficients are linear but time-varying. We consider different dynamics, from very simple and deterministic ones to the case when they follow a stochastic process. We find that when a closed form solution is known, the RL algorithm finds very similar strategies with similar costs. More interestingly, when the solution is not known or is known only in some regime parameters of low variability, the RL algorithm outperforms the benchmarks. In summary, the aim is to train a ‘model robust’ agent capable of adapting its trading strategy based on the current liquidity profiles in the market. This entails leveraging minimal information, represented as features to the neural networks, to agnostically select the correct model and selling schedule to follow. The paper is organised as follows: Section 2 introduces baseline models and the DDQL algorithm, Section 3 discusses the main results, and finally Section 4 provides conclusions and outlines further research directions. 2 Methods We will consider the problem of a trader who wants to unwind a portfolio ofq0 stocks within a time window [0,T ]. The goal is to unwind the portfoliooptimally using arrival price as benchmark, i.e. minimising the difference between the initial and final portfolio values. We assume that the trading influences the stock price via permanent and temporary impacts. The magnitude and dynamics of these impacts will change over the trading experiments that will be presented. Initially, we assume price dynamics to follow the classic Almgren-Chriss [3] model, and then we test these results against those obtained by an agent modelled with a DDQL algorithm. We will further modify and complicate market dynamics to test RL’s capabilities in more complex environments. This section introduces the main tools used in the experiments, namely baseline financial models and the DDQL algorithm used to model our agent. 2.1 Market impact models Baseline Model The Almgren and Chriss [3] (A&C) model is used as the baseline model. We assume a trader with an initial inventoryq0 stocks, the trader needs to unwind this portfolio within a time window[0,T ], divided intoN sub-intervals of lengthτ = T N. Setting t = 1,2,...,N the model reads: St =St−1−g (vt τ ) τ +στ 1 2ξ ˜St =St−1−h (vt τ ) (1) whereSt is the mid-price for the stock at timet. St evolves because of a diffusion partξ (a draw from a standard normal random variable) multiplied by the price volatilityσ. The number of shares sold 2 during the interval[t− 1,t] of lengthτ is vt. The mid-priceSt is impacted by thepermanent impact term gt (vt τ ) , assumed to be linear and constant:g (vt τ ) =κvt τ . The price received by the trader,˜St, is equal to the mid-price impacted by atemporary impactterm also assumed to be linear and constant in time: h(vt τ ) = ˜αvt τ , in what follows we use and model directly the quantityα = ˜α τ. The aim is to find an optimal quantity to sellvt for each sub-intervalt, minimising theImplementation Shortfall (IS) cost functional given by: IS =S0q0− N∑ t=1 ˜Stvt (2) Since IS is stochastic, A&C assumes a mean variance optimisation (or equivalently a CARA utility maximiser) characterised by a risk aversion parameterλ. A&C shows that the optimal inventory holding qt for each timet = 1,...N is: q∗ t =q0 sinh(ω(T−t)) sinh(ωT ) where ω solves 2(cosh(ωτ )− 1) = λσ2 2 ˜ατ 2. In this paper the trader (or agent) is assumed to be risk neutral withλ = 0, thus arisk-neutral agent in discrete time adopts the TWAP strategy, selling their inventory at a constant ratev∗ = (q0 N,..., q0 N ) or equivalently holdingq∗ t = (N−t)q0 N stocks for each timet = 1,...N . Time-dependent impacts baseline model We then consider a different baseline model by as- suming that the permanent and the temporary impacts aretime-varying. This is a more realistic baseline model assumption, since in real-market situations liquidity is variable and fluctuates. In fact, as discussed in [9], price impacts have strong intraday time-dependency since they react quite quickly to changing market conditions. Impact dynamics usually have a deterministic and a stochastic com- ponent. In this baseline we consider deterministic dynamics, while in the next one we will consider a stochastic dynamics for the impacts. In general, if both impacts are time-varying, the functional to be minimised is similar to the one on the right-hand side of (2) but with time-varying impacts, i.e.: N∑ t=1 ˜Stvt = N∑ t=1 (St−2−κt−1vt−1)vt− N∑ t=1 αt(vt)2 (3) In our context, the time varying permanent impact isg(vt τ ) =κtvt τ . We consider here the simplest deterministic dynamics forκt, namely we consider a linear temporal dependence,κt =κ0±βκ×t. The time varying temporary impact is assumed to be similarly specified, i.e.,h(vt) =αtvt, with dynamics αt =α0±βα×t. Since impacts must be positive, we choose the parameters in such a way that both κt> 0 and αt> 0,∀t. Fig. 2 below shows the impact parameter dynamics used in our experiments. The optimal schedule in this scenario might be found via standard quadratic optimisation tech- niques. However, when the dynamics of the impacts are not known, blindly applying optimisation methods may lead to inefficient trading schedules. We test the DDQL results against those obtained via canonical methods as if the dynamics were known from the beginning. The aim is to test whether the algorithm has learnt the correct parameter specification for both the impacts without prior knowl- edge of their deterministic dynamics, in a quest to obtain a ‘robust’ optimal execution schedule in an agnostic way. Stochastic impacts baseline model Lastly, we consider an environment with stochastic impacts. The use of both permanent and temporary stochastic impacts allows for more freedom when it comes to model liquidity. Thus, both the temporary and the permanent impacts are assumed to follow a square-root mean reverting process. We will choose the parameters in such a way that the impacts are almost surely positive, we will further assume positive correlation between the permanent and the temporary impacts. The stochastic impacts model was proposed Barger and Lorig (2019) [4], where an approximate optimal execution solution is found via a Taylor approximation around the long run 3 mean values for the processes considered. According to [4], the model is: dSt =−κtνtdt +σdWt dκt =λκ(θκ−κt)dt +σκ √κtdB(1) t ˜St =St−1−αtνt dαt =λα(θα−αt)dt +σα √αtdB(2) t <B(1) t ,B (2) t >=ω (4) where St is the stock price, ˜St is the execution price,λκ and θκ are, respectively, the rate of mean reversion and the long run mean at which the permanent impact reverts to,λα and θα have same meaning but for the temporary impact dynamics. At timet, the trading velocityνt, that is the instantaneous trading volume for a sell program is found, assuming thatα0 =θα, κ0 =θκ, as: νt = ( 1 N−t +λα(θα−αt) 2αt + (N−t)λκ(θκ−κt) 6κt ) ×qt (5) Eq. (5) can be seen as a perturbation of the TWAP solution, which is optimal in the constant impact case. In what follows we will consider a discrete-time version of the model. We will assume that the trader trades within each of theN time-steps t, a quantityvt =νtτ of stocks. The price and the impacts’ paths over theN discrete time-steps are simulated using the model in Eq. (4). 2.2 DDQL algorithm Deep Reinforcement Learning is a machine learning paradigm where an agent, modelled with neural networks, learns how to interact with an environment. This is achieved by taking actions and receiving feedback in the form of rewards or penalties. The primary objective of the agent is to maximise the cumulative reward over time by discovering an effective policy or strategy. We denote the sets of all possible states, actions, rewards, and policies asS,A,R and Π respec- tively. In this context, the algorithm, given the environment’s statest∈S , must decide which action at∈A to perform. This action modifies the environment to a subsequent statest+1∈S and results in receiving a rewardrt∈R. The ultimate goal is to learn an optimal policyπ∗∈ Π that maximises the sum of discounted future rewards, denoted as∑∞ t=0γkrt, whereγ∈ (0,1] is the discount factor. In this paper, we employ Deep Reinforcement Learning to find the optimal execution schedule in various time-varying impact settings. Specifically, we adopt theDouble Deep Q-Learning(DDQL) algorithm, providing a model-agnostic solution to the optimal execution problem. Q-values, repre- senting the quality of taking actions in each state of the environment, are obtained through neural networks known as Q-nets. We use Double Deep Q-learning, thus employing two neural networks, namely the main Q-net (Qmain) for action selection and the target Q-net (Qtgt) for state evaluation. Overall, the algorithm undergoes an exploration phase, where it explores possible rewards by taking random actions in evolving states. Subsequently, it gradually transitions to an exploitation phase, leveraging learned information on rewards usingQmain to select actions. To maintain stability, the weights forQtgt are periodically synchronised with those ofQmain. This is achieved through a training routine that updates the main net using past states, actions, and rewards randomly sampled from a memory. The training occurs overM episodes, followed by a test phase on an additionalB episodes to evaluate the DDQL agent’s performance post-exploration. 2.2.1 Algorithm setup for numerical experiments In order to tackle the problem of optimal execution with DDQL, we consider an agent who wants to sell a portfolio ofq0 stocks within a time-window[0,T ]. During this time window, the agent totally sells its inventory and this is called anepisode. The episodes are assumed to be divided intoN time-steps and the time increment for the simulations isτ = T N. In this context, the agent decides the quantity of stocksvt to sell in each of thet time-steps in which the episode is divided. The mid-price at which the agent trades is modeled according to Eq. (1), but depending on the frameworks considered, the dynamics for the impact parameters change. 4 Over the M train episodes the algorithm learns, via exploration-exploitation, the best trading strategy and changes the weights of the Q-nets accordingly. The architecture of the algorithm in the training phase is thus divided into two phases: anexploration and anexploitation phase, managed by the parameterϵ∈ (0,1] that will decrease during training and initially set asϵ = 1. Depending on the phase, the way actionsvt are chosen changes. When the agent is exploring, it will randomly select sell actionsvt in order to explore different states and rewards in the environment, alternatively, when the agent is exploiting, it will useQmain to selectvt. Action selection and reward function. At the beginning of each time interval and for each episode, the agent has limited knowledge of the environment where it trades. This means that it has access to statesst made either by tuples of (qt,t) or (qt,t,St−1) (i.e. quantity, time and possibly mid-price), depending on the considered feature setup. Given the current value ofϵ, a drawζ from a uniform distribution determines whether to perform exploration or exploitation. Specifically, with probabilityϵ the agent chooses to explore, and the sell action vt is sampled from a binomial distribution with number of trials equal toqt (i.e. the inventory left at the beginning of a sub-interval) and probability of success is1 N−t. In this way, in the exploration phase the TWAP is selected on average. Alternatively (with probability1−ϵ), the agent chooses the Q-optimal action, i.e. the action that maximises the Q-value fromQmain, doing exploitation of what learnt in the exploration phase. Notice that the agent cannot sell more than the remaining inventory and, in addition, no buy actions can be performed in the selling program. In this way, the agent randomly explores a large number of states and possible actions to perform. Once everym actions taken during training episodes,ϵ is multiplied by a constantc< 1 such that ϵ←ϵ×c, in this way for large number of episodesM,ϵ converges to zero and the algorithm gradually stops exploring and starts to greedily exploit what it has learned in terms of weightsQmain. In formulae, the action decision rule for each time stept in the training phase is: ϵ∈ (0,1), ζ∼U (0,1) vt = { ∼Bin(qt, 1 N−t) ,ifζ≤ϵ argmaxv′∈[0,qt]QM(st,v′|θmain) ,else (6) Subsequently, at eacht, once that the action is chosen according to Eq. (6), the reward is calculated as follows: rt =St−1vt−αv2 t (7) Overall, the rewards for everyt∈ [1,N ] are: r1 =S0v1−αv2 1 r2 = (S1 +κv1 +N (0,σ ))v2−αv2 2 ... rN = (SN−1 +κvN−1 +N (0,σ ))vN−αv2 N (8) Thus, for each time stept the agent sees the reward from sellingvt shares, and stores the state of the environment,st, where the sell action was chosen along with the reward and the next statest+1 where the environment evolves. As said, the aim of the agent is to cumulativelyminimise such reward, such that the liquidation value of the inventory happens as close as possible to the initial value of the portfolio. At the end of the episode, the reward per episode is−q0S0 +∑N t=1St−1vt−αv2 t. T raining scheme The statesst, actionsvt, rewardsrt and subsequent future statesst+1 obtained by selling a quantityvt in statest, form atransition tuple that is stored into a memory of maximum length L. As soon as the memory contains at leastb transitions, the algorithm starts to train the Q-nets. In order to train the nets, the algorithm samples random batches of lengthb from the memory, and for each sampled transitionj it calculates: yj t (θtgt) = { rj t if t =N; rj t +γQtgt(sj t+1,v∗|θtgt) else (9) 5 In Eq. (9),rj t is the reward for the time step considered in the transitionj,sj t+1 is the subsequent state reached int+1, known since it is stored in the same transitionj, whilev∗ = argmaxvQmain(sj t,v|θmain). γ is a discount factor that accounts for risk-aversion2. The loss to be minimised is the mean squared error between the targety(θtgt) and the values obtained via the Q-main network. Thus, it is: L(θmain,θ tgt) = 1 b b∑ ℓ=1 ([ yℓ t(θtgt)−Qmain(sℓ t,vℓ t|θmain) ])2 θ∗ main = argmin θmain L(θmain,θ tgt) The algorithm then uses back propagation and gradient descent to update the weights of the main network. This sub-routine is repeated for each random batch of transitions sampled from the memory. Finally, as stated above, once everym actions ϵ is decreased by a factorc< 1 and the algorithm sets Qtgt =Qmain. After training, otherB<M trading episodes are fed to the algorithm in order to exploit what learnt during training, this is the testing phase and the actions are now selected using justQmain. The results shown below are those obtained in the test phase only. The features of the Q-nets are (qt,t,vt) or (qt,t,St−1,vt) and are normalised in the domain[−1,1] using the procedure suggested in [27], normalised mid-prices¯St are obtained via min-max normalisa- tion. In our setup we use fully connected feed-forward neural networks with5 layers, each with30 hidden nodes activation functions are leakyReLu, and finally we use the ADAM optimiser for optimi- sation. The parameters used to calibrate the algorithm are reported in Table 1, the training algorithm is reported in Algorithm 1. Table 1: Fixed parameters used in the DDQL algorithm. The parameters not shown in the table change depending on the experiments and are reported accordingly. DDQL parameters Model parameters NN layers 5 M train eps. 10.000 N intervals 10 Hidden nodes 30 B test eps. 5.000 σ-stock 0.00001 ADAM lr 0.0001 m reset rate 100 acts. S0-stock 10$ Batch sizeb 32 c decay rate 0.995 q0 inventory 20 L memory length 15.000 γ-discount 1 2We set aγ = 1 since we model a risk neutral agent 6 Algorithm 1 Training of Double Deep Q-Learning agent for optimal execution Require: Initialise with random weightsQmain and make a copyQtgt; Initialise the memory with max lengthL. Setϵ = 1, b batch size,M train episodes; Set market dynamics parameters; for i in Mdo Set Si 0 =S0; for t in Ndo st← (qt,t); ▷ or (qt,t,S i t−1) if mid-price considered vt← { sample Bin(qt, 1 N−t)with probabilityϵ argmaxv′∈[0,qt]Qmain(st,v′|θmain)with probability(1−ϵ) ; rt←Si t−1vt−αv2 t; Si t−1→Si t; ▷ Generate Si t from Si t−1 st+1← (qt+1,t + 1); ▷ or (qt+1,t + 1,Si t) Memory← (st,rt,vt,st+1); ▷ Memory storing if Length of memory≥ b then for j inb do Sample a batch of(sj t,rj t,vj t,sj t+1) from memory; v∗ = argmaxvQmain(sj t,v|θmain); yj t (θtgt) = { rj t if t =N; rj t +γQtgt(sj t+1,v∗|θtgt) else end for θ∗ main = argminθmainL(θmain,θ tgt) via gradient descent with loss to minimise: L(θmain,θ tgt) = 1 b b∑ ℓ=1 ([ yℓ t(θtgt)−Qmain(sℓ t,vℓ t|θmain) ])2 if Length of memory =L then halve the length of memory end if end if After m iterations decayϵ =ϵ×c; After m iterations θtgt←θmain; end for end for 7 3 Experiments and results In this section we present the results of our numerical investigations. The aim of the experiments is to study whether the DDQL agent is able to find model-robust optimal execution strategies without any form of knowledge of the underlying impact model, but just based on simple sets of information. Since the algorithm does not know neither the parameters nor the model used for the dynamics of the impacts we adopt a model agnostic approach to find optimal execution strategies. In this context, we study whether the DDQL agent is able to learn the optimal strategy (i) when the optimal solution is known but the environment is not known to the agent (the impact can be equally increasing or decreasing) and (ii) when the optimal solution is not known in closed form but in an approximate form and the environment is still not known to the agent. In this sense, we investigate the use DDQL as a tool to develop ‘robust’ strategies. In a way, the goal is to use DDQL as a robust non-parametric technique, able to agnostically detect price impacts’ magnitude and dynamics in the market by using as few information as possible. Notice that the number of trading steps per episode is set toN = 10 and the agent has to to sell q0 = 20 shares. After the test phase is complete, the average IS is calculated for each test episode. Thus, inthetestphasewemeasureforeach episodetheISforboth thestrategies: theDDQNsuggested strategy and the optimal one if impacts dynamics and parameters were known from the beginning. The performance difference between the two approaches, for each test episode, is quantified as: ∆P &L =Cagent−C b Cb whereC =∑N t=1vt ˜St, the cash generated by the trading. Notice thatCb is the cash calculated for the baseline model, whileCagent is the cash obtained using DDQL strategies. In the tables below we report the average values and the standard deviation over the whole test set. 3.1 Constant impact We first consider mid-price dynamics generated according to the A&C model of Eq. (1). The impacts are constant and the coefficients are set equal toκ = 0.001 and α = 0.002. When the market behaves as in Eq. (1), the TWAP is the optimal solution, i.e. the strategy with minimal costs is the one where q0 is sold equally over the time steps. We want to check that the DDQL is able to recover a similar strategy also by comparing the expected cost with the one of a TWAP. This would imply that DDQL understands that the impact parameters are fixed and trades accordingly with minimal discrepancy compared to the closed-form solution’s costs. We do not expect that including price as feature should improve the DDQL strategy performance. F eatures Q,T The results with the costs are reported in Table 2. We notice that, if the agent has knowledge of justqt andt, it retrieves an IS values very similar to the one that would be obtained with the TWAP strategy. The∆P &Lshows a difference of just−0.4 basis points and a standard deviation of only two basis points. The average number of stocks sold per time-step and level of inventory is shown in the left panel of Fig. 1. It can be observed that the agent has learned a strategy consistent with ‘slice and dice’ trading. F eatures Q,T,S If one includes also the price among the features, we observe that the DDQL agent is able to retrieve the same cost. The∆P &Lis in the order of−0.25 basis points, implying that the optimal cost has been learnt and reproduced by the agent. The average optimal trading per level of inventoryqt, time-stept, and normalised price level¯S are reported in the right panel of Fig. 1. The strategy does slightly vary depending on the price level. It might be that during training some states did bear a lower cost. However, the algorithm overall does not perform any better than a noisy TWAP strategy, as expected. Moreover, it appears that allowing for more information in such a simple environment does not significantly add any value. The strategy adjusts depending on the price level considered to be optimal and does not outperform the previous case. This aligns with the theoretical findings in [30], proving that dynamical strategies (which can depend on price) are also statically optimal. 8 Constant Impact A&C DDQL ∆P&L ∆P&L features E[IS] E[IS] avg. std.dev. Q,T 0.2607 0.2698 -0.455 2.5 Q,T,S 0.2607 0.2652 -0.225 1.6 Table 2: Constant impact. Comparison between the costs of the DDQL agent and of the A&C model. ∆P&L values are reported in basis points. Figure 1: Constant impact. Left panel: Average number of stocks sold per time-stept and inventory levelqt. Right panel: Average number of stocks sold per time-stept, inventory levelqt, and normalised price ¯S. 3.2 Deterministically time-varying impact Having established that the DDQL agent is able to recover the optimal solution when impacts are constant, we test the algorithm with two different, yet deterministic, impacts patterns. It is widely recognised that liquidity has intraday patterns3 thus a trend in impact parameter is observed in certain parts of the trading day, e.g. in the first part of the trading day or around important market announcements. Ifoneknowsinadvancethefunctionalformofthedynamicsoftheimpactparameters, the optimal execution is again a minimisation of a cost functional and can be solved via quadratic optimisation (although the well posedness of the problem is far from trivial, see [29]). However, the DDQL agent has no knowledge either about the existence of a pattern or whether the pattern shows an increasing or decreasing trend and the parameters for the impact have to be implicitly estimated by the agent employing DDQL. In making no assumption on market’s dynamics the nature of the problem becomes more involved. As explained in Section 2.1, we assume impacts follow a linear deterministic trend. We consider either an increasing or a decreasing impact, and in order to test the appropriateness of the parameters learnt by the algorithm, we calculate the optimal strategy using quadratic optimisation4 and then we 3see for example [9] for a thorough discussion on this topic 4We solved the problem using the.optimise() method in SciPy and applying Quadratic programming to Eq. (3). 9 simulate the optimal strategy and we measure its cost. The resulting IS is then compared with the one obtained with the DDQL strategy. We also use as point of comparison the IS of a TWAP strategy, which is obviously not optimal. This serves as an additional benchmark of the performance of the DDQL agent in addition to the theoretically optimal one. Figure 2: Time-varying dynamics of the temporary and permanent impact 3.2.1 T esting and training with increasing impacts The impacts dynamics isg(vt τ ) =κtvt τ , whereκt =κ0 +βκ×t andh(vt) =αtvt, whereαt =α0 +βα×t and the parameters for the impacts are reported in Table 3. The parameters are chosen such that the average value of the impact parameter during the trading period are equal to the fixed impacts in the experiments of the previous section. Fig. 3 shows the optimal solution for these parameters (green line, the red line is the TWAP reference). As expected, given that impacts are increasing, it is better to trade more than in a TWAP at the beginning to exploit the initial lower trading costs. Table 3: Parameters used in the increasing time varying setting. parameters value κ0 0.0001 α0 0.0001 βκ 0.0002 βα 0.0004 κ5 =κ 0.001 α5 =α 0.002 F eatures Q,T As shown in Table 4, when only price and time are used as features, the DDQL algorithm is not able to really beat the TWAP strategy in terms of costs. In fact, the∆P &Lbetween the DDQL and the TWAP strategy is almost zero, i.e.∆P &L =−3.20e− 5. As a consequence, the ∆P &Lbetween the DDQL and the theoretical simulated costs is significantly negative (see Table 4). Looking at the blue line in Fig. 3 it appears that the DDQL agent with two features learns to trade more at the beginning, but not enough. A similar conclusion is obtained by looking at the full strategy (see left panel of Fig. 4). Looking at the∆P &Lvalue and at the average quantity sold per inventory level and time-step, it can be concluded that market parameters have been noisily estimated leading to a strategy as good as a TWAP strategy. F eatures Q,T,S Adding the mid-price to the features leads to better results in terms of∆P &L. In fact, as reported in Table 4 the simulated IS for the DDQL agent performs better than the one obtained with TWAP. Comparing our results with the theoretical solution, adding the mid-price as a feature lowers the∆P &Lto just2 basis points of difference. Although not performing as good as the theoretical solution, adding a feature significantly increases the learning capabilities of the algorithm. This conclusion is supported by the average inventory holding and average trading schedule reported in Fig. 3 and right panel of Fig. 4, respectively. It can be seen that the agent has learnt to trade too aggressively within the first half of the execution window. This is compatible with the increasing 10 nature of the underlying impact parameters. We conclude that the agent has estimated the trend in the impacts and has found a trading strategy accordingly. Increasing Impact Theo. DDQL ∆P &Lvs. Theo. ∆P &Lvs. Theo. TW AP inputs E[IS] E[IS] avg. std.dev. E[IS] Q,T 0.1449 0.2401 -4.76 1.1 0.2326 Q,T,S 0.1449 0.1944 -2.42 1.1 0.2326 Table 4: Increasing impact. Comparison between the costs of the DDQL agent, of the theoretically optimal solution, and of a TWAP strategy.∆P&L values are reported in basis points. Figure 3: Increasing impact. Average inventory holdings per time step with different features, com- pared to the optimal inventory holding if the strategy was known from the beginning, and to the inventory holding if the TWAP strategy was used 11 Figure 4: Increasing impact. Left panel: Average number of shares sold per time-stept and inventory levelqt. Right panel: Average number of shares sold per time-stept, inventory levelqt and normalised price ¯S 3.2.2 T esting and training with decreasing impacts The impacts dynamics isg(vt τ ) =κtvt τ , whereκt =κ0−βκ×t andh(vt) =αtvt, whereαt =α0−βα×t and the parameters for the impacts are reported in Table 5. As before, the parameters are chosen such that the average value of the impact parameter during the trading period are equal to the fixed impacts in the experiments of the previous section. Fig. 5 shows the optimal solution for these parameters (green line, the red line is the TWAP reference). Since impacts are decreasing, it is optimal to trade less than in a TWAP at the beginning to avoid the initial high trading costs. Table 5: Parameters used in the decreasing time varying setting. The parameters are chosen such that the average value corresponds to the fixed impacts in the experiment above. parameters value κ0 0.002 α0 0.004 βκ 0.0002 βα 0.0004 κ5 =κ 0.001 α5 =α 0.002 F eatures Q,T Similarly to the increasing impact case, when the features are inventory and time, the DDQL algorithm has a sub-optimal performance. In fact, as reported in Table 6 its IS is higher than the theoretical optimum but the learnt strategy still outperforms the TWAP. As in the previous case, the algorithm manages to understand the direction of the trend. As it can be seen in Fig. 5 (blue line) and in the left panel of Fig. 6 the average actions per inventory level and time-step seem to be consistent with an increasing cost of execution, since the algorithm trades more toward the end of the period when costs are lower. It can be concluded that although correct in the estimation of the trend, the algorithm did not manage to calibrate its own actions to the magnitude of the impacts. F eatures Q,T,S When including the mid-price among the features, the algorithm’s performance gets fairly better. In fact, as it can be noticed in Table 6, when the algorithm features the mid-price 12 does better than TWAP by lengths and performs slightly worse than the optimal trading strategy. Again, adding the mid-price as a feature adds more power to the DDQL agent when it comes of estimating magnitude and direction of the impacts. This is confirmed by the average actions chosen per level of inventory, time step and normalised mid-price¯S, see Fig. 5 (orange line) and the right panel of Fig. 6. The strategy is again skewed to the right hand side of the heat-map implying that the algorithm has perfectly understood the direction and magnitude of the impacts. Decreasing Theo. DDQL ∆P &Lvs. Theo. ∆P &Lvs. Theo. TW AP inputs E[IS] E[IS] avg. std.dev. E[IS] Q,T 0.2566 0.3080 -2.58 0.03 0.3588 Q,T,S 0.2566 0.2877 -1.51 0.5 0.3588 Table 6: Decreasing impact. Comparison between the costs of the DDQL agent, of the theoretical solutions, and of a TWAP strategy.∆P&L values are reported in basis points. Figure 5: Average inventory holdings per time step with different features, compared to the optimal inventory holding if the strategy was known from the beginning, and to the inventory holding if the TWAP strategy was used 13 Figure 6: Decreasing impact. Left panel: Average number of shares sold per time-stept and inventory levelqt. Right panel: Average number of shares sold per time-stept, inventory levelqt and normalised price ¯S 3.2.3 Mixed train with increasing and decreasing impacts While the previous results were obtained by using the same dynamics in the train and test phase, here we consider a more realistic situation where the train phase contains different scenarios and in the test phase only one of them is actually realised. More specifically, the DDQL agent is now trained with 10,000 trajectories using increasing impacts and10,000 trajectories using decreasing impacts. It is subsequently tested on 5,000 trajectories with either increasing or decreasing impacts trends. It is worth to study such experimental setup since it is functional for an eventual deploy in real market situations of an algorithm based on this RL paradigm. In fact, if the algorithm is used in a ‘production’ setting, and especially without any prior knowledge of the data at hand, one would train such an algorithm with several scenarios for the stocks intended to be sold and then, using such strategy, one would like the algorithm to be able to detect the specific liquidity pattern and simultaneously adapt the trading strategy. We mimic this situation by training with both regimes, then we test with either of the two, in order to assess whether the DDQL agent is able to recognise the direction and the magnitude of the impacts at considered. In this case the TWAP IS, used also above, becomes the natural benchmark. In fact, since the training set includes both increasing and decreasing impact while the test realises only one of them, the obvious choice for a agnostic trader would be to use a TWAP strategy. For this reason, in the tables we report also the∆P &LTWAP with respect to the TWAP strategy. The standard∆P &Lis also reported but should be considered as a kind of unfeasible benchmark, since its calculation requires to know whether the impacts in the test set is increasing or decreasing. Increasing impacts - F eatures Q,T Using as features only inventory and time, the agent is again not able to find the optimal strategy. As reported in Table 7 the performance in terms of∆P &Lis still poor and the overall IS is similar to the one obtained with a TWAP strategy. As it can be seen in the left panel of Fig. 10 the strategy achieved by the agent does not appear in line with the one that would be expected with such impact dynamics. Increasing impacts - F eatures Q,T,S When the mid-price is included into the features, the performance of the DDQL agent is dramatically better. In fact, as reported in Table 7 the performance in terms of∆P &Lis almost zero, meaning that the agent performs as good as the optimal solution 14 in terms of costs. In turn, this implies that the agent has correctly estimated both the direction and the magnitude of the impacts used in the test phase. In fact, as it can be seen in the right panel of Fig. 10, the strategy found, conditioned to the price levels, is in line with the increasing magnitude in the impact dynamics. Increasing Impact Theo. DDQL ∆P &Lvs. Theo. ∆P &Lvs. Theo. TW AP ∆P &L TW AP inputs E[IS] E[IS] avg. std.dev. E[IS] avg. Q,T 0.1449 0.2554 -5.34 1.1 0.2326 -0.92 Q,T,S 0.1449 0.1319 0.65 0.9 0.2326 5.2 Table 7: Increasing impact. Comparison between DDQL agent, theoretical solutions and TWAP strategy. ∆P&L values are reported in basis points. Decreasing impacts - F eatures Q,T If just the inventory and the time-step form the state seen by the agent, the estimation of the parameters is noisy as in the other cases. Looking at Table 8 it can be seen that the resulting strategy performs slightly worse than the TWAP and it under-performs the optimal selling schedule suggested via optimisation of the cost functional. This result is in line with the strategy outlined in the left panel of Fig. 9. Decreasing impacts - F eatures Q,T,S If the mid-price features the states seen by the agent the performance is fairly good if compared to the previous case. In fact, adding the price to the features of the algorithm increases the estimation power of DDQL and delivers a performance in line with the optimal one. This can be seen in Table 8 where the∆P &Lis very low, suggesting that the impacts dynamics are estimated quite efficiently leading to a strategy consistent with the decreasing nature of the impacts’ dynamics in the test set. This result is confirmed by the average action chosen per level of normalised mid-price, inventory and time-step shown in the right panel of Fig. 9. Decreasing Impact Theo. DDQL ∆P &Lvs. Theo. ∆P &Lvs. Theo. TW AP ∆P &L TW AP inputs E[IS] E[IS] avg. std.dev. E[IS] avg. Q,T 0.2566 0.3696 -5.62 0.32 0.3588 -0.51 Q,T,S 0.2566 0.2456 0.86 0.03 0.3588 6.5 Table 8: Decreasing impact. Comparison between DDQL agent, theoretical solutions and TWAP strategy. ∆P&L values are reported in basis points. 3.3 Stochastic impacts Lastly, we consider stochastic impact coefficients. This experiment allows us to consider dynamics that are much more complicated and gives the opportunity to thoroughly test the capabilities of the DDQL agent to identify optimal strategies. As an analytical point of comparison, we use the third model of Section 2.1 for which an approximated solution can be obtained as a Taylor expansion on the long run means of the temporary and permanent impact dynamics as outlined in Barger and Lorig (2019) [4]. In this regime, the resulting optimal execution of Eq. (5) is in fact a perturbation of the TWAP strategy that accounts for deviation of the impacts with respect to their long run mean values. The aim of the experiment is to test whether the agent is able to replicate, or even beat, the performance that would be obtained if the parameters for Eq. (5) were known. In fact, the difficulty in considering stochastic impacts when implementing an optimal execution strategy lies not just in the 15 correct equation to be used, but in the correct parameters estimation for the impact model considered. By using the DDQL agent we aim at tackling the problem in a model agnostic way, i.e. we do not estimate or make assumptions on either the model or the impacts’ magnitudes. We let the agent learn them via exploration-exploitation. The parameters chosen for the simulations are reported in Table 9. We assume that both impacts hover over their long run averages and are correlated, with correlation coefficient5 ω = 0.9. Thus, the parameters are chosen such that the Feller condition holds and the values for the impact coefficients are almost surely positive6. We implement two types of experiments, we test for strong mean reversion (λ(high) α andλ(high) κ ) and for weak mean reversion (λ(low) α andλ(low) κ ) parameters, leaving long run levels and volatility of the impacts untouched. Thus testing for either strong or weak memory properties in the dynamics for the impacts. In the experiments, for each train and test episode we simulate one path forαt and one forκt. Sample paths for bothαt and κt are reported in Fig 8. Table 9: Parameters used for the simulation of stochastic impacts. The parameters are chosen such that the starting values correspond to the fixed impacts in the A&C experiment above. Parameter Value Parameter Value λ(low) α 1 θκ 0.001 λ(low) κ 1 θα 0.002 λ(high) α 5 σκ 0.002 λ(high) κ 5 σα 0.002 ω 0.9 F eatures - Q,T When the agent can only access the level of inventory and time-steps as features, when considering theλ(low) α,κ setup, the resulting IS is similar to the one obtained using Eq. (5) as shown in Table 10. The ∆P &Lis, in fact, slightly positive but less than 2 basis points. The performance increases in the case ofλ(high) α,κ setup, as shown in Table 11 it seems that since the impact dynamics mean revert faster to their long-run average the agent, trained in this way, takes advantage and trades accordingly, thus obtaining lower IS and better∆P &L. F eatures - Q,T,S Adding the price to the set of features does bring significant benefits to the optimal selling schedule. Considering theλ(low) α,κ setup, the∆P &Lis now significantly positive, due to the increased amount of cash generated by training a DDQL agent with these features. Thus, adding the price to the set of features greatly improves the trading performance overall as seen in Table 10. When theλ(high) α,κ setup is considered, the performance of the agent is still extensively better than the approximated solution, but in line with those obtained with just inventory and time-step as features as shown in Table 11. We interpret this to be the result of the increased mean reversion rate, the agent learns that the dynamics tend to revert faster to the long run average and takes advantage with its trading. Notably, the agent trained in this way has no notion of the stochastic dynamics of the impacts parameters used in this setting, the algorithm in fact,learns the model and, implicitly, its parameters from the rewards obtained at each time-step and for each train episode. Thus, it is capable of performing better than an approximate closed-form solution, with the advantage that the parameters used to obtain the sale schedule are neither assumed nor estimated in any way, they are learned implicitly and directly from the few features observed by the agent and fed to the neural nets. 5This high value reflects the fact that different liquidity measures are typically highly correlated. We expect the same happens for temporary and permanent impact 6 It is worth noticing that in the space of solutions of [4] both buys and sells are allowed for a sell program, while our RL approach considers only sells. In order to provide a fair comparison between the two methods, we selected the parameters of the model in such a way that, using the [4] solution, the fraction of buys in a sell program is negligible. This parameter choice has been achieved via extensive numerical simulations. 16 Figure 7: Stochastic impact. Left panel: three sample paths forαt with λ(low) α . Right panel: three sample paths forκt with λ(low) κ . Solid lines: three different realisations for the temporary and perma- nent impacts. Yellow area is the standard deviation around the average value of the impact. Figure 8: Left panel: sample paths for αt with λ(high) α . Right panel: sample paths for κt λ(high) κ . Solid lines: three different realisations for the temporary and permanent impacts. Yellow area is the standard deviation around the average value of the impact. Stochastic Impact:λ(low) α,κ Theo. Theo. DDQL DDQL ∆P &L ∆P &L inputs E[IS] std.dev.[IS] E[IS] std.dev.[IS] avg. std.dev. Q,T 0.3129 0.63 0.2789 0.011 1.8 3.19 Q,T,S 0.3129 0.63 0.2572 0.007 2.5 3.27 Table 10: Stochastic impact. Comparison between DDQL agent and theoretical solutions. ∆P&L values are reported in basis points. 17 Stochastic Impact:λ(high) α,κ Theo. Theo. DDQL DDQL ∆P &L ∆P &L inputs E[IS] std.dev.[IS] E[IS] std.dev.[IS] avg. std.dev. Q,T 0.5017 1.83 0.3200 0.0084 9.2 73.3 Q,T,S 0.5017 1.83 0.3158 0.0112 9.4 73.4 Table 11: Stochastic impact. Comparison between DDQL agent and theoretical solutions. ∆P&L values are reported in basis points. 4 Conclusions In this paper we developed a DDQL algorithm able to learn the optimal liquidation strategy when the liquidity is time-varying. By considering an Almgren-Chriss linear market impact model, we in- vestigated several deterministic and stochastic dynamics of the temporary and the permanent impact coefficient. These include constant, linearly varying, and square-root mean reverting stochastic pro- cesses for the parameters. We also investigate the case when coefficients are linearly varying but the slope can be either positive or negative with equal probability. We find that, when considering settings where the optimal solution is known, the algorithm is able to learn strategies with an expected cost comparable with the optimal one. More interestingly, when we consider settings where the optimal solution is not available or is available in approximate form, we find that the DDQL algorithm finds better solutions. This indicates that RL could be successfully used in real settings where liquidity is naturally latent and time-varying. There are several possible extensions of our work. First of all, we considered a linear impact model, whereas it is known that temporary market impact is non-linear as shown in [2]. Second, more sophisticated market impact models, such as the Transient Impact Model by [7] and its extension by [6], better describes the reaction of prices to trades. Finally, other dimensions of liquidity, e.g. the bid-ask spread, are important components of transaction cost and are known to be time varying with non-trivial dynamics. It is certainly interesting to explore if RL based approaches are capable to find optimal trading schedules also in these more complex and realistic environments. We leave these interesting questions for future research. Acknowledgements F.L. acknowledges partial support by the European Program scheme ‘INFRAIA-01-2018-2019: Re- search and Innovation action’, grant agreement #871042 ’SoBigData++: European Integrated Infras- tructure for Social Mining and Big Data Analytics’. References [1] Jacob Abernethy and Satyen Kale. “Adaptive market making via online learning”. In:Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems26 (2013). [2] Robert Almgren et al. “Direct estimation of equity market impact”. In:Risk 18.7 (2005), pp. 58– 62. [3] Almgren, R. and Chriss, N. “Optimal execution of portfolio transactions”. In:Journal of Risk3 (2000), pp. 5–39. [4] Weston Barger and Matthew Lorig. “Optimal liquidation under stochastic price impact”. In: International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance22.02 (2019), p. 1850059. [5] Dimitris Bertsimas and Andrew W Lo. “Optimal control of execution costs”. In: Journal of financial markets1.1 (1998), pp. 1–50. 18 [6] Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, J Doyne Farmer, and Fabrizio Lillo. “How markets slowly digest changes in supply and demand”. In:Handbook of financial markets: dynamics and evolution. Elsevier, 2009, pp. 57–160. [7] Jean-Philippe Bouchaud et al. “Fluctuations and response in financial markets: the subtle nature ofrandom’price changes”. In:Quantitative finance4.2 (2003), p. 176. [8] Antonio Briola et al. “Deep reinforcement learning for active high frequency trading”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.07107 (2021). [9] F Campigli, G Bormetti, and F Lillo. “Measuring price impact and information content of trades in a time-varying setting”. In:arXiv e-prints(2022), arXiv:2212.12687. [10] Alvaro Cartea and Sebastian Jaimungal. “Incorporating order-flow into optimal execution”. In: Mathematics and Financial Economics10 (2016), pp. 339–364. [11] Álvaro Cartea, Sebastian Jaimungal, and José Penalva.Algorithmic and high-frequency trading. Cambridge University Press, 2015. [12] Philippe Casgrain and Sebastian Jaimungal. “Trading algorithms with learning in latent alpha models”. In:Mathematical Finance29.3 (2019), pp. 735–772. [13] Kevin Dabérius, Elvin Granat, and Patrik Karlsson. “Deep execution-value and policy based reinforcement learning for trading and beating market benchmarks”. In: Available at SSRN 3374766 (2019). [14] Jean-Pierre Fouque, Sebastian Jaimungal, and Yuri F Saporito. “Optimal trading with signals and stochastic price impact”. In:SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics13.3 (2022), pp. 944– 968. [15] Gatheral, J., Schied, A., and Slynko, A. “Transient linear price impact and Fredholm integral equations”. In:Mathematical Finance: An International Journal of Mathematics, Statistics and Financial Economics22.3 (2012), pp. 445–474. [16] Gueant, Lehalle, and Fernandez-Tapia. “Optimal portfolio liquidation with limit orders”. In: SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics3.1 (2012), pp. 740–764. [17] Olivier Guéant and Charles Albert Lehalle. “General intensity shapes in optimal liquidation”. In: Mathematical Finance25.3 (2015), pp. 457–495. [18] Ben Hambly, Renyuan Xu, and Huining Yang. “Recent advances in reinforcement learning in finance”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04553(2021). [19] Dieter Hendricks and Diane Wilcox. “A reinforcement learning extension to the Almgren-Chriss framework for optimal trade execution”. In:2014 IEEE Conference on Computational Intelli- gence for Financial Engineering & Economics (CIFEr). IEEE. 2014, pp. 457–464. [20] Thibault Jaisson. “Deep differentiable reinforcement learning and optimal trading”. In:Quanti- tative Finance22.8 (2022), pp. 1429–1443. [21] Gyeeun Jeong and Ha Young Kim. “Improving financial trading decisions using deep Q-learning: Predicting the number of shares, action strategies, and transfer learning”. In:Expert Systems with Applications117 (2019), pp. 125–138. [22] Michaël Karpe et al. “Multi-agent reinforcement learning in a realistic limit order book market simulation”. In:Proceedings of the First ACM International Conference on AI in Finance. 2020, pp. 1–7. [23] Michael Kearns and Yuriy Nevmyvaka. “Machine learning for market microstructure and high frequency trading”. In:High Frequency Trading: New Realities for Traders, Markets, and Regu- lators (2013). [24] Pankaj Kumar. “Deep reinforcement learning for market making”. In:Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems. 2020, pp. 1892–1894. [25] Luca Philippe Mertens et al. “Liquidity fluctuations and the latent dynamics of price impact”. In: Quantitative Finance22.1 (2022), pp. 149–169. [26] Yuriy Nevmyvaka, Yi Feng, and Michael Kearns. “Reinforcement learning for optimized trade execution”. In: Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine learning. 2006, pp. 673–680. 19 [27] Brian Ning, Franco Ho Ting Lin, and Sebastian Jaimungal. “Double deep q-learning for optimal execution”. In:Applied Mathematical Finance28.4 (2021), pp. 361–380. [28] Anna A Obizhaeva and Jiang Wang. “Optimal trading strategy and supply/demand dynamics”. In: Journal of Financial markets16.1 (2013), pp. 1–32. [29] Palmari, G., Lillo, F., and Eisler, Z. “Optimal execution in a time varying environment: well posedness and price manipulation”. In:in preparation(2024). [30] Alexander Schied, Torsten Schöneborn, and Michael Tehranchi. “Optimal basket liquidation for CARA investors is deterministic”. In:Applied Mathematical Finance17.6 (2010), pp. 471–489. [31] Matthias Schnaubelt. “Deep reinforcement learning for the optimal placement of cryptocurrency limit orders”. In:European Journal of Operational Research296.3 (2022), pp. 993–1006. [32] Shuo Sun, Rundong Wang, and Bo An. “Reinforcement learning for quantitative trading”. In: ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology14.3 (2023), pp. 1–29. [33] Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. “Reinforcement learning: an introduction MIT Press”. In: Cambridge, MA22447 (1998). [34] Haoran Wei et al. “Model-based reinforcement learning for predictions and control for limit order books”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03743(2019). [35] Pengqian Yu et al. “Model-based deep reinforcement learning for dynamic portfolio optimiza- tion”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.08740(2019). 20 A Figures Figure 9: Mixed train, test with decreasing impact. Top panel: average number of stock sold per time- step t and inventory levelqt. Bottom panel: average number of stock sold per time-stept, inventory levelqt and normalised price ¯S 21 Figure 10: Mixed train, test with increasing impact. Top panel: average number of stock sold per time-step t and inventory levelqt. Bottom panel: average number of stock sold per time-step t, inventory levelqt and normalised price ¯S 22